Unirted Nt#ion8

S08tb

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

P.lJNABYDTlNG
FrldflY', 17 November 1950, at 8 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Recorth "

,

Flushing Mea(low, NeUJ York

'
,

,

.

, ,

"

,

.

.

"

.

'

"

Du'iiee of Siates in the e~ent of the' outbreak of
hostilities: report of the First CO~'JDittee
(A/1500)
.'
[Agenda' item 72]

Mr. THORS (1cclana): Rapp(Jrteur~ presented the
"eport of tlte First Committee and the accompanying
draft resolutions (A/1500).
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
wish to remind the Assembly that under rule '67 of the
rules of. procedure, the First Committ~e's' report is not
to be discussed in plenary meeting of the General
Assembly unless at least one-third of the members
present and voting 'consider such 'a discussion to be
necessary. , .
".". "
?: I put this questiqn to the vo~e. '"
.'

It'lvai' decidea}by 39, votes to. Si not to open a debate.
3. "The' PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
must draw the attention of the Assembly to the ·fact
that 'the' First Committee has submitted two draft
res,ol:utions,A ancl B~ in its !7eport•. The Soviet Union
has submitted an amendmen.t [A/1512]. I shall put that
amendment to the vote first.. ' ,
.
4. I call upon the representative of the Soviet Union
on a, point of order.
.
~. Mr. ZARUBIN (Union.o! So~iet Social!st Repub..
11C~) (translated from RWSlan): I should bke briefly
to explain the USSR;del:gation'svote on draft resolution Alubmi~ by, the First, Committee on 'the duties
..

I

.

.

of States in the event of the outbreak of hostilities; if
the President has no objection,. I should then like to
refer,' briefly to the Soviet Union an'lendment to draft .
resolution B.
6. The 'First Committee" approved a draft resolution
relating to· the duties of States in the event of th~
outbreak of hostilities. The USSR delegation considers
that the practical measures to 'end hostilities which
States engaged in armed conflict would be expected to
take under this resolution would fail to bring abOut a
speedy end to that conflict; on the contrary, they.would
make it possible for the aggressor to continue military
operations and would place the. inva~ed 'State at an
obvious disadvanP,lge. .
. '.
.
.
7. .These conclusions are borne out by the recoritnien..;
datiolls contained in the draft resolution. Paragraph 1
(et) of the draft resolution recoinmends that if a State
~ct\17l1eS enflged in armed .conB,ict, it should take all
steps to brmg the armedconfltct to an end at the
earliest possible moment, if thos~ steps are "practicable
in thecircutnstancesand compatible with the ,right of
self-defence".
'.
8. It is not at all clear to which Statethisstatetnent
is intended to refer," the ,aggressor ·State or the State
which, has been attacked, and it is only in sub-paragraph
-(b) that it becomes clear that the recommendation
contained in sub-paragraph (a) refers to the attacking
State,that is to say, the aggressor.
.
9. There can be little' doubt that the attaeking State
will always be able to find excuses to justify its failure

•

.

.A/PV.308

to

take sWis ~t~ bring the conflict to an end. The
aggressoet will certainly be able to allege all kinds of
circuw.atances to explain why he was unable to take
steps- to end the conflict. The recommendation contained
in ($ub-paragraph (4) of the ·draft r~lufion therefore
giv.,'s the aggressor every oppoJ:tunitr. not to end the
annt.,d conflict but rather to intensIfy and continue
hostilities against the State which he has attacked.
10. It 'is clear from . the recommendation in subparagraph (b, that the attacking.·State is being given
e-very opportu..nit)f to continue hostilities against its
victL-n for. twenty..£our. hours, after which it can \lroclaim its readiness t~) discontinue all military operatIons
and withdraw those of its forces which have invaded
the territory of the I)ther State. This proclamation can
only be made, how(~ver, if the other State involved in
, the dispute is· reads' to do likewise.
11. The Soviet Union delegation considers that the
establisbmento£ a time limit during which the aggressor
can. continuemiEtary' operations with impunity in. the.
territory of the State which has been attacked cannot
contribute to bringing, about a cessation of hostilities;
on the contrary, it can. only make it easier for the
aggressor to realize his aggressive designs. It should be
clear that the establislunentof· any time limit within
which the aggressor can do what he likes with his
victim is ~ncompatible with. th.·e adoption..of the sp~e~y
and effective' measures which the Secunty Council IS
called upon to. take a~inst any aggressor.

12. It should also beno~d that sub-parag'raph Cb)
entirely fails to state that both parties will cease military
operations ~wen when· they have proclaimed their
readiness to do so. Consequently, even if the aggressor
has'i>roclaimed his readiness to end the conflict, he is
not prohibited· from continuing military operations
against the State which he has attacked.
13. The delegation of the USSR considers that the
duties of States ;,n the event of the outbreak of
hostilities set out in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of the
draft. resolution will operate entirely in favour. of the
attacking State rather than of the State which has been
attacked; in practice,. they will not .prove to be a means
of ending.aggression but will bea weapon it! the hands.
of the aggressor. .
14. For these reasons, the delegation of the Soviet
Union will vote against draft resolution A.
15. The USSR clelegation wish~a now. ·to make a
"
statement on draft resoluiionB.
.
.
"16. When the First Committee discussed the draft
resolu.tionon the. duties of States in the event of the
outbreak of hostilities,1 the Soviet Union delegation
introduced a draft Tesolution on the definition of
aggression [A/C.l/1608]. Ifintroduced that proposal
because it believed that, under Chapter VII of the
Charter, immediately upon any threat of aggressionand, .(J fortiori, in the event of actual aggressionspeedy and. effective measures against that aggression
should be ~ken which would place the victims under
the .collective protection of all pea.ce-loving States an.d
cO).1front t~e aggressor with the concerted action of the
Member States of the United Nations.

"17. The USSR delegation feels that one of the most

important steps in combating aggression" to define the
attacking State,·that is to say, to define agg1ession. It is
common knowledge that the Soviet Uniol1 delegation
introduced its proposal on the definition df aggression
as far back as the second session of the Conference for
the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments in 1933.·
The basic principles of that proposal were adopted by
the Committee on Security Questions,,' that USSR
proposal on the definition of aggression was also ap\>1ied
in practice. In July 1933, a number of international
conventions for the definition of ·aggression were toneluded .~. Lo~d.on,. all.. ba..sed on. ~.he .proj>Osals which
the SOVIet Umon had mtroduced tn tile General Commission. In accordance with this definition of aggression, the USSR Governrnentbas conc:ludecJ conventions on the definition of.aggression with eleven States.
18. In view of· the tasks confronting the United NaHons and in the interests of general security, the Soviet
Union delegation submitted apropos~l to the First
Committee.· to .the effect that aggression shoJlld be
defined as accurately as possible so as to forestall any
pretext which 'might be used to justify it. During the
discussion of this proposal in the First Committee, a
number o~ representatives expressed the hope that the
General Assembly would conside.r the definition of
aggression. At the same tiq1e, the~ pointed out that the
Soviet Union proposal failed to refer to indirect aggression; in particular, they drew attention to the fact that
it contained no provision concerning armed bands and
corresponding to article I1, paragraph 5, of the Conven- .
tion for the Definition of Aggression signed in London
on 4· July 1933' by five States.

19. As we all know, that article state$ that the aggressor ·I;hall be considered to be that State which is the
first to "commit any of a number of actions enumerated
in the convention. Among the clauses in that article is
paragraph .5,· which reads as follows:
('Provision of'support toattned bands formed in its
territory which have·invaqed theterrit.ory ·of another
State, or refusal, notwithstanding the request of the
invaded State, to take, in. its own territory, all the
measures in its. power to depriv'e those bands of all
aS$i~tanceor prptection!'
.
.
20. Since this definition of indirect··aggr,~sion is a·
component part oftbe conventions for the (definition of
aggression signed inLondon in July 193.3, the USSR
delegation is, ofcotit$e, prepared to ~dd. a,paragraph
on armed bands to its draft resolution on the definItion
of aggression; such'a paragraph would, correspond to
article 11, paragraph 5 of the Convention for the Defillitionof Aggression signed on 4July 1933 by five $~tes.
21. • Moreover, in Yiewof the urgency and im~rf;ance
of defining aggression, the SQviet Union delegation
proposes that draft resolution B should be completed by

.• See League of Nations, Reco"d.t of th, Conference' f()" the
. R~duction a~d Lim.ita.tiof!. of Armaments, Series.B, Minutes of
the General C()mm.lsslOnl Vote II, page 237 (Series L.o.N., IX,
Disarmament, 1933.IX.lu).
..
.
81bid., "Conferenct"for the Reduction and Limitaticn of ArtfUl..
ments, Report of. ~e Cotr1tl1itt~· on ~ecui'ity. Question!!, docu~
ment Conf.. D./C. G.I08, ~pub1tshed In. Conference Documents
1 See OBidal Records of the Gtn~ral Assembly, Pilth. S,,Vat. It, page 6'19 (Series L.o.N., IX, Disarmament, 1935.IX.4).
,ff(;n, First Committ", 384th to 390tb ~eetings indusiyc:..
., .. 4 See ibid., Treat1 Smelt Vat. 148, page 213.

,SOOth Meeting-17 November 1950
speclfyin$' the time by which the International Law
Conunisslon is to 'present its conclusions to the General

Assembly.
.
22. That amendment [A/1S12] calls for the addition,
at the end of draft resolution. B,of th~ words: ffand
present its report not later than the next· regular session
of the General Assembly". The USSR delegation urges
the General Assembly to accept the addition which it
has pr~posed. '.
23. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
did not interrupt the representative of the Soviet Union
because in any event he is permitted to explain.his vote,
eithe~ before or after the vote. But he did not speak on
a POInt of order according to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure, for according to that rule, the.point' of order
should relate tof1the actual conduct of the voting".
Jhe speaker could, for exatnple, have requested a vote
In parts or·a roll..call vote. I repeat, however, that I did
not interrupt him, because be could,-have asked for the
floor in order' to explain bis vote.
, 24. . I shall put. to ~he vote the amendment of the
USSR [A/.lS12] to draft resolution B submitted by
the First Committee and then the two draft resolutions
A and B [A/1S00].
.
. The amendment was rejected by 22 votes to 12, with

13 abstentions.
D'rajt resolutions A and B were adopted by 49 'tIotes
to 5, with 1 abstention"
25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon the representative of the UniQv. of South

Mrica, who wishes. to explain his vote. Speeches in
explanation of votes are limited to seven minutes.
26. Mr. JARVIE (Union of South Africa) : I intend
to confine myself to·:a. very brief statement on the manner
in which the South African delegation voted on resolution A.
'
,
27. In the view of my delegation, the proposals contained in that resolution, the original draft of which was
introduced by the Yugoslav delegation, con$titute a .valuable contribution to the measures and procedures which
we are evolving to, deal with aggression and international armed conflict. This view, which governed our
vote, is based on the fact that the provisions which
refer to armed conflict between States seek to outlaw
the use of armS except in the common interest and to
suggest procedures for the earliest possible cessation
of hostilities. By doing this, the resolution is aimed at
the settlement .of it:tternational conflicts by peaceful
means:
.~. Pat~graph 1 (d) of the operative part requires the
unmediatedispatch of the Peace Observation Commission to the area of hostilities unless, of course, tne
af1?1ed attack in question is an isolated. incident and ,s
itn1l1e~~a~ely ~"!d satisfactorlly halted. ,!,h~purpQse (If
the VISIt would be to enabl~ the CommIssIon to detet'mine,. in a sp,~cific area. the military facts of the
/
situation.
. 29. What is particularly important,. however, is the
provision contained in . paragraph 201 the operative
part, in which it is stated dead)· and in the most precise
terms that the provisions .of the resolution will in no
way impair the rights and obligations of States under

the Charter. As I have. stat.ed, this provision is of
particular importance, for it is essential that the system
of collective security which we are gradually building
up should in no circumstances become a threat to
Member States in so far as that system may afford
opportunities for intervention in their internal affairs.
30. r repeat that my delegation regards the present
resolution, interpreted in the light of the few remarks
I have made, as a valuable contribution to the system
of collective security, and we therefore voted in favour
of it.
3!. Mr.. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian): I wish .to
explain the vote of the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
on the item called "Duties of States in the e lnt of
the outbreak of hostilities". In the First Conun'
the
delegation of the Ukrainian SSR voted agaim~" J.raft
resolution A,and it took the same position in the voting
in the Assembly.
'
32. In. the first place, this' resolution speaks only ofa
State which becomes engaged in armed conflict with
another State or States, without making any distinction
between the aggressor and the victim. This formula is
based on a concept which is mistaken, vicious and
dangerous as far as the victim of aggression is con...
cerned; according to that concept, the two parties to a
conflict are treated in the same way, in other words,
the aggressor who has prepared for war and the victim
who resists aggression are placed on the same footing. It
is easy to see that such' an attitude towards the two
parties to the conflict· would give the aggressor. an
advantage' over the victim and would encourage him
to furthetconquest.
33. . In the second place, this resolution calls ona State
which has become engaged in armed conflict with
another. State or States to proclaim within 'twenty-four
hours. its readiness to discontinue military operations
and to withdraw its· forces from foreign territory. One
gial1ce at this provision will show how unrealistic it is.
34. To whom can such a. reconunendation apply?
Ind';1bitably~ to the aggressor alone, whose troops are on .
foreIgn terrItory. Obviously an aggressor, whQ has long
and carefully prepared for an attack on his victim and
has now carried it out, cannot and will not proclaim
that h(~ win discontinue· military operations, since the "
purpose of his long preparation was certainly not to,
state, at the v(~ry outset of the attack, that he was ready
to discontinue military. operations, and since be· certainly.did notatiatk an~ occn-p;y the terri~()ry of another
State m order to proclatm on the very brst day of the
unleashing of hostilities that he would withdraw his
forces from the terrib.'lty he had ille.gally seized.
35. Everyone knows that real aggressors do not
behave in that way. On the contrary, it may rather be
assumed ,that the aggressor will make full use of his
advantage under this resolution and will try·to finish· off
the country he has attacked as swiftly· and completely
a~. he~n, .seize as. U1UIC~ o~ its. territory .as possible,
dIsrupt Its lnternal orgr.cuuzatlon and force It to capitu..
late as soon as possib:le. Naive as it is to expect an
aggressor to proclaim: that he will discontinue military
operat!on~ and. withdraw his troops. from foreign territory, It IS hannfuland dangerous to makesueh a
demand of a victim of aggression, since· to ask a ~ntry

General A..,mhly-FUth SeeeIon-PlenaJ:7 Meedngs
i

"

,

,',

?

..

•...

.',

...•..

"

which 1::1 resisting aggression to suspend military operanoits would be tantamount to ordering it toeapititlate.
It would be an ultimatum whose rejection by the victim
might mean' that the victim would~be, considered an
.aggressor.
36. Thirdly, this resolution is directed against the
Security Council. the United Nations organ which bears
primary-responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security. Its pernicious provisions doom the. Security
Council to inaction at the outbreak of aggression and,
moreover, replace. the methods of opposing aggression
laid down. in the Charter. by vague recommendations
which are dangerous to the cause of peace and represent
a retrpgression from the London conventions for the
definition of .aggression.
37. Thus it is perfectly clear that this resolution is
harmful,. that it gives the aggressor an advantage over
his victim and 'consequently furthers the spread of
aggression. In addition, as we have already noted, it
violates the Ch~rter and is directed against the Security
Council.
38. ,In this con~on the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR wishes to state that it fully supports the' draft
"resolution submitted by the Soviet Union in the First
Committee on the definition of aggression [AIC.l1608].
We feel that in the present state of interna.tional tension
it is particularly important to have a definition' of
a.ggressionwhich is precise, indisputable and recognized
by' the United Nations.. Such a definition will be a
powerful tool with which tlte Security Council will be
able swiftly and unerringly to determine the party guilty
of aggression, that is, the aggressor; this in turn will
enable it to take rapid and decisive action to halt
•
aggression.
"39. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR thinks it was
wrong to refer the USSR draft reso.lution to the InteruattoJlal Law Commission. That ~sa:matter.which might
.well have. been settled by the· FIrst Comnuttee and the
General Assembly .themselves.
,40. For the above reasons, the delegation of the
Ukrainian SSR voted against the resolution recommended by the First -Committee.
41. Mr. WINIEWICZ (Poland): The Polish delegation wishes to take advantage' of this opportunity to
make clear its position with regard to the resolutions
which have· just been adopted by the General Assembly.
42. With regard to resolution A, which was originally
~ponsored by Yugoslavia in the First Committe~,~we
had some ilnportant reservations to. make in view of
itsmconsistency with the clear provisions of the Charter
and, in particular,. with those in Chapters VIand VII.
Furthermore, the resolution completely confuses the
victim with the aggressor and thus serVes the ends of
the aggressor but does not help international peace, so
that it becomes a harmful document. It cannot be
denied that such a confused resolution serves only those
who favour flexible notions as to who, in given circumstances, should be characterized as .the aggressor. In the
First Committee the original Yugoslav draft was
trimmed and pruned a great deal, but in spite of all the
changes it could' not stand up to a thorough lega.l and
logical examination and we had to vote against it.
43. Resolution B transmits to the International Law
Commission a document of great historical imPortance,

.'.

, •.....

'._

.•

,

',

' ••

__

',

_

_,_

:",

_

namely, the draft resolution providing for a clear
definition of aggression which the Sovie.t Union submitted in the First Committee [A/C.1/6Q81. The
Polish delegation would have preferred that this paramount problem had been dealt with favourably at the
present session. Since that view was not accepted, it
voted. in .favour of the USSR amendment [.4/1512]
providing that the Commission's findings should be
reported to the next session of the Gener<.\l Assembly.
The amendment was rejeeted, however,. and it is our
opinion that the very important histonca:I document of
the Soviet. rJnion may now be lost in the huge mass
of papers already accumulated on the desks of the
International Law" Commission.
44. Those are the reasons why the Polish delegation
had to vote against the draft resolution.
. 45. Mr. HA]DU (Czechoslovakia) ; The Czechoslovak
delegation regrets ·that -a proposal as important as that
submitted to the First Committee by the Soviet Union
delegation and .clearly defining aggression and an ag~
gressor .was not adopted but transmitted to -the Inter~
national. Law Commission. This was, done despite the
fact that everyone who. spoke in the First Committee,
with the exception of the representative of the United
States, .stressed the usefulness and even the necessity
of having sucha' definition of an aggressor. Not one of
the representatives in the First Cotmnittee who voted
for the transmission of the proposal to the International
Law Commission touched upon the substance of the
matter. Not one said that 'he disliked this or that clause,
that certain clauses should be amended or that new
clauses -should be added defining the aggressor more
precisely.
. '
.
46. In spite of this, the majority in the Committee
decided to transmit the draft resolution to the International Law Commission, and the question 'is, "Why?".
Apparently they did not desire that an aggressor should
be so defined as. to make an act of aggression more
plain a.nd, for that reason, more difficult.
47. .Instead, the General Assembly has just adopted a
resolution, proposed 'originally by the Yugoslav delega..
tion, which not ;<)nly is not clear but which confuses the
issue and obscures the existing concept of aggression
as recognized by international law. It is a proposal which
even facilitates the act of aggression by giving. the
aggressor and the victim of aggression the same legal
sta11ding, thus placing the victim in a position where he
would be deprived of all opportunity of defending himself even in the area of aggression.
48.. The Czechoslov9:t<: delegation, -therefore, voted
against resolution A and, for tliereasons. explained here,
in favour of the Soviet Uiiion amendment. It also voted
in favour of resolution B.
'
,
E8tablis~ebt cd a permanenteommission of good

offioos= report of ihe Fast Committee (A/ISOI)
[Agenda item 73].
49. The PRESIDENT ... (translated from French):
.The report of the First Committee on theestablishmel1t
of a permanent commission of good offices seems to me
to be extremely .simple and. unless the Rapporteur
wishes to make some :explanatory remarks, I shall not
ask him to present it ·to the General· Assembly. The

....-.-.,,------------

BOOth Meetblg--17NoveJDbeJ' 1950
,

., .

report concludes with a draft resolution which provides
that this question should be referred for· study to the
Interim Committee.
.
50. If no one wishes to open a debate on this· question"
I shall put to the vote the draft resolution of the First
Committee [A/1501].
'

The draft resolution was adopted by 45 'Votes to 5,
'lfJith J abstentions. .,
,

57. The PRESIDEl"1T (translated from Fren,h):
I shall now put to the vote, in succession, draft resolutions A and B of the First Committee [A/1490].

Draft resolution A was adopted by 50 votes .to 5,
with 1 .a,bstention.
D~"'a-ftr-esolution B was adopted by 49 votes to none,
with 7 abstentions.
58. l'he' PRESIDENT (tranr1.ated from French):

I eaU upon the representative of the Soviet Union,
who wishes to explain his 'Vote.
59. Mr.VYSHINSKY. (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The SQviet
(A/1490)
Union delegation considers that the text submitted by
,[Agenda item 69]
the First Colllmittee5 and now adopted by the General
Mr. Thors (Iceland), Rapporteur, presented the re- . Assembl'y': is unsatisfactory. Despite its .g'randiloquent
title of npeace through Deeds", no deeds in lavour of
port of the First Committee and the accompanying draft
peacecare
even hinted at in this resolution. We pointed
resolutions (document A/1490).
this out in the First Committee and suggested the
51. Mr. THORS (Iceland), Rapporteur of the First
necessary amendments ta the draft resolution. We also
Committee: People ~1l over the world will appreciate
submitted .those amendments. to the Ge~eral Assembly,
that'this session of th£; General Assembly has given the
but the General Assembly has rejected them. I should
all-important question of peace a most thorough and
like to explain why1 in the circumstances, the USSR
exhaustive consideration. When all these re.."Olutions for
delegation' did not consider it possible' to support the
,peace are adopted, the road to ~ace may seem dearly
t~t submitted' by the First Committee.
.
marked.. Let us hope that this proves to be the case. ' .
60. My first point concerns the problem of the pro52. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
hibiti9n of the atomic weapon. Sub-paragraphs (a) and
shall now. ask the Assembly to vote on whether it
( b) of paragraph 20f the resolution which has just
desires to have a discussion on this item.
been adopted .are wholly unsatisfactory, since. they
ignore. the .mQst important and fundamental questionIt was decided, by 27 votes to 7, with 17 abstentions,
the prohibition of the atomic weapon-a.nd do ne more
not to open a debate.
than recommend theestablisfunent of international con53. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
trot. We have insisted and we continue to insist on the
wish to draw your attention to the various documents
unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and
before us.
othel~ weapons of mass destruction, and on the establish54. First of all, we have draft resolutions A and B
ment of strict international control. It is our belief,
submitted by the First Committee [A/1490]. A whole
however, that it is not enough merely to refer to such
series of amendments to draft resolution A has been
international control while ignoring. the question of the
submitted jointly by the Byelorussian SSR, Czechosloprohibition of the atomic weapon. After all, it is imvakia, Poland, the Ukrainian SSR and the Soviet
possible to control. what does not yet exist. It is
Union [A/1505].We have also a separate draft resoluimpossible to see to it that the prohibition of the atomic
weapon is put into effect if that prohibition itself does',
tion submitted by the Soviet Union [A/1491].
not exist. Our amendments, therefore, were designed to
55. 1 intend to put the' amendments to the vote first,
remedy these deficiencies which .render this part .of the
then the dr~tt resolutions submitted by the Committee,
resolution completely useless.
and thereafter' the USSR draft resolution.
61. The second question is closely connected with the
The first amendment (A/1505, paragraph 1) was
first: it concerns the reduction by the five great Powers
rejected by 29 votes to 5, with 15 abstentions.
of their armaments and. armed .forces by' one-third
The second amendtnent (A/1505, paragraph 2) was
during. the years 1950 and '1951. Because of· the way it
rejected by 28 votes to 8, with 13 .abstentions.
deals with this question, the resolution. will _do nothing
The third amendment (A/15q5, paragraph 3) was
whatsoever- to promote a· reduction in ·armaments. On
the contrary, it marks a retrogression. from the derejected by 35 votes.to 5, with 10 abstentions.
56. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): .cision taken on this question in resolution 41 (1)
adopted by the General Assembly in 1946. That
Only ~fty delegations have voted. A number of delegaresolution recommended that the Security Council
tions in this hall therefore do not wish to express their
should give prompt consideration to formulating. the
views, but the result is the same in the end, for nonpractical measures which were essential' to provide for
participation. in a vote is counted as an abstention. We
the general regulation and' reduction of armaments and
shall-continue with the 'Voting. '
armed forces, .to expedite the consideration of the
The fourth. amendment (Aj1505, paragraph 4) was
appropriate' conventions and to take other practical
rejected by 37 votes to 5, with 11 abstentions. .
steps along those lines. The resolution which has just
The fifth amendment (A/1505, paragraph 5) was
been.adopted contains no provisions of that kind.

Declaration on the removal of the threat of a new
war and the strengthening of peace and security
among. nations: report of the First Committee

rejected by 36 votes to 5i with 13 abstentions.
The siJ:th amendment (.11./1505" paragraph 6) was
rejected by 35 votes to 5, with 15' abstentions.

---

IS For the discussion

on this subject in the First Conunittee,

see OfjicialRecords ojthe General Assembl:Y1 Fifth Session,

First Committee, 372nd to 383rd meetings inclusive.

480

General As8en1bly-Fifth Sal$ion-Pl~ Meetinge
IQ

62~

In order to justify this negative attitude to our
proposal fora one..thjrd reduction by the five great
Powers of their Rrmaments and anned forces during
1950 and 1951, references have been made to the
weakness of the military potential of all other countries
as compared with that of the Soviet Union. But what
weakness of military potential can be invoked if the
military.potential of the United States a1one~ according
to authoritative military experts, is at the present time
the highest in the whole history of the United States?
This was confirmed by President Truman who, in
submitting his government's budgetary estimates for
1950, stated that "the military forces recommended in
this budget are the most powerful this nation has ever
maintained in peace-time".6 The forces in question are
the armed forces of the United States.
63. It is clear, therefore, that references to the weak~
ness or inadequacy of the war potential of certain other
States, such as the U'nited States, are merely pretexts
advanced in order to refuse even the slightest reduction
of armaments and armed forces, a measure which would
have a tremendous moral and political effect, since it
would undoubtedly ensure the strengthening of mutual
4,.'Onfidence and the removal of the distrust which is
h~mpering the cause of peace.
64. That is why the resolution proposed by the Firs'
Committee could not satisfy us on this point either, and
Why we voted ,against it. \Ve introduced amendments
to it in an endeavour to find a compromise, so that an
agreed decision might be taken on· this most important
question. Unfortunately, however, our amendments were
rejected, and small wonder, since the real aim of the
foreign policy of the United States-which calls the
tune on this q!testion-is not to reduce armaments or
to ease the burden of taxation resulting from military
expenditure, a burden which weighs so grievously upon
the. tax-payers, but to speed up the armaments race, to
build up stock-piles of atomic bombs, to arm the country
as stro-agly as possible and t·.) prepare all kinds of
armaments. All this, of course, is in flagrant contradiction with that· policy of peace \'ioout which there is so
much talk but no action whatsoever.
65. The third question, and an extremely important
one, is that of propaganda in favour of a new war. In
this r~gard also thf; resolution is wholly unsatisfactory.
It was said that there was no need to adopt any new
resolutions on: this question, inasmuch as the General
Assembly had already adopted appropriate decisions.
We know,howe:ver, that, although such decisions have
. been adopted, in poitllt of fact, ever since 1947-that is
to say, during the last three years--this criminal
propaganda iu f~vOlii' of a new war and hatred of
mankind l~as not only not diminished but, on the
contrary, has been developing and growing ever more
intense, thusrendeting the ;;-esohtHon adopted three
years ago hy the General Assembly [resolution 11(}
(11)] completely nugatory.
66. To illustrate hlow far matters have gone in that
direction, it is enough to refer to facts such as, for
example, the publication in Washington of a magazine
called Junior Rtrview for school children of 10 to 14
years of age, each issue of which is taken as a subject
of study at special lessons. One issue of this publk.atiOl1
6

Message to the United States Congress, 10 JanuarY 1949.

..... 11'

sang the praises of the armada of bombers which can
travel 5,000 miles to bomb enemy objectives. The
article states that from Alaska these planes could attack
the whole of Russia, except for the southern parts of
the country.

67. .This criminal gibberish is being. fed to ten..yearold children by American teachers, whose directors in
\Vashington differ in no respect from inveterate warmongers. Urgent measures must be taken to put an end
to this criminal war propaganda, this preparation for
war aid hatred of mankind which are thwarting all
efforts to establish friendly relations among nations,
and are nullifying ali measures, even those merely in an
embryonic stage,. designed to strengthen international
peace and security.
68. The Soviet Union Government deems it its duty
to continue the struggle against propaganda in favour
of a new war, and to carry on the campaign for
universal peace which it has staunchly and consistently
conducted since the very foundation of the Soviet
Socialist Stat~. The head of the Government of the
USSR, Joseph Stalin, said in 1925: "The policy of our
Government-its foreign policy-is based on the idea
of peace. Its aim is to struggle for peace and against
further wars, and to expose all measures taken with a
view to preparing for another war, all measures which,
under the catchword of pacifism, are. in fact designed to
precipitate another war. That is our aim." He also said:
"We do not want to be a hammer for weak nations Olr
all anvil for the strong. We want to be neither the om~
nor the other. We are for peace."
69. ·That is why the Soviet Union delegation submitted a number of amendments designed to put an
end to the armaments race, to dissipate the war
psychosis, to prohibit war propaganda, and to enable
the General Assembly to declare firmly and resolutely
that the atomic weapon and all other weapons of mass
destruction must be unconditionally prohibited, and. that
a really strict and effective international supervision of
the observance of that prohibition must be instituted.
Although the text submitted to the First CommJttee was
altogether unsatisfactory, the USSR delegation submitted amendments in the hope that the Gel1eral Assembly's decision would correspond to the pressing
demands of millions upon millions of' people who are
appealing to us to exert every effort to avert the threat
of a new war, to strengthen peace and ensure international security.
70. The First Committee was unwilling to listen to
our advice. On the contrary, the First C()mmittee, or
at least a number of delegations in that Committee,
found it possible to slander and defame the Stockholm
Appeal which has been signed 'by 500 million peaceloving persons, including eminent statesmen, outstanding representatives of the worlds of science, art and
literature, as well as by workers and peasants. All those
people are calling upon the General Assembly with a.
single voice to take steps to put an end to the criminal
armaments ra~e and to war propagal1da, as well as to
the manufacture and stock-piling of atomic bombs, to
outlaw the atomic bomb, to ensure that atomic energy
is used for peaceful purposes, and to dec::1are that the
gover~ment which first uses atomic bombs and unleashes a i~~W war is declared a war-criminal.

S08th Meeting-I? Novenaber19S0

71. That· is our position. It was in the light of that
position that we ·c:onsidered the text submitted by the
First Committee. We opposed' a large number: of
provisions which did not offer a single practical solution
and served merely to camouflage the aggressive plans
on which the foreign policy of a number of nations,
including first and foremost the United States, is now
based. That was why we submitted a number of· pro..
posals which. would have made good the deficiencies in
the text put forward by the First Committee. As those.
proposals were rejected, we voted against that text as
being wholly.unsatisfactory. We declare that the Soviet
Union will continue to strJggle for peace, and to expose
war..mongers and th~ aggressive plans of those who do
not wish to heed the voices of millions upon millons of
persons who thirst for peace and detest war.
72.. Mr. JARVIE (Union of South Africa): I shalt
confine my ,explanation to my dele~ation's vote on
.
resolution A, entitled "Peace through Deeds".
73. When· this resolution was considered in the First
Committee, the South African delegation indicated that
it would need to reserve the position of its government
regarding paragr~lph 2 (a) of the operative part of the
resolution, and to abstain in the vote on that paragraph.
74. We explained that South Africa found itself in. a
particular and peculiar difficulty with regard to the
methods and machiner:y of atomic energy control, and
that my countr:y's position and interest we.,te different
in this respect from those of other countries concerned.
We also explained that in South Africa uranium was
found as a component of the gold..bearing conglomerates
of the Witwatersrand gold mine, and that the produc..
tion of gold was South Africa's most important and
valuable primary industry. We further intimated that
the South African Government, while giving its whole..
hearted support to the principle of atomic energy contro!, was forced by the considerations I have mentioned
to give the matter further close consideration· and
examin"tion in order that the economic implications'
involved for South Africa might be clearly determined.
75. Consequently, in voting today for the resolution
as a whole, we did so with the reservation I have
referred to in mind.
76. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I wish to g-ive a short
explanation of Israel's vote. My dele~ation voted in
favour of the second amendment proposed bv the USSR
to resolution A, noting that the addition of the one sntall
word "as materially changed the whole amendment
as it was drafted previously. '1 \Vhe.reas the amendment
submitted to the First Committee l'ead: ttRecognizing
that the use of the atomic weapon, a weapon of
aggression and mass destruction, is contrary to congeience and incompatible with membership of the United
Nations", the final version read: ((Recognizing that the
use of the atomic weapon as a weapon of aggression ...
i~ ... incompatible with· membership of the United
Nations".
77. My deleg:at~on has repeatedly declared that it
regards a.ny armeciaggression with whatever weapons
1

'

, '1 The word ,lfas"was inadveltently omitted from the En~1ish
version of the a.tnendmerit (A/C.l/60n submitted to the First
Committee. The' COf.~t inglish t1"~nslat1.on a:ppeared in document A/1505. The original RU'Jstan text remaIned the same in
both cases.
.
.

481.

used as-here I wish to use the language of the resolu..
tion we have just adopted-"tht ..;ravest of all crimes
against peace and security throughout the world". That
is why my delegation cannot agree to the use of the
atomic weapon as a weapon of ~ggression.
78. Mr. WIERBLOWSKI (Poland). ·(translated
from Russian): By the decision of the majority, the
Polish delegation was prevented from stating its posi..
tion during the discussion. With the P~esident'$ per"
mission, I should like to explain the Polish deleg-~t!on's
vote.
79. We consider that the United Nations must seek
the appropriate means of settling' controversialprob..
lems, wherever they may arise. All obstacles to international co-operation must be eliminated. The United
Nations must find constructive solutions to questions
which the nations of the world bring before it.
80. It is clear that neither of the resolutions just
adopted provides such a solution. Thesere.solutions can
in no way help to relieve international tension, or to
maintain and· strengthen peace and international secu..
rity. On the contrary, the wording of these documents
is vag,~e and ambig'Jous, arid their provisions create an
atmosphere favouring the sinister machinations of the
groups which are interested fu~~;ingingabout a· new
war•.

81. That is why the Polish delegation did not support
these resolutions. It voted in favour of the USSR
<\eclaration [A/1491] for a number of reasons•.
82. We believe that the peoples of the world are ina
state of deep anxiety: the atomic bomb, the propaganda"
in favour of another war; the armaments· race, all of
which are championed by the representatives of the
North Atlantic Treaty countries, are so many causeso£
fear of the future and concern for the fate of mankind.
The Partisans of Peace movement has been organized
to fight against the threffit of war. It includes il1its
ranks all those who desire progress and prosperity
throughout the world. It embraces all those who have a
realistic approach and who believe in the obvious truth
that the two systems-the socialist and the capitalist~
can co-exist, co~operate and engage in peaceful competi..
tion, provided those who are at the nead of the most
powerful of the capitalist States-the 'United Statesand their followers in other countriesl will renounce
their plans for world domination.
83. Vve are completely at one with the millions wlio
want peace, and that· is .whY we voted for the declaration
proposed by the USSR dele~ation. We want to take
steps, through the United Nations, which is dedicated
to the cause of peace, to prevent the conflicts., which the
war..mongers are provoking in the Pacific and the
Atlantic, in Europe and in other parts of the world. Our
aim is peace. That is the aim of the USSR declaration
which we discussed in the Committee. That is al<io the
aim pursued by the movement of the Partisans of Peace.
That is why the Polish delegation voted for the Soviet
Union draft declaration.
84. That declaration calls for disarmament, an.d, as a
first step in that direction, provides· that the great
Powers shall reduce their armed forces by one..third
during 1950..1951, and that the question of a further
reduction of armed forces shall be brougJ:tt u~ for

432
.
oonsideration at one of the fO'ithcoming sessions of the
General Assembly. This is the first step towards the
reduction of armam.ents proposed by the camp of peace;
it is a concrete proposal which establishes the tixne
within which such disarmament must take place and
the extent of the disarmament. It is a realistic proposal
whose adoption would considerably diminish interna..
t~onal tension.
S5. The other measures proposed, which d~ not pro..
vide concrete conditions and time limits for disarma..
ment, will remain mere phrases; they are designed to
delude the peoples of thft world who consider that real
disarmament is an essential prerequisite for the prevention of wax'.
86. There C&'1 be no effective disarmalnent without
the prohibition of the atomic weapon. That is why one
of the basic provisions in the USSR declaration is the
unconditional prohibition of the use of the atomic
weapon as a weapon of aggression and of mass destruction. Together with unconditional prohibition, the
USSR has also proposed a strict system of international
control to ensure the scrupulous observance of this
prohibition. The Soviet Union, which has already
repeatedly made concrete proposals on the. question of
control, has given further ·proof of its will for peace
and of its desire to save humanity from the disaster
which is bound to follow the use of atomic energy for
.
military purposes.
87. It is quite clear that those who do not intend to
use the atomic weapon and who have no criminal
~esigns voted in favour of such prohibition. That is
why the Polish delegation supported the USSR draft
resolution. It supported that text precisely be:cause it
unt'onrli tionally prohibited the use of the atomic weaoon
and declared that the first government to use it should
be regarded as a criminal.
88. This proposal that the first government to use the
atomic weapon should be declared a war-criminal was
the logical consequence of our preceding proposal for
the prohibition of the atomic weapon. This proposal was
made at the same time in the Stockholm Appeal. The
hundreds of millions of people who have signed this
peace appeal consider it a guarantee that the ?;reatest
crime which can be committed against humanity will
not go unpunished, and see in it a means of making
governments think twice before taking a decision which
might have such fatal consequences for the future of
mankind.
89. The USSR draft declaration puts the question
clearly and unambiguously. The way to guarantee
effective prohibition of war propaganda is, of course,
to provide a punishment for the war-mongers. We are
in favour of prohibiting war propaganda. We are in
favour of forbidding war-mongers to carry on their
provocative activities with impunity. Those who are in
favour of allowing a criminal to go unpunished are in
favour of the crime and share the responsibility for it.
That is why the Polish delegation voted for the declaration proposed by the Soviet Union.
90. We are realists. We realize that the best plan for
the maintenance and strengthening of peace will be
ineffective so tong as international relations are dominated by antagonism among the great Powers, so long
as efforts are made to keep one of those Powers at

arm's length and to substitute for the representatives of
another a group of politicians who are abject failures
and have been expelled by their own People.
91.· The l"'SSR delegation has raised the question of
achieving permanent co-operation and concerted action
among; the great Powers by proposing the conclusion of
a five"Power pact for the strengthening of peace. In
the dceclaration submitted for our cOflsideration, the
Soviet: Union and the entire camp of peace once again
give e:x:pression to their desire f~! co-operation for the
good of all mankind. We want the conflicting interests
to be settled by means of agreements, sound compromises and mutual concessions, and ~'1ot by a policy of
pressure, uy bombs and mass destruction.
92. Our contribution to ~he cause of peace will be the
adoption of measures to dispel the spectre of war. A
serious step in that direction would be the adoption of
the USSR draft resolution containing all the basic
provisions required to remedy the international situation and to enable the Organization to function "
normally.
93. .The Polish delegation calls upon
the members
of the Assembly to take into account, in their future
work, the seriousness of the situation, and not to vote
mechanically, as they have just Jone at this meeting,
against draft resolutions and declarations which are
supported by hundreds of millions of people.
94. If the United Nations intends to fulfil the task
assigned to it, if it intends to satisfy humanity~s craving
for peace, it must choose the path indicated by the
USSR delegation-the path of agreement and international co-operation.
95. For all the aforesaid reasons the Polish dele~ation
voted in favour of the draft resoiution submitted by the
Soviet Union.
96. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The delegation
of the Byelorussian SSR considers it necessary to
explain its vote on resolution A~ which was sponsored
in the First Committee by the delegations of the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Bo~ivia, India,
Lebanon, Mexico and the Netherlands and submitted
by that Committee to the General Assembly. In the
First Committee we were forced to vote against the
eight-Power draft resolution since the amendments proposed by the delegations of the Byelorussian SSR,
Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Ukrainian SSR and the
Soviet Union had been rejected by the majority of the
Co~ittee. Unfortunately those amendments [A/1505]
have also been rejected by the General Assembly. .
97. Th~se amendments were intended to facilitate the
adoption of a resolution which would help to remove the
threat of a new war, to reduce the heavy burden of
military budgets and to establish mutual trust among
States. They expressed the ardent desires, expectations
and hopes of all peace-loving peoples who detest and
despise war and passionately yearn for peace.
98. . The five delegations proposed that a new paragraph should be inserted after para~raph 1 of resolution
A, beginning with the word.s "Solemnly reaffirms", to
read as follows: URecogniking that the use of the
atomic' weapon as a weapon of aggression and mass
destruction is contrary to international conscience and

an

..

S08th Meeting-I? Novewber 1950

honour and incompatible with membership of the United
Nationsl1 •
..
99. We Soviets continue to insist on the prohibition
of the atomic weapon as a barbarous weapon of
aggt'ession, the use of which is incompatible with mem..
bership of the United Nations and contrary to the
conscience and honour of peoples. This demand was'
voiced throughout the world and found an answering
echo in the hearts of many millions of people.· No
blackmail, no threats to use a "superatomic bomb';, no
scares deliberately engineered by the war..mongers, no
hysteria about the atomic bomb will frighten us or force
us to abandon our just and consistent policy of seeking
to ensure that the use of the atomic weapon as a
weapon of aggression is prohibited. As early as 14
December 1946, the General Assembly expressed itself
[resolution 41 (1)] in favour of the elimination of the
atomic weapon from national armaments. Consequently
there is not and never has been any reason why we
should·delay the adoption of this pr~posal.
100. Further, paragraph 2 (a) of resolution A should
have been reworded in the following manner as proposed in the amendment submitted by the five delegations: . flOn the unconditional prohibition of atomic
weapons and the establishment of strict international
control, under United Nations supervision, over the
scrupulous and unconditionan implementation of this
ban, in order to make effective the prohibition of
atomic weapons".
101. The Soviet Union has always insisted that the
use of the atomic bomb should be outla'lj;;Oed and that
the great discovery of our age, atomic energy, should
be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. Only. by
adopting such a decision could we establish conditions
favourable to the free and serious consideration of the
question of establishing control of atomic energy.
102. The voice of the peoples who have signed the
Stockholm Appeal grows louder and echoes in every
corner of the globe, although there are still those who
do not wish to hear or heed it. Hundreds of millions of
human beings insistently demand the prohibition of the
atomic weapon and the organization of effective international control of atomic energy to ensure its use for
peaceful purposes. But many delegations here do not
want that.
103. We proposed, moreover, that paragraph 2 (c) of
resolution A should be reworded as follows: "To
regulate all armaments and armed forces in such a way
as to proceed, beginning in the year 1950-51, to the
reduction of armaments and armed forces". This is a
specific and clear proposal. It is obvious to everyone
that the problem is ripe for a decision and that the
time has now come to take definite decisions so that
these tasks may be carried out. That is what the peoples
of the world are demanding. By adopting such a
decision we should strengthen international faith in the
belief that the United Nations was really imbued with
the desire for lasting peace. That would be in conformity with the interests of all peoples, since it would
reduce the heavy burden of taxation imposed on them
by ejeaggerated expenditures on armaments which are
not in. keeping with post..warpeace-time conditions~
The reduction of armaments and arlned forces would
bring about the end of the armaments race which has

433

already begun and which is now continuing with
intensity.
104. At this fifth session, the General Assembly should
recommend that the 3ecurity Council should araw up
the necessary and practical directions for the reduction
by one..third of the armies maintained by the five great
Powers in time of peace. Naval and air forces should
also be reduced by one..third, as they are now out of all
proportion to peace-time needs. That would be a first
step towards carrying out a further and still greater
reduction in armaments and armed forces. Let us take
this first step.
10S.After paragraph .2 (d) of resolution A, it is
essential to add the following;
((Condemns any r-orm of propaganda for a new·war;
((Notes that the reduction of armaments and armed
forces and the condemnation of propaganda for a. new
war are of great importance for the strengthening of
peace and security among the nations."
106. Approximately, three years ago, at the second
session of the General Assembly, a ,similar decision
[resoltttion110 (11)] was adopted. That decision was
wholeheartedly supported by all the peoples of the
world and stirred the camp of the war-mongers to the
pitch of fury. Since ,then they have not abated theil"
efforts and, despite the decision adopted by the United
Nations, they. have continued their propaganda for
another war. The ruling circles in the United States and
the United Kingdom, who have taken no steps to
oppose it, are primarily answerable to the Genera!
Assembly for such propaganda.
'
107. lna recent broadcast from London, that arrant
war-monger, Winston Churchill, demanded the organization of a "European front" and advocated the
kindling of the fires of another war in Europe. Churchill
is well known· to the peoples of the world as an
inveterate believer in imperialism and colonialism and.
as the most virulent enemY of international peace and
security. Similar propaganda for a:nother war is being
conducted by the war-mongers in the United StatesJohnson, Eisenhower, Bradley, Matthews, l~acArthur
and others. General Bradley, for example, openly called
for the use of the atomic bomb against peaceful populations. Such statements by the war..mongers·· arouse the
righteous indignation of all peace-loving peoples, who
demand the cessation of such misanthropic propaganda.
108. As early as 1946, Generalissimo Stalin in a reply
to the President of the United Press wrote that if the
peoples of the world were' to be spared another war,
"the instigators ofa new war must be exposed and
muzzled". It is the duty of the representatives at this
session of the General Assembly to expose the warmongers and to take measures to strengthen international peace. The propaganda put out by the instigators
of war should be counteracted by a wide propa~anda
for peace and friendship among peoples and States.
Only thus can we fulfil our duty and justify the faith
of the peoples who ha'Ve sent us here to represent them.
Such action is essential for the promotion of international co-operation and the strengthening of peace.
109. That is why the delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR supported and voted in favour of the amendments
to resolution A proposed by fi'Ve delegations. That is. why

~ .'_,,

Gen
.....'__
c"_al_,r_A_llem_,
__
bl.:r--_,':_"FUth
_ _S_._.~_IOR_'_-_I'_:len
__....
'I:1.....'_M_e.e_,tlu_'...;;;::I_'

we could not aS$ociate our$e!ves with that ·resolution
and voted against it
110. Mr. SIROKY (Oed:ll~slovakia) (translatldjrom
R.:ssian): I should like to ~plain the Czec'hosiovak
delegation's vote. Resolution A. which was sponsored
in the First Committee by eight States belonging to
the Anglo-American bloc has superseded the Soviet
Union propo,sa,,1 for the re,moval ,Of the threat of a new
war and the strengthening of peace and security among
the nations, a proposal of the utmost importance.
111. The USSR proposal, based on the urgent need
to strengthen and develop friendly co-operation among
nations, wit,h a view to settli, g inte";1a,tion,a1 prqblems,
called on the General Assembly, at Its fifthsesslon, to
take practical measures for the preservation of peace.
In particular, it called for a ban on war propaganda,
the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and
, a reduction of armaments and armed forces of all kinds
by one-third during the year 1950-5l.
112. As for. the resolution adopted by the Anglo..
Atnerican majority bloc. it does not provide peaceloving humanity with the instrument it needs to enable
the peoples of the world to advance along the noble
road which leads to the strengthening of peace and
security among nations, or to oblige the Member States
of the United Nations to fulfil their obligations in the
spirit of the Charter. That resolution deliberately re..
frains from. providing for any practical measures, in
~cular, the prohibition of the atomic weapon and the
reduction of armaments and armed forces of all kinds
by one-third during the year 1950..51; it is merely the
last link in the chain of documents which are intended
to legalize armed intervention in the domestic affairs
of States, an intervention directed against the freedom
and independence of peoples.
113. The representatives of the Anglo-Atnerican bloc,
with tIle1r usual majority, have rejected not only the
Soviet Union proposals, but also the amendments SUbmitted by the USSR and. four other States, including
Czechoslovakia, despite the fact that the sote purpose
of tbosearnendments was to make the resolution an
effective instrument for the pursuit of a policy of
peace and for democratic co-operation among nations.
114. The declaration proposed by the Soviet Union'
included effective measures against ideological, political,
strategic and material preparations for another world
war. It .proved unacceptable to those delegations whose
countries have formed themselves ~nto aggressive blocs
under the leadership of the most rt\pacious imperialism
of. our times. Natural1y the lucid words of the USSR
delegation are not to the liking of these delegationsr
since the essence of the policies of tb.eil' governments is
not peace and co-operation amOJ.1.g the nations, but
war, oppression and the· exploitation of other peoples.
115.. The sponsors of the resolm:ion speak of "'effective
control"of the atomic weapon. But what control can
there be if the manufacture of the atomic bomb is not
prohibited? Those v~ governments whose representatives on the First COmmittee talked about "effective
control", hold forth in their practical political· activities
about '(the use of the atomic bomb for the sake of
peace", and "the use of the atomic bomb for purposes
of defence", in other words, about legalizing the use
of tbeatomic bomb.
n,

,

_

116. The same applie$ to the question of disarmament.
The USSR draft resolution called for the reduction of
the armaments and armed forces of the great Powers
by one-third no later than in 1950..51, which would
constitute a starting point for further disarmament.
The Anglo-American bloc rejected this proposal, which
the whole world considered just.
117. Resolution A advocates disarmament in general
and abstract terms; or, rather, it refers to ((gradual"
disarmament, although it is not stated when or where
it is to begin, to what it must apply and how it is to
be put into effect. Whenever the question is posed in
concrete terms, the representatives of the Anglo..
American bloc take a negative attitude, since any con-crete and definite formUlation would be binding. And
while speaking of gradual disarmament, their countries
feverishly continue to arm themselves and to arm the
North Atlantic Treaty countries .and western Germany.
118. Such are the reasons why the Czechoslovak
delegation voted again.st theresQlution.
.
119. The PRESIDENT (translCl-ted from Fretlch):
I am going to put to the vote the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union delegation [A/1491].
120. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR
delegation proposes that the vote on its draft, entitled
"Declaration on the removal of the threat of a new war
and the strengthening of peace and security attlong the
nations" should be taken as follows: a separate vote on
the preamble to the declaration, and then separate and
successive votes on each of the three paragraphs of the
operative part.
The preamble of the USSR draft resolution was re..
jeeted by 31 votes to 51 with 15 abstentions.
Paragraph 1 of the operative part of the draft resolu..
tion was~rejeeted by 34 'Votes to 5, with 11 abstentions.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part of the draft resolution was rejected by 35 'Votes to 5, with 11 abstentions.
Paragraph 3 of the operative part of the draftresolution was rejected by 35710tes to 51 with 11 abstentions.
121. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the representative of the Ukrainian SSR,
who wishes to explain his vote.
122. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Sovie" Social..
ist Republic) (translated from Russian): The delega" .
tion of the' Ukrainian SSR strove stubbornly and persistently in the First Committee to secure the adoption
of the d~claration proposed by the Soviet Union on the
removal of the threat to peace, as it considered that
me~sure~ to strengthen peace and security, based on a
pobcy dIrected towards th~ peaceful and friendly settlement of international ·,isagreements, would certainly
constitute a. serious obstacle ·to the spread of war
propaganda. and to the aggressive actions of the imperialists. The United States and several other influential countries, however, were unwilling to follow that
course. On the contrary, the delegations of those
countries did everything they could to prevent the
United Nations from ~dopting the USSR proposals.
123. In order to counteract the declaration submitted
by the USSR and to prevent the First Committee from
considering.it, several other .draft resolutions were sub..
tnitted, the basic provisions of which differed considerably from those of the Soviet Union. Those draft

........... ,"

808th MeetlnB-17 November 1950
,;

(

;

resolutionm .did not ~ntain such important provisions
as the. unCOllditional prohibition of the atomic weapon
and other me~,n$ of mass destruction and the reduction
of the present armed forces of the five great Powers
by one~third d~~ring 1950-51.,
124. In contrast to the clear and precise provisions of
the USSR declaration, the other (Jraft resolution had
deliberately vague attd b1definite recommendations
which diverted the Committee from its appointed task
and contained no practical obligations to remove the
threat of a new war.
125. In the vote in the First Committee, the declara~
tion proposrtJ. by the Soviet Union failed to receive the
llecessary majority and was therefore not adopted. It is
noteworthy that the declaration was attacked primarily
by the delegations of the countries which have ratified
the North Atlantic Treaty. Their attitude towards the
USSR proposals for peace once again laid bare the real
nature and true purposes of this aggressive alliance
which the United States and ibv-adherents pretend is
a defensive one.
126. In spite of the incompleteness and obvious· in~
adequacy of the draft resolutions before the Committee,
the Soviet delegations attempted to improve.them and
to. find formulae which would be generally acceptable
and make' it possible to arrive at an agreed decision
on so important a question as the defence of peace.
But the Angt)-American bloc cynically rejected all our
amendments in the Committee. As a result, the Committee appr.oved a worthless, elnasculated United States
draft resolution containing nO measures to remove the
threat of war and imposing-no obtigations in that
respect.
127. The delegation of the Ukrainian· SSR, deeply
convinced that the declaration on the removal of the
threat of a neW war and the strengthening of peace and
security among the nations is an essential and completely effective means to remove the threat of a new
war, fully supported all the provisions of this declara~
tion,' one of the most important of which was the
conclusion of a peace pact among the five great Powers.
128. The United States says a great deal in its propa...
ganda about its alleged efforts for peace and its so-called
defensive measures. The United States representatives
in the First Committee also spoke on that subject. If
the United States truly wants peace and if the leaders
of its present government sincerely want agreed collec~
tive action in defence of peace, why should not the
United States Government, together with the other
great Powers,conclu~e a pact for, the st~en1rthening
of peace, as proposed tn the USSR declaration?
129. Such a pact would certainly help to unify the
great Powers' efforts for peace and would therefore·
constitute an obstacle to miUtarypreparations and
preparations for another war; but neither the United
States nor the other Powers which were· invited to
conclude such a pact. were willing to assume any
oblig-ations which would hamper them in carrying out
their true intentions, whi~hare far removed from the
defence of peace. The United Statesdele~ation and its
myrmidons preferred not to assume restrictive obligations which might interfere with their a~~ressive plans
and therefore rejected the peace pact proposed by tbe
Soviet Union.

130. The USSR. draft declaration also proposed that
the use of tbe atomic wea??nas a means for the mass
destruction of peaceful populations should be prohibited.
It is common knowledge that this provision is fully
supported by the hundreds of millions of' people all over
the. world who have signed the StockholmAp~,
realizing clearly that they face extermination in the
devastation of an atomiewar.
131. There is no need to cite the numerous statements
by the Jeadersof the present Government of the United
States and of the various civilian and militaryofficlals
who extol the atomic weapon as a guarantee of peace.
Such cynical statements in praise of the atomic bomb
were also to be heard in the First Committee.
132. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will of
course always combat such dangerous views. The
declaration proposed by the Soviet Union recognized
that the use of the atomic weapon was contrary to
international conscience and honour and incompatible
with membership of the United Nations and provided
that the atomic weapon should be unconditionally
banned and that a strict system of international control
should be instituted to ensure the absolute and uncondi~
tional observance of the prohibition. This proposal was
based on a· decision adopted by the supreme legislative
body of the Soviet Union-the Supreme Council ·of
the USSR-on 19 June of this year, in connexion with
the report of the delegation'of the Permanent Committee of the World Congress of the Partisans of Peace.
By that decision the Supreme Council associated itself
with the committee's proposal concerning the prohibition of the ato~ic weapon. and declared. its readine~s
to co~operate wIth the legtslaturesof other States tn
elaborating and carrying Gut measures to implement
such proposals.
.
133. The discussion on this question in the First
Committee and here, in the General Assembly, has
shown that the ruling circles of the United States,
which are engaged in a feverish armaments race and" are
spending fabulous sums for the execution of their plans
for aggr~s~i!ln, are unwillipg to accept the proposal.for
the prohIbItion of the atomIC weapon because the Untted
States has no intention of discontinuing the production
of atomic bombs and of using atomic energy for peaceful
purposes. Nor has it any. intention of instituting e~...
tiveinternational control of atomic energy, notwithstanding the demagogic statements to. that effect ()f
Uuited States representatives to the United Nations'.
It is perfectly obvious that the United States is con~
tinuing to· increase its already tremendous war potential
in order to pursue a feverish armaments· .tace for
purposes of aggression and noto! defence.
134. Hence the reason which the United States delega~
tion gave in the First Committee for its government's
refusal to agree to the proposal for the reduction of the
armed forces of the five great Powers by· ·one-third
during 1950-51, namely, the alleged military weakness
of the United States, was false and mendacious.
135. Thus the rejection of the declaration proposed
by the USSR,. as· well as of the amendments proposed
by the Soviet delegations and the delegations of the
peoples' democracies to resolution A, is clear proof of
the fact that the United States and its adherents have
no desire to make it difficult for themselv~s ,to carry

General AefJentb1r-Fifth Seeeion-PlenaryMeetinge
...

..

..

be . . . . ·

'

, . ,

'

,

.-

out their propaganda in favour of war and the.'r pol}cy
of indtement to war hysteria as means for preparIng
.
.another war.
136. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR supported
. the declaration proposed .by the Soviet Union and
: voted in ·favour of all its provisions both in the First
, Committee and in the ..General Assembly. It also made
every effort to render resolution A acceptable and
defended the amendments it had submitted jointly with
four other delegations. Neither the declaration, however, nor a single one of the amendments was adopted
by the majority of the General Assembly, obedient to
the dictates of the United States. That is why tlle
Government of the Ukrainian SSR will continue with
still greater zeal its fight in the camp of the partisans
of peace•••
137. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
This is not an explanation of a vote.
138. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : I am about to
finish, Mr. President. The Government of the Ukrainian
SSR will continue to fight in the camp of the partisans
of peace, with the Soviet Union at its head, to .avert the
threat of a new war, and to strengthen friendship and
co-operation among nations and international peace and
security.
1.39. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I am going to make an explanation myself. not with
regard to a vote but to throw' light on my future
decisions.
140. I have tried to be reasonable; where questions as
important as those we are discussing now ate concerned,
it is essential that delegations should be given an
opportunity of explaining their attitude, even if the
Assembly has decided not to open a discussion. But an
explanation of a 'lute rrmst ~e that and nothinJ{ more;
r.epresentatives must: confine themselves to explaining
the reasons for their votes. They cannot start e.'"Ii:plaining the reasons for other delegations' votes. More'over,
no representative is entitled to attack and accuse other
delegations of bein~~ in the pay of certain countries or of
~cting under pr'essure. I beg all of you in future to
confine yourselves as far. as possible to a J{enuine
explanation of your votes; in that case I shall certainly.
allow you to explain your views. I hope that you will
understand my position and that from now on. you
will· co-operate with me.
Technical assistance for Libya after achievement
of independence: report· of the Second Committee (A/1513)
_

[Agenda item 65]
141. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Assembly has before it a report from the Second
Committee on technical assistance for Libya after
achievement of independence [A/1513] .. containing a
draft resolution approved unanimously by the Committee after discussion. I hope the General Assembly
will give the draft resolution the same- reception.
The draft f'csolution submitted by the Second Committee was adopted unanimously.

"','"

"

'.

t .

i

Development of a twenty-year programme for
achieving peace through the United Nations *
memoran(lum of tlie SeeretQry-General
(A/ISM)
[Agenda item 60]
142. The PRESIDENT ('translated from French) :
The next item on the agenda was proposed by the
Secretary-General; the General Assembly decided not
to refer it to a Comm~ttee but to discuss it in plenary
meeting.
143. I call upon the Secretarr-General to make a
statement on the question he Wishes to submit to the
Assembly.
144. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It may be useful at t;le beginning of the general debate on this item
to recall the circumstances in which my "Memorandum
of points for considera~ion in. t~e development of a
twenty-year programme lor achlevmg peace through the
United Nations" [Aj1304] originated.
145. Early last spring it seemed t~ me-a~ I am su~e
it did to most of you-that the Untted Nations was m
grave danger. The deadlock over the representation of
China came at the end of a chain of events that had
progressively weakened faith throughout the world over
a period of three years in the United Nations' approach
to the problems of war and peace.
146. There had been a steadily growing tendency to
relegate the United Nations to a secondary position in
international affairs and to give first priority instead
to the old, familiar expedients of arms and alliances.
147. I believed that this fatal tendency towards loss of
faith in the United Nations as the principal means of
preventing, war must be, and could be, arrested.
148. I never had any doubt that the peoples of the
world would continue to support the United Nations
with all their hearts, if given a chance to demonstrate
their loyalty to its humane and universal aims. I also
believed that the Member States-all of them-wanted .
the United Nations to succeed. But the many and
dangerous conflicts of interest and ideology were making all of us the prisoners of a vicious circle of charg-e
and counter-charge, of force and counter-force, in
which distrust and hatr~ds mounted month by month.
149. Somehow a way had to be found by the Member
States to break out of this vicious circle. I felt it was
clearly my duty as Secretary-General to do what I
could to help. It was wi~h these considerations in mind
that I prepared my memorandum on the development
of a twenty-year United Nations peace programme.
150. In this memorandum I declared my belief that
the atmosphere of deepening international mistrust
could be dissipated and that the threat of the universal
disaster of another war could be averted by a new and
great effort to employ to the full the resources for
conciliation and constructive peace-building present in
the United Nations Charter.
151. I personally handed the memorandum to the
President of the United States, Mr. Truman, on 20
April 1950. in Washington; to the Prime Minister of
the United King'dont, Mr. Attlee. on 28 April, in
London; to the Prime Minister of France, Mt.. Bidault,
on 3 May, in Paris; and to the Prime Ministter of the

S08th Meetlng--17 Novembe,.. 1950

487

[

Ul1.iotl of Soviet Spcialist Republics, Generalissimo
Stalin, on 15 May, in Moscow.

152. I di~ct1ssed the memorandum, and my rea~on~
for preparing it, with them and with other leaders of
their governments, including the Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. Acheson; the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Bevin; the Foreign Minister of France, Mr. SchUQ.lan;. and the Vice-Premier
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr, Molotov, and the Foreign Minister of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Mr. Vyshinsky.

153. My talks with these statesmen during my visits
to "the tapitals of the four great Powers were entirely
preliminary and exploratory. All the talks-without
exception-were most fdendly and cordial. I neither
asked for, nor received commitments on specific points
in the memorandum.
154. While it was indicated to me that each of the
four governments might have reservations or amendments concerning some of the points of view expresstd,
it became equally clear that the approach I was making
could provide an acceptable initial basis for discuslJion
to all four governments.

155. As a next step, therefore, I communicated my
memorandum formally, on 6 June, to all the Members
of the United Nations, together with a covering letter
in which I amplified my memorandum on points concerning atomic energy, trade restrictions and discriminations, and the desirability of universality of membership and support for the specialized agencies as weII as
for the United Nations itself.
156. Less than three weeks later came the attack from
North Korea upon the Republic of Korea. I do not
need today to recall here the momentous events in the
life of thfJ United Nations that have occurred since then.

157. The United Nations action in Korea and the"
further steps towards the creation of collective security
that have been taken at this session of the General
Assembly are, however, not in cpnflict with, nor do they
diminish in the slightest degree the importance of the
many other approaches to peace prescribed by the
Charter and suggested in the memorandum. It is just
as important now as it ever was that the United Nations should serve as a centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations towards achieving the purposes of the
Charter-perhaps even more so.
158. The United Nations works best when negotiation, mediation and conciliation succeed in preventing
breaches of the peace such as the one that occurred in
Korea.
159. Once a breach of the peace has occurred, the
United Nations can succeed on three conditions: first,
that the breach of the peace is suppressed by effective
collective action; secondly, that full collective assistance
is given to rehabilitate and reconstruct the country that
is the victim of a~gression; thirdly, that steps towards
genuine and lastin~ reconciliation are undertaken as
rapidly as possible after peace has been restored in that
area. .

160. With these considerations in mind, I went ahead
with toy plan to place my memorandum on the agenda

of this session of the General Assembly, and I so
inflonned the Member States in my annual report."
161. I am glad that the General Assembly decided to
consider my suggestions in plenary meeting. My memo..
randum, of course. is not in itself a programme. It is,
rather, a working paper that suggests an approach to
what I hope may develop in time into a twenty...y ear
Un~ted Nations peace programme. It is areaffirm~tiQn
of the United Nations approach and an appeal to the
Member States to renew their efforts to make the
United Nations work as the only tolerable and civilized
alternative to that barbarous thesis of despair-the
thesis of irreconcilable conflict.
.
162. I believe that the detailed consideration of the
points in my memorandum can most fruitfully be undertaken by those organs of the United .Nations particularly concerned under the Charter. This consideration
-by the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Trusteeship Council and by appropriate
United Nations commissions-wi1llead, I hope, during
the coming year, to specific action by these organs in
their respective fields of responsibility and to the formulation of definite and concrete. proposals.
163. Already, this session of the General Assembly has
made several historic decisions that reflect the will to
employ to the full the resources for peace ,and forpolitical, economic and social progress available under. the
United Nations Charter, which I had in mind in suggesting the dp.velopment of a twenty-year United Nations peace programme.
164. Let me now proceed to discuss briefly each ·of the
ten points in my memorandum.
165.. The first point is: "Inaqguration of periodic
meeting's of the Security Council,' attended by Foreign.
Ministers, or heads or other members of governments,
as provided by the United Nations Charter fArticle28,
paragraph 2] and the rules of procedure [rule 41 ;,
together with further development and use of other
United Nations machinery for neg-otiation, mediation
and conciliation of international disputes."
166. There have been no periodic meetings of the
Security Council so far, either Qecause, until 1948, the
Council of F orei~n Ministers met regularly, or' because,
until this year, there have been two General Assembly
sessions each year, or for other reasons. The Charter
says there "shall be" such periodic meetings. separate
and distinct from the regular continuous session. The
Charter also says [Article 28, paragraph 3] that the
Security Council may hold meeting'S "at such places
other than the seat of the Organization as in its judg...
ment will best facilitate its work".
167. Such periodic meetings, in my opinion, should be
inaugurated and used for a general semi-annual review
at a high level of outstandin!; issues. particularly those
that divide the great Powers. These meetin~s should
not be expected to bring great decisions every time.
They should not be held primarily tor public debate.
They should be used mainly for consultation~much of
it informal-for efforts to gain ground towards agreement on questions at issue, to clear up misunderstand..
ings" to prepare for newinitiatittes that may improve
the (,hances for definitive agreetnent at later meetings.

-

sSee 0 lficlal Records Df Ih, G~"a' As.rtmb'~, 'Fiftls StSsCOIJ,
Su/J/Jlement No. 1.
.

General AHembly--Fifth Seuion--Plenaq Meetings
smaller States not only have the right to be consulted
l~. In this conn~i()n> I hope ~hat the Security O)un..
.
on
all matters in' which their interests are involve&, but
cll and the General Assembly WIll be able to settle the
th.ey can often.contrib?.te s).lbs~ant.i~l1y to results that
question of the representation of China in the near
will strengthen the United Nations mfluence for peace.
future.·
177. The second point in a United Nations twenty169. We need more direct and regular contact between
year
peace ptpgramme is: HA new attempt to make
the men who are responsible for policy-making. Periodic
progress
towards establishing an international control
nleetings of the Security Council will enable the For...
system for atomic energy that will be effective in preeign Ministers of the five greatPower!3 to talk among
venting
its use for war and promoting its use .for. peacethemselves and to have the benefit of the views l:>f the
ful
purposes'»
.
.
Foreign Ministers of the six non-permanent mertnbers,.
who represent the interests of alt the smaller Member
178. There is no. pl'ospectof any quick or easy soluStates of the United Nations in the Security Council.
tion of this most difficult problem-a problem that goes
They have often dc::monstrated their effectiveness in
to the veryhean of. the greatest conflict of power and
conciliating and moderating great Power disputes.·
ideology in the world at the present time. I do believe
170. I suggest that the special periodic meetings should .in the possibilityd a definitive solution) but I believe
that ·suchasolt.,ti"m probably will be found only at the··
normally be held away from the Permanent Headend-rather than at the beginning-of a long' series of
quarters in New York) where the Security Council
difficult
negotiations for the settlement of wider issues.
meets in regular session. The periodic meetings might
179. In the meantime" I hope that negotiation on the
appropriately be he:ld in rotation in the countries of
the other four permanent members of the Security Counprohlem of atomic energy itself can be resumed, in line
cil) as well as in the~ countries of other Member States.
w.ith the directive ~iven py. the General Asse.rably last
year [resolution 299 (IV)], namely) "to explore all
Among other advantages) this practice would. bring the
United Nations into closer physical contact with all the
possible avenues and examine all concrete suggestions
with a view to determining whether they might lead
peoples of the world.
to
an agreement".
171. I belk-ve tha.t the inauguration ofa series of
180. It maybe that satisfactory intlerim or step-by-step
periodic meetings of the Security Council may not only
agreements on atomic energyconttQl could be worked
revive negoti~tion. on great Power policies and difout that wot!ldat least be an improvement on the
ferences) but could. also bring about the progressive
present
state of affairs, when we have ,fln unlimited
development over the next few years ·of other United
atomic arms race) even though they did not afford full
Nations resources for the pl'~vet1tion) as well as the
seC1Ltrity. Even such initial steps .could be. of great
mediation and conciliation,
disputes of all kinds
.
between Member States.··
. importance.
181. Perhaps the General Assembly and the Security
172.. . The Security Council has well esta,blished its role
CGt!ucil, in periodic meeting or otherwise should t'eas a place. wbere international controversies can be
examll1~
tlte decisions to establish two separate CompUblicly •debated. It has, however, only· made a beginmissions·
-the
Atomic EnerJOT. Commission and the
ning at using its meetings for negotia.tion as effectively
Commission on Conventional Armaments-or at least
.
.
as for debate.
consider the advisability of linking their work more
173. . I hope that the practice of using Presidents. of
closely together.
the Council as rapporteurs for purposes of mediation
182. I recall the statement made by President Truman
and conciliation will be encouraged) to~ether with regin this hall on United Nations Day [295th meeting],
ularly established and functioning- machinery for private
when
he said in this connexion:
consultations of the representatives of the five great
"One possibitity to be considered is whether their
Powers among themselves as well as with the repreresentatives of other Member:s--as' this session of. the
work mi~ht he revitalized if ~arried forward in the
General .Assembly has unanimottsly recommended
future throug-h a new and consotia.ated disarmament
(302nd meeting]. ..
commission."
174. .At San Francisco the repr,,~sentatives of the five 183. This brings me to the thit·cl. point in the 1l1emorandum: leA new approach to the problem of brine-ing
great Powers met every day. That was One of the means
through which unanimous agreement was ultimateiy
the. armaments ".-ace under cQntrol, not only in the field
secured on the United' Nations Charter.
of atomic weapons, but in other weapons of mass de175. The General Assembly has demonstrated its stntction and in conventional armaments!'
unique role as the main instrument through which
184. We should not for~et that a sin~le raid
the
world public opinion on international issues can be
Second World War., carried out with so-called convend~tertnined and given effective political expression. The
tional blockbuster and incendiary bombs, killed more
Gerteral Assembly has surpassed in this .respect the
people than the atomic bomb. The destructive .power· of
existin~ ·lethal .chemical. and bactedolo';cal weapons
expectations of the founders at San Francisco. Likewise it has proved to be an ideal forum in which the
has not been tested, but such weapons may well be even
statesmen of the smaller countries can exert upon conmore deadly ~han any atomic bombs so far 1lla~~
flictsof power an important ~d even decisive mediat185. It js understandable and i.n conformity with their
ing and moderating influence.
responsibilities to their own peoples that Member States,
176. We must build on this experience.l.rhe principle when faced with the failure to make peace and the consequent delay in~stabtishin~ a United Nations 'coUective
of equal rights. of States, large and small, is fundasecuri~Jsystem~
should look to their own defences:
mental in the United Nations approach to peace. The

or

in

-

BOOth M_ting-17 . November 1950
~

.

186.. Iu-.an.atmo$phere Sl,lch as' exists today ..strong
national defences are a necessary evil. DisarmatY.lent can
Come only as part of a collective security eystem and
in an atmosphere of mutual confidence sueh as prevailed
among the Allies during the war.
187. But it is also true that any progress at all towards
agreements on the regulatIon of armaments of any kind
would help to reduce tensions and would thus assist in
the adjustment of political issues.
1880. VVe do not need-to delay, and should not delay,
work on the vast ~1l0unt of study, discussion and planning that is required to complete preparation of an
effective system of international control for all armaments.
189, Neither efforts at political settlement nor efforts
at regulation of armaments will wait upon the. other.
Both must go hand in hand.
190. The fourth point in my me1l)qrandum is: itA renewal of serious efforts to reach agreement on the
armed forces to be made available under the Charter
to the Security Council lor the enforcement of its
decisions".
.
..
191. Negotiations on this issue have been stalemated
for almost three years in the JVlilitary Staff Conunittee.
The problem is clearly one of a political nature. This
is an issue that needs new consideration by the Security
Council, first of all, probably, at one of theproposea
periodic meetings.
.
192. The important action taken by the General
Assembly at this session in recolluuending [A/1481]
to Member States that they should have forces available for United Nations service on the reconnnendatiol1
of either the Security Council or the General Assembly,
does not in any way diminish the need for and desirability of new efforts to establish the United Nations
forces that, under Article 43 of the Charter, should be
made available to the Security Council. The Assembly
has itself explicitly recognized this. .
193. The fifth point is: "Acceptance and application
of the principle that it is wise and right to proceed as
rapidly as possible towards universality of membership".·
..
194. Fourteen nations are still awaiting admission to
the United Nations. Some of them. have been waiting for
three years. S0111e have been kept out .by one negative
vote, some by abstentions by the majority in the Security Council.
195. Arguments have been advanced against' the conduct or nature of each of these gov'ermnents by one side
or the other. But it seems to me that the tests provided
by the Charter for membership should be applied with .
wisdom and with generosity, bearing in mind first of
all the interests of the peoples concerned, rather than
the nature of their governments.
196. I believe it is better for every nation to be inside
the United Nations than outside it. I ·believe it is better
both for the United Nations and for the people· of the
country seeking admission. I do not think it is wise to
discourage the intercourse and co.:operation with the
rest of the world that United Nations membership helps
to promote. Membership entails the sharing of responsibility for upholding the obligations of the Charter that
rests upon each Member.
.

.

197. The United Nations is made weaker, not stronger,
when countries Asia that have newly won' their ind~­
pendence a.re· kept outside and when £uroP7 also IS
grossly under-represented because of the contInued absence of nine European countries that have long ago
applied for membership,
.

of

198. I look forward to the day when all the peoples

.

of the world will bereprese~ted in the United Nations.
I include not only those countries awaiting admission
now, and others which may apply, but also Germany
and Japan as soon as the peace treaties have been completed.
.
.

199. The sbtth point is: ~tA sound and active programme of technical assistance for economi.c d~velop'"
iDent and encouragement of large;-scale capItal Investment, using all appropriate private, governmental and
inter-governmental resources".

200. The fundarnental purpose· of. such. a United Na-·

tiQnsptogranune is to help the people of every country
to raise their standard of. living by peaceful means.
A good start has been made during the present year
with the inauguration of the $20 million United Nations expanded programme of technical assistance for
economic development and social welfare.
5'-~ .

201. A United Nations programme of technical assistance that will produce a basis for sound eeonomic
development anq social progress must be practical and
realistic; it must aim at encouraging self-help. If carertdly planned and. sensiblyadniinistered it will help
greatly towards the type of economic development which
will increase production, increase purchasing power,
andexoand the markets of all producers of.industrial
and agricultural products. The mutual interests of wefideveloped and under-developed nations in such a programme are apparent to everyone.
202.

But such a programme is only a beginrdng.

203. In aMition to technical aS$istanc(~, the underdeveloped cou~tries require financial ass~stance. The
Second Committee l:tas recently given unanirnousapproval to a drg;ft resotntion[A/1524]decJaring that
the voil1me of private capital now flowing Into underdevelope-d countries cannot meet th~ir net~ds for economic development. In this same draft r~solution the
Economic and Social Council is asked to consider practical methods for achieving the expansion and steadier
flow of foreign capital, both private and\ public. I hope
that the steps. taken by the General A~lsembly at this
session will lead next year, to real progtess insQlving
the problems of' financing economic development 'on an
adequate scale.
204. It .may be that what .is needed is. a ~trengthening
of the resources of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and other intemationalor~
ganiiations operating in this field. On the other hand, it
is probable.that additional methods o£financil1~ cerWn
types of capital expenditures in under-developed eountries will be needed. I confidently' look forward to the
establishment of what has been called during this Assemblya ltUnited Nations recovery force", .throu~h which
all the nations will. join in a mutually beneficial'effort
to raise the unspeakably low living standards,of more
than half the human race.

General .AsseUlbly-Fifth ·Sessictn-Plenary Meetings
1':";

205. 1-'" this cotUlexiou, I warmly welcome the initiative ( le Second Committee in calling for an exami..
nation of those features of agrarian life, such as outmoded systems of land tenure, which ~re an ()bstac1e
to economic development. The caro.paign to raise.. the
standard of Ihd.ng of the under-devP.:1oped countries must
• be fought on many fronts. Next to the preservation of
peace, it is the greatest undertaking to which we have
put our hands. It must suq..~~d.
206. The seventh point of the peace programme is:
uMore vigorous use by all Memi.'er States of the specialized agencies of the United Nlltions to promote, in
the words of the Charter [Articl~ 55, subparagraph a],
higher standards of living, fuU employment and conditionsof economic and social 1Jrogress"~' .
..
207. The United Nations' family of specialized agencies is by far the most effective machit~ery that the
world has ever had for organized internat~onal action
to eliminate human misery t.hrough persist~~nt, day-today, practical programmes. The specialized agencies
have quietly gone ahead. in thf, past four years, right
in the middle of the gtave world crisis and with very
limited resources, with the development and implementation of hundreds of such programmes. It is not
too much to say that almost everybody in the world has
been helped by OIi~ or more of the programmes undertaken by these agencie!l. They have become vitally necessary . tools in a IOlng-range progr~e aimed at
eliminating the econcmic and social causes of war.
208. . The specialized ~encies, however, like the rest
of the United Nations peace .system, are not selfoperating. They need wider and more constructive supPOrt from all Member States of the United Nations.
It is very much to be regretted that they have not had
this support in all cases in the past. I hope that all the
Member States will be. prepared, as time goes on, to
pc:.:ticipate fully in the work of the specialized agencies
and to increase their resources.
209. :Much has already been done to achieve better co.ordination so as to prevent overlapping and thus effect
economies and improve programming. A more important place for the specialized agencies in the policies
of governments would produce better leadership in
achieving these objectives, while at the same time putting to greater use some of the best tools the world
has yet devised for reducing the causes of war.
210. I wish once again to call the attention of representatives to the statement to which the DirectorsGeneral of the specialized agencies and I subscribed in
Paris. last May, reaffirming the principle of universality
and urging that "the greatest efforts should . . . be
directed towards achieving in fact true Urtiversality in
the membership and programmes of the United Nations and ui t.hose of the specialized agencies which are
founded. on tliat principle".
.
211. The eighth point is: "Vi~orous and continued development of the wIJrk of the United Nations for wider
obs(~rvance and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the world".
212. The attention of the world has been so concentrated during the past four years upon contests of political interest and ideological dogmas that the significance
of the growing demand throughout the world for better

•

,

._

observance Q! human riSbts ha~ not been fully under..

~tCHO<1.

. .

213. Evidence is already accumulating that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is destined to rank
in history with such R'reat documents as .MaWla. Carta,
the Declaration of Independenc~ of. the United States
and the Declaration of the Rights. of .Man and of the
Citizen. It goes beyond these declarations in two important respects. First, it is international-the first
world-wide declaration of human rights in history. Secondly, it proclaims economic and social ri~hts along
with the traditional political and' religious libertiessuch rights as the right to work, the right to a decent
standard of living and the right to social security, in
conformity with what should now be the universal
standard. Most of the peoples of the world do not yet
enjoy most of these rights.
214. The United Nations has the resources to achieve
a peaceful revolution during the next twenty years by
securing much wider observance of these rights in all
parts of the world. This effort may take many forms:
international covenants on individual rights or groups
of rights designed to mob~iize the power of national
and international law behind the observance of such
rights; development of other methods to. promote implementation of these rights; assistance to governments
to help them create conditions in which economic, social
and cultural rights particularly can be enjoyed by
greater numbers of people; separate action towards
such ends. as promoting freedom o.f information, promoting the rights of women, fighting discrimination
against minorities, fighting slavery and the use of forced
labour.
215. These and many other programmes of action
through the United Nations and the specialized agencies
deserve the fullest possible support from all the Member States and peoples of the Uniteet. Nations.
216. The ninth point is: "Use of the United Nations
to promote, by peaceful means instead of by force, the
a,•'rancement of dependent, colonial or semi-colonial
peoples towards a position of equality in the world".
217. -1 firmly believe that such great changes as have
been taking place since the end of the war-fundamental
changes in the relationships of whole peoples and even
continents-can be prevented from tearing the world
apart only if the universal framework of the United
Nations is used to contain them within peaceful bounds.
218. Since the United Nations was founded, nine
countries of Asia with a population of 600 million
people have gained their independence.
219. In Africa, the United Nations is assisting the
former Italian colonies of Libya, Ericrea and Somaliland
to achieve independent status.
220. .The United Nations, through its Trusteeship System and the provisio~s of the Charter relatin~ to other
Non-Self-Governing Territories, offers the .adrr1inist~r·
ing Powers ~nd. the peoples under their jurisdiction the
best opportunity to move forward by peaceful means
towards an era of co-operation for their mutual welfare.
221. This opportunity needs to be more fully used and
I am glad to note the progress that is being made in
this direction.

441

308th Meeting-17 November 1950
222. The tenth and last point in the memorandum is:
H Active and systematic use of all the powers of the
Charter and all the machinery of the United Nations to
speed up the dev~lopment of international law towards
an eventual enforceable world law for a universal wor1((
sodety".
223. This work is in progress. It needs more vigorous
support from the Member States and from the peoples.
The General Assembly adopted unanimously in Paris,
in 1948 [resolution 260 A (Ill)], the convention Ol,t..
lawing genocide-the crime of destroying a national,
ethnical, religious or racial group of human beings as
Hitler tried to destroy the Jews. This convention"has
only just now secured the number of l'atifications required to bring it into force.
224. The codification and embodiment in similar conventions of the laws of the Niirnberg Tribunal under
which the Nazi war criminals were punished should.
also be pressf.~d forward by the Member States.
225. Other conventions widening the scope of world
law-like the pr'otocol extending the control of narcotic
drugs to the new synthetic drugs and the proposed
conventions on human rights-should be pressed. The
constitutional scope and authority of the United Nations
system will be enhanced by each such convention or
. treaty as it comes into force as la.w.
226. If, during the next twenty years, the G~"leral Assembly, the International Court of Justice, the Internationai Law Commission and other appropriate organs
of the United Nations can proceed systematically in the
development of international law, by the ~nd of that
time we may have at least the essential beginnings of a.
system of enforceable world law directly applicable to
individuals as well as governments on all matters essential to the peat:e and security of mankind.
227. In the meantime I hope that the Member States
will continue the trend of the past year towards greater

Printed in U.S.A.

use of the International Court of Justice both for the
juridical settlement of disputes and for the banding
down of advisory opinions and interpretationso£ the
United Nations Charter.
228. I have placed my memorandum .before you as a
preliminary working paper. The suggestions it contains
are, of course, not in any way final or complete. I am
grateful for the many expressions of sympathy, .interest
and s~pport that I have received from the Foreign
Ministel'S and representatives of Member States since
the circulation of my memorandum last June.
229. I welcome the draft resolution [A/1514] by the
sponsoring Powers to refer the memorandum for further study and action to the appropriate organs. I hope
that other constructive ideas and suggestions will be
brought forward during this debate and will be given
full and equal consideration.
230. The suggestions I have made carry with them an
appeal to the Member States to make the United· Nations the primary instrument of their foreign policies
in all ways-in the creation of collective security against
armed aggression, in the prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes, in all intc:rnational efforts towards disarmament, expanding world trade, raising living standards, promoting human rights for individuals and equal
rights for peoples.
231. One of the things the world needs more. than
anything else today is a continuing re,-affit"mation by the
Member States tl::.c the United Nations is the right
road to peace, anu the only road now open to mankind.
232. We cannot foresee today what the next twelve
months will bring. But of one thing I am certain-it is
still possible for the Member States to win peace, audto
win it for. a long time to come if they will follow that
road.
The meeting rose at 6 p~m.

A--40464--December 1950-3,600
