S/PV.8231

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8231st meeting

Friday, 13 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10728 (E)
*1810728*

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: The situation in the
Middle East is in chaos to such an extent it has become
a threat to international peace and security. The region
is facing a true Gordian knot — different fault lines
crossing each other and creating a highly volatile
situation with risks of escalation, fragmentation
and division as far as the eye can see, with profound
regional and global ramifications. We see a multiplicity
of divides.
The first is the memory of the Cold War. But, to be
precise, it is more than a simple memory: the Cold War
is back with a vengeance — but with a difference. The
mechanisms and the safeguards to manage the risks of
escalation that existed in the past no longer seem to
be present.
Secondly, there is the Palestinian-Israeli divide.
Thirdly, there is the Sunni-Shia divide, evident
from the Gulf to the Mediterranean. It is important to
note that apparent religious divides are normally the
result of political or geostrategic manipulation.
Finally, there is a wide range of different
factors — from opposing attitudes in relation to the role
of the Muslim Brotherhood or the status of the Kurds,
to the dramatic threats to communities that have been
living in the region for millenniums and are part of the
rich diversity of Middle Eastern societies.
Those numerous divisions are reflected in a
multiplicity of conflicts with different degrees of
interconnection, several of which are clearly linked to
2/22

13/04/2018

the threat of global terrorism. Many forms of escalation
are possible.
We see the wounds of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict continuing to fester. The recent violence in
Gaza resulted in many needless deaths and injuries.
I repeat my call for an independent and transparent
investigation into those incidents. I also appeal to those
concerned to refrain from any act that could lead to
further casualties, in particular any measures that could
place civilians in harm’s way. That tragedy underlines
the urgency of revitalizing the peace process for a twoState solution that will allow Palestinians and Israelis
to live side by side in peace in two democratic States
within secure and recognized borders. I reaffirm the
readiness of the United Nations to support those efforts.
In Yemen, we are witnessing the worst humanitarian
disaster in today’s world. There is only one pathway
to ending the Yemeni conflict and to addressing the
humanitarian crisis: a negotiated political settlement
through inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue. My Special
Envoy, Martin Griffiths, is doing everything possible
to facilitate that political settlement. He will brief the
Council next week.
In Libya, I encourage all parties to continue to
work with my Special Representative, Ghassan Salamé,
as he engages in the political process with a broad range
of Libyan interlocutors across the country in order to
implement the United Nations action plan. It is high
time to end the Libyan conflict.
The case of Iraq demonstrates that progress is
possible with concerted local, regional and global
commitment. With the defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, having overcome the risk of
fragmentation, the Government of Iraq must now
focus on reconstruction, reforms and reconciliation.
I hope that the upcoming elections will consolidate
that progress.
At the recent Paris and Rome conferences, the
international community reaffirmed its support for
Lebanon’s sovereignty, stability and State security
institutions. It is absolutely essential to prevent a new
Israel-Hizbullah conflict, which could inevitably result
in many more victims and much greater destruction
than the last war. I reiterate the critical importance to
act on key principles and commitments on Lebanon,
including the Security Council resolutions, such as
resolution 1701 (2006), and the policy of disassociation.
The dangers of the links to the Syrian conflict are
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8231

evident in the recent confrontations between Iran and
Israel in Syria.

team is already in Syria; a second team is expected
today or tomorrow.

Syria today indeed represents the most serious
threat to international peace and security. We see
there confrontations and proxy wars, involving several
national armies, a number of armed opposition groups,
many national and international militia, foreign fighters
from everywhere in the world and various terrorist
organizations. From the beginning, we have witnessed
systematic violations of international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international law, in
general, in utter disregard for the letter and spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations.

However, we need to go further. In a letter to the
Council two days ago, I expressed, following the end
of the mandate of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism,

For eight long years, the people of Syria have
endured suffering upon suffering. I reiterate that there
is no military solution to the conflict. The solution must
be political through the Geneva intra-Syrian talks, as
stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015), and in line with
the consistent efforts of my Special Envoy, Staffan de
Mistura. Syrians have lived through a litany of horrors:
atrocity crimes, sieges, starvation, indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
the use of chemical weapons, forced displacement,
sexual violence, torture, detention and enforced
disappearances. The list goes on.

“my deep disappointment that the Security Council
was unable to agree upon a dedicated mechanism
to attribute responsibility for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria”.
I want to repeat today that the norms against
chemical weapons must be upheld. As I wrote in the
same letter:
“[e]nsuring accountability for a confirmed use of
chemical weapons is our responsibility, not least to
the victims of such attacks. A lack of accountability
emboldens those who would use such weapons by
providing them with the reassurance of impunity.
This, in turn, further weakens the norm proscribing
the use of chemical weapons and the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture as
a whole. I urge all Member States to act responsibly
in these dangerous circumstances;

In a moment of hope, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018), demanding that all parties cease
hostilities without delay for a durable humanitarian
pause. Unfortunately, no such cessation of hostilities
ever really took place. That is the bleak panorama of
Syria today.

“I appeal to the Security Council to fulfil its
duties and not to give up on efforts to agree upon
a dedicated, impartial, objective and independent
mechanism for attributing responsibility with
regard to the use of chemical weapons. I stand
ready to support such efforts.”

In that panorama, I am outraged by the continued
reports of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
I reiterate my strong condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by any party to the conflict under
any circumstances. Their use is abhorrent and a clear
violation of international law. The seriousness of the
recent allegations requires a thorough investigation,
using impartial, independent and professional expertise.

The increasing tensions and the inability to reach a
compromise in the establishment of an accountability
mechanism threaten to lead to a full-blown military
escalation. In my contacts with the members of the
Security Council, particularly the permanent members,
I have reiterated my deep concerns about the risks of
the current impasse and stressed the need to prevent the
situation from spiralling out of control.

In that regard, I reaffirm my full support for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and its Fact-finding Mission in undertaking
the required investigation into those allegations. The
mission should be granted full access, without any
restrictions or impediments, to perform its activities.
I take note that the Syrian Government has requested
that and is committed to facilitating it. The first OPCW

That is exactly the risk that we face today — that
things spiral out of control. It is our common duty to
stop it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

18-107283/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are greatful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing. His participation, his assessments and
his authoritative words about the situation that has
developed are very significant. We agree with him that
there are many wounds in the Middle East. However,
most important, currently the deepest wound is the
situation in Syria, insofar as any negative repercussions
would have major global implications.
Two days ago, news of a threat by the United
States to launch missile strikes against the Syrian
Arab Republic ricocheted around the world. The
Russian Federation was also warned to prepare for
strikes. Let me point out that our military is in Syria
at the invitation of its legitimate Government in order
to combat international terrorism. We continue to see
dangerous military preparations for an illegal act of
force against a sovereign State in violation of the norms
of international law. It is not just the use of force but
even the threat of it that flies in the face of the Charter
of the United Nations, and that is precisely what we
are seeing in the most recent statements and actions
of Washington and its allies. The bellicose rhetoric is
being ratcheted up at every level, including at the very
top. Additional forces and assets of the United States
military and its allies are bearing down on the Syrian
coast. It feels as though Washington is singlemindedly
heading towards unleashing a military scenario against
Syria. That cannot be permitted. Such developments
would be fraught with terrible consequences for global
security, especially considering that a Russian military
contingent is deployed in Syria.
There are also those who have been observing
these risky preparations with tacit approval, declaring
that they understand Washington’s motives or engaging
in direct incitement, thereby becoming potential
accomplices in an act of reckless military adventurism.
There are people in the Security Council who love to
talk about preventive diplomacy. Right now, for some
reason, they are nowhere to be seen or heard. The guilty
parties have been speedily identified not just before any
investigation has been conducted but even before it has
been established whether the incident in question took
place at all, but evidently they must still be punished.
Someone will have to answer for these unfortunate
developments and for the previous interventions that
have engulfed many countries in years of crisis with
untold casualties.
4/22

13/04/2018

Witness the recent experience of Iraq and Libya,
which, among other things, shows that the attitude of
America’s leaders to the Security Council is largely
one of convenience. They need it as cover for their
Iraqi test tubes and Libyan no-fly zones. What they
are presenting us with now is another virtual test tube,
and an empty one. The reckless behaviour of the United
States as it tramples on international law and State
sovereignty is unworthy of its status as a permanent
member of the Security Council, which presupposes the
highest possible degree of responsibility and certainly
not a right to sabre rattling, a right that is unknown in
international law.
Why does the United States continue to torture the
Middle East, provoking one conflict after another and
pitting the States of the region against one another?
Who will benefit from a potential strike against the
Syrian military, which is taking the brunt of the fight
against terrorism and achieving major victories in it?
We know for sure that the ringleaders of the Syrian
armed groups were given orders to launch an offensive
after a possible military action. Is this latest wave of
chaos really being unleashed just for that?
The excuse is the alleged use of toxic substances
in the Syrian town of Douma on 7 April, for which
there has been no reliable confirmation. Our specialists
found no trace of the use of toxic substances. The
residents of Douma know of no such attack. All the
evidence of the alleged attack has been provided by
anti-Government forces for whom this development
is in their interests. We have good reason — indeed,
we have information — leading us to believe that what
took place was a provocation with the participation of
various countries’ intelligence services. We have been
issuing warnings about this for a long time. It is a repeat
of the Khan Shaykhun scenario in April of last year.
The Syrian Government, for which this is clearly the
last thing it needs, has said that it was not involved and
has sent a request for an immediate inspection by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) of the location of the alleged incident. It has
offered security guarantees jointly with the Russian
military. The mission is already getting started on its
work in Syria and we hope that it will be able to conduct
a truly independent and impartial investigation.
Only the Security Council has the authority at the
international level to decide what measures to take and
against whom in connection with the use of chemical
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

weapons in Syria. Russia will continue to work diligently
and systematically to de-escalate the recent tensions in
international relations. We proposed adopting a brief
resolution in support of the OPCW inspection mission
in Douma that the United States, Britain and France
irresponsibly blocked, thereby demonstrating their
lack of interest in an investigation. The only thing they
care about is overthrowing the Syrian Government
and, more broadly, deterring the Russian Federation.
This has been clearly visible in other international and
domestic political events built on unfounded hoaxes
and conspiracy theories that always centre around the
Russian Federation.
What is the United States trying to achieve? After
many years of internecine strife in Syria, significant
areas of the country have been stabilized. The
political process is reviving and indicators of national
reconciliation are emerging. The terrorists have been
dealt a significant blow. We have never denied that
the United States has also made a certain contribution
to achieving that shared goal, but it has always kept
certain types of terrorists in reserve for its fight against
the so-called regime and for advancing its geopolitical
priorities in the region.
My British colleague is always asking me what
Russia is doing to implement resolution 2401 (2018).
My answer is that my country is practically the only one
that is doing anything about it. Over the course of the
Astana process, peace has been restored in more than
2,500 towns and villages. That does not mean that they
have become victims of the regime, as the United States
calls it, merely that with the help of Russia and other
guarantors they have established normal relations with
the central authorities in Damascus. With the support
of the United Nations, the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress was held successfully in Sochi. How many
towns and villages has the United States brought peace
to? How many groups has it persuaded to join the
ceasefire agreements?
In order to break the deadlock in the situation in
eastern Ghouta after the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), complex negotiations were conducted with
the leaders of armed groups, with Russian assistance.
The militias and their family members were safely
evacuated from the district, and civilians were finally
given the opportunity to shake off years of terror. Film
of their genuine joy exists, but the Western media is not
showing it. The United States does not care about the
fate of the prisoners of the militias in eastern Ghouta

S/PV. 8231

who had been supporters of the Syrian Government.
When they were bargaining with the Syrian authorities
to exchange prisoners, the militias claimed that they
were holding between 2,000 and 4,000 people. Now
it turns out that there are far fewer. People died from
harsh treatment and hard labour digging huge tunnels
for their torturers.
Some members have grieved to see their bearded
pilgrims setting off for Syria on free tourist tickets.
They lost no opportunity to shriek from every street
corner about the plight of the hundreds of thousands of
people in besieged eastern Ghouta. Now those people
need help in rebuilding normal lives, but these Council
members have already lost interest because the area
is under Government control. Now there will have to
be unpleasant discussions about the blockade of Fo’ah
and Kefraya. When was the last time a humanitarian
convoy was there? When was the last time Council
members even asked about it? Someone must answer
for the coalition’s destruction of Raqqa.
These are dangerous developments, with farreaching ramifications for global security. In this
instance, responsibility lies entirely with the United
States and its allies. It is a pity that Old Europe continues
to lose face. We call on the leaders of these States to
immediately reconsider, return to the international legal
fold and not to lead the world to the dangerous brink.
We urgently need to find a peaceful way out through
a collective effort. The Russian Federation is ready
to cooperate equitably with all partners and to solve
the problems that may arise through dialogue. We will
continue to focus on finding a peaceful settlement to
the conflict in Syria based on established international
law. We will continue to work actively to that end, and
we call on all our partners to do the same.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I started to
listen to my Russian friend so as to respond to him, but
instead I am truly in awe of his ability to say what he
said with a straight face.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council has
been convened under truly strange circumstances.
The Russian Federation has asked us to discuss what
it calls unilateral threats related to Syria. What is
strange is that Russia is ignoring the real threat to
international peace and security that has brought us all
here. It is ignoring its own unilateral responsibility for
all of it. What we should discuss today is the use of
deadly chemical weapons to murder innocent Syrian

18-107285/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

13/04/2018

civilians. That is one of the most blatant and grotesque
violations of international law in the world today. It is
a violation of all standards of morality. It violates the
long-standing international consensus that chemical
weapons represent a unique evil. Chlorine, mustard
gas and other chemical weapons killed 90,000 people
and injured more than 1 million during the First World
War. In the history Canada in the Great World War, the
Canadian soldier A.T. Hunter described it this way.

what we all agree on, let us ask ourselves what we
should be condemning today. We should be discussing
the actions that truly brought us to this moment in time.
We should not be condemning the country or group
of countries that might have the courage to stand up
in defence of our common principle against the use of
chemical weapons. Instead, we should be condemning
the country that has unilaterally prevented the Security
Council from upholding it.

“The gas cloud gathered itself like a wave and
ponderously lapped over into the trenches. Then
passive curiosity turned to active torment — a
burning sensation in the head, red-hot needles in
the lungs, the throat seized by a strangler. Many
fell and died on the spot. The others, gasping,
stumbling with faces contorted, hands widely
gesticulating and uttering hoarse cries of pain, fled
madly through the villages and farms and through
the city itself, carrying panic to the remnants of
the civilian population and filling the roads with
fugitives of both sexes and all ages”.

Which member of the Council most exhibits
unilateralism with regard to chemical weapons? It
is Russia alone that has stopped at nothing to defend
the Syrian regime’s multiple instances of the use of
chemical weapons. It is Russia alone that killed the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, which enabled the world to
ensure accountability for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. It is Russia alone that has used its veto six
times to prevent the condemnation of Al-Assad’s use of
chemical weapons. It is Russia alone that has used its
veto 12 times to protect the Al-Assad regime. To make
matters worse, it was Russia alone that agreed to be
the guarantor of the removal of all chemical weapons
in Syria. If Russia had lived up to its commitment,
there would be no chemical weapons in Syria and we
would not be here today. That is the Russian record of
unilateralism. It is a record that has led to the trashing of
all international standards against the use of chemical
weapons. This meeting should not be about so-called
unilateral threats, but rather about the multiple actions
that Russia has taken to bring us to this point.

Chemical weapons did not produce the most
casualties in the First World War, but they were the most
feared. In the Second World War chemical weapons
were employed on an industrial scale against civilians,
resulting in the worst genocide in human history, which
the United States recalled just yesterday on Holocaust
Remembrance Day. That is what brings us here today.
That is what chemical weapons are all about. That is
why we must not stay silent in the face of the horrible
use of chemical weapons in our own time.
The first response to all of this death and injury
was the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which banned the use
of chemical weapons and more. Later, in 1993, the
Chemical Weapons Convention was signed. It obligates
all of its parties to never under any circumstances
“develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or
retain chemical weapons, or transfer, directly or
indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone”.
It also prohibits all parties from helping anyone to
engage in such activities. The United States is a party
to the Convention. Russia is a party to the Convention.
Every country that is currently a member of the Security
Council is a party to the Convention. Even the Al-Assad
regime has pledged to abide by the Convention, so in
theory all of us agree on the core principle at stake
today. No country can by allowed to use chemical
weapons with impunity. Now that we have established
6/22

Our President has not yet made a decision about
possible actions in Syria, but should the United States
and its allies decide to act in Syria, it will be in defence
of a principle on which we all agree. It will be in
defence of a bedrock international norm that benefits
all nations. Let us be clear. Al-Assad’s most recent use
of poison gas against the people of Douma was not his
first, second, third or even forty-ninth use of chemical
weapons. The United States estimates that Al-Assad
has used chemical weapons in the Syrian war at least
50 times. Public estimates are as high as 200.
In the weeks after Al-Assad’s sarin-gas attack last
April, which killed nearly 100 people, including many
children, the regime used chlorine gas at least once and
possibly as many as three times in the same area. Last
November, just as the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism expired, the regime again attacked its
people with sarin in the Damascus suburbs.
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

In January, Al-Assad used at least four
chlorine-filled rockets in Douma, and then he struck
again last weekend. Thanks to Russia, there was no
United Nations body to determine blame. But we know
who did this; our allies know who did this. Russia can
complain all it wants about fake news, but no one is
buying its lies and its coverups. Russia was supposed
to guarantee that Al-Assad would not use chemical
weapons, and Russia did the opposite.
The world must not passively accept the use of
chemical weapons after almost a century of their
prohibition. Everything the United Nations stands for
is being blatantly defied in Syria, with the help of a
permanent member of the Council. All nations and
all peoples will be harmed if we allow Al-Assad to
normalize the use of chemical weapons. It is those who
act to violate the prohibition of chemical weapons who
deserve our condemnation. Those who act to defend it
deserve our support. The United States and its allies
will continue to stand up for truth, accountability,
justice and an end to the use of chemical weapons.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and
deeply appreciate his tireless efforts on the issue of the
Middle East and that of Syria.
The current situation in Syria is perilous. The
country is at the crossroads of war and peace, and
China is following the developments there with great
concern. The possibility of an escalation of tensions
worries us deeply. The pressing priority of the moment
is to launch a comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigation into the relevant incidents in order to
arrive at authoritative conclusions.
China has consistently stood in favour of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and opposed the routine
use or threat of force in international relations. To
take unilateral military action by circumventing the
Security Council is inconsistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and runs
counter to the basic norms enshrined in international
law and those governing international relations.
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be fully respected. We call
on the parties concerned to remain calm, exercise
restraint, refrain from any move that could lead to
further escalation of the situation and resolve the issue
peacefully through consultation and dialogue. China is
convinced that there can be no military solution to the

S/PV. 8231

Syrian issue; the only way out is a political settlement.
China supports the United Nations in playing an active
role in safeguarding the authority and standing of the
Organization and its Security Council.
China calls on the international community to
steadfastly continue its diplomatic efforts, tirelessly
stay the course so as to settle the Syrian issue politically,
give full play to the role of the United Nations as the
main mediator, and resolve without delay the Syrian
issue comprehensively, justly and adequately, in
keeping with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The people of the world yearn for peace and oppose
war. The situation in Syria has ramifications for peace
and stability in the Middle East and the world at large, as
well as for the credibility and authority of the Council.
At this critical juncture, the Council must rightfully
discharge its sacred responsibility emanating from
the Charter of the United Nations; act in line with the
dictates of our times; build unity and consensus and do
its utmost to maintain peace; leave no stone unturned
in its efforts to prevent war; and live up to the trust and
expectations of the international community.
China is and has always been a builder of world
peace, a contributor to global development and a
defender of the international order. China stands ready
to continue its unflagging efforts to safeguard peace
and stability in the Middle East and the world at large,
in a spirit of responsibility to history and to the peoples
of the world.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement.
We are meeting today to address the threats to
international peace and security that have arisen as a
result of the situation in Syria, six days after the latest
chemical-weapons carnage, on 7 April in Douma.
For seven years, the situation in Syria has without a
doubt constituted a grave threat to international peace
and security as defined in the Charter of the United
Nations. The Security Council itself characterized
this as such unanimously on 27 September 2013,
when resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted in the wake
of the appalling chemical-weapons attacks that had
taken place in eastern Ghouta. The world then learned
for the first time and with horror of the symptoms of
large-scale chemical-weapons-related deaths in Syria.

18-107287/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

To counter those who are seeking to sow confusion,
going so far as to accuse the Syrian people of having
gassed themselves; those who are suggesting conspiracy
theories; those who are endeavouring methodically to
destroy our mechanisms for action on chemical weapons
in Syria, we must come back to simple facts. Yes, the
Syrian crisis represents a threat to international peace
and security. This threat is related to the repeated,
organized and systematic use of chemical weapons by
the Bashar Al-Assad regime, which once again reached
new levels of horror with the two attacks perpetrated in
Douma on 7 April last. Those attacks claimed the lives
of at least several dozen people and wounded hundreds
of others. Many of the injured will continue to suffer
throughout their lives from the serious respiratory and
neurological aftereffects of the chemicals used.
There is no doubt once again as to the responsibility
of Damascus for this attack. The facts collected on the
ground, the symptoms of the victims, the complexity of
handling of the substances used, and the determination
of the regime’s forces to subjugate the last pockets of
resistance in Douma as expeditiously as possible and
using every means at their disposal, all point to this.
This is a well-known and documented modus
operandi, given that an independent mechanism, created
at the initiative of the Security Council, had already
established at least four times since 2015 that chemical
weapons had been used by the Damascus regime in
Sarmin, Talmenes, Qmenas and Khan Shaykun — an
investigative mechanism that a permanent member of
the Security Council decided last November to force
into silence.
The chemical-weapons policy of the Bashar
Al-Assad regime is among the most serious violations
of all the norms that guarantee our collective security.
It is first and foremost a violation of all international
obligations relating to the prohibition of chemical
weapons under the Chemical Weapons Convention, to
which Syria is a party.
Secondly, it constitutes a violation of the very
foundations of international humanitarian law,
namely, the principles of distinction, precaution
and proportionality.
Thirdly, it constitutes a breach of successive
Security Council resolutions: resolutions 2118 (2013),
2209 (2015) and 2235 (2015) and therefore a breach of
the obligations incumbent upon Syria under the Charter
of the United Nations.
8/22

13/04/2018

Lastly, the use of chemical weapons against
civilians, which was banned in 1925 under the Geneva
Protocol, constitutes a war crime under the Statute of
the International Criminal Court.
The Secretary-General in August 2013 called the
use of chemical weapons a crime against humanity. That
chemical war is a tool to accelerate a deliberate policy of
submission by terror, which, in seven years, has caused
the deaths of 400,000 people, the deliberate destruction
of civilian and health infrastructure in entire regions, a
massive exodus of refugees and displaced persons and
has fuelled international terrorism. This frightening
picture is that of one of the most blatant threats to
international peace and security in the contemporary
era. It is also the record of those who, against all odds,
continue to support it.
I will once again have to state the obvious: if Syria has
continued to use toxic substances for military purposes,
it is because it has retained the capacity to use and
manufacture them, in contravention of its international
commitments, of the guarantees provided by Russia
in the framework of the 2013 Russian-American
agreement and of Security Council resolutions.
It has already been several years since the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) informed us of the major remaining doubts
about the sincerity of Syria’s initial declaration to the
organization in 2013. Many of the OPCW’s questions
and requests for documents have gone unanswered.
Syria has never provided a satisfactory explanation for
the inspectors’ discovery of substances and capabilities
that Syria had never declared. We saw those capabilities
again in action on 7 April, used to kill as many civilians
as possible and terrorize the survivors to consolidate
the definitive takeover of Douma by the Syrian regime.
Beyond Syria, the prevailing impunity since 2013
affects the entire chemical non-proliferation regime,
and with it the entire security system that we have
collectively built since the Second World War. It is
that collective security legacy, built to protect future
generations from the outbreaks of violence in the two
global conflicts, that the members of the Security
Council have been mandated to protect. To allow the
normalization of the use of chemical weapons without
reacting is to let the genie out of the bottle. That would
be a terrible setback to international order, for which
we would all pay the price.
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

The Security Council, to which the Charter of the
United Nations entrusts the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of the entire international community, is
therefore more than justified in meeting today. It is more
than justified for the Council to note, once again, the
violation of international law and its own resolutions,
and the persistence of a proven threat to international
peace and security. It is more than justified to urgently
re-establish a mechanism for attributing responsibility
for chemical attacks — that opportunity was given to the
Council in vain, once again, on Tuesday (see S/PV.8228)
with the American draft resolution (S/2018/321).
The Council is more than justified in doing what it
has committed itself to do, that is, to take measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. But in
the face of the mass atrocities committed in Syria, the
Council’s action has been paralysed for several years
by successive Russian vetoes. Russia vetoed 12 draft
resolutions on Syria, including six on the chemical
issue alone. Those vetoes had no other objective than to
protect the Syrian authorities — to guarantee a regime
of impunity, in defiance of all international standards.
To allow the indefensible, Russia has deliberately
chosen to sacrifice the ability of the Council to act, the
most important tool of our collective security. We had
proof of that again last Tuesday.
On 7 April, Douma joined Ypres, Halabja and
Khan Shaykhun in the litany of chemical massacres. I
solemnly say that, in deciding to once again use chemical
weapons, the regime reached a point of no return on
7 April. France will assume its responsibility to put an
end to an intolerable threat to our collective security
and to finally ensure respect for international law and
the measures taken for years by the Security Council.

S/PV. 8231

of the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons, which we initiated last
January. We will also continue to support and assist all
international mechanisms in their work to investigate
the most serious crimes committed against civilians
in Syria.
In addition to the chemical issue, continuing
violations of international humanitarian law must cease
without delay. We ourselves demanded it by unanimously
adopting resolution 2401 (2018) — thwarted the day
after its adoption by the resumption of bombardments
by the regime with the active support of its allies,
including those within the Council who had subscribed
to the truce. Resolution 2401 (2018) has lost none of
its relevance, quite the contrary — full and unhindered
humanitarian access to help populations in distress must
be implemented throughout the territory. It is essential
and urgent that humanitarian convoys can reach eastern
Ghouta safely and that civilians fleeing hostilities or in
need of medical treatment can be protected.
Finally, we can only sustainably resolve the Syrian
crisis within the framework of a political solution and on
the basis of the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). Only under those conditions can put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people, eradicate terrorism
and work together for the stability of the Middle East.
We have been calling for a political solution for seven
years. May those who join us today in their concern
about the consequences of the Syrian crisis finally
force the regime to accept negotiations under the aegis
of the United Nations.

A chemical attack like that of Douma, which
consists in gassing the last inhabitants of a besieged
enclave — even when it is about to fall, even when the
last fighters are negotiating their surrender — is the
height of cynicism. That is where we are after seven
years of the regime’s war against its people. This is the
situation to which the world must provide a firm, united
and resolute response. That is our responsibility today.

We cannot allow the most fundamental values and
standards of humanity, such as those emanating from the
Charter of the United Nations, be thwarted and flouted
in front of our eyes without reacting. Those values
and standards must be defended and protected. That
is the reason behind our commitment — to restore the
complete ban on chemical weapons set in stone within
international conventions, and thereby consolidate
the rule of law. It is the responsibility of those who
believe, like France, in effective multilateralism led by
a respected United Nations.

It will also be essential to combat impunity for
those responsible for the use of such weapons and,
more broadly, for those who are responsible for the
most serious crimes committed in Syria. France is
fully committed to that endeavour. That is the purpose

We must stop the Syrian chemical escalation.
We cannot allow a country to simultaneously defy
the Council and international law. The ability of
Damascus to violate all our norms constitutes a threat
to international security. Let us put an end to it.

18-107289/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The SecretaryGeneral has presented a catalogue of danger in the
Middle East, including Gaza, Yemen and Iraq. It is no
disrespect to those issues that today, like other speakers,
I will concentrate on Syria. The United Kingdom will
be ready to put its shoulder to the wheel on those other
issues when the time comes.
The situation we face today and the reason we are
in the Security Council today arise wholly and solely
from the use of chemical weapons on the Syrian people,
most probably by the Syrian regime — not just once,
but consistently and persistently over the past five
years. The highest degree of responsibility, to quote the
Russian Ambassador, is indeed what the Council, and
in particular its five permanent members, are for, and it
is our duty to uphold.
The British Cabinet met recently and concluded
that the Al-Assad regime has a track record of the
use of chemical weapons and that it is highly likely
the regime is responsible for Saturday’s attack. This
is a further example of the erosion of international
law in relation to the use of chemical weapons, as my
French and American colleagues have set out, and it
is deeply concerning. But more important than that,
the use of chemical weapons cannot be allowed to go
unchallenged. The British Cabinet has agreed on the
need to take action to alleviate humanitarian distress
and to deter the further use of chemical weapons by
the Al-Assad regime. To that end, we will continue
to work with our friends and allies to coordinate an
international response.
The Secretary-General mentioned the Cold War.
Of course, the Cold War was bracketed by East-West
cooperation. We have been on the same side as Russia.
In April 1945, Russia liberated Vienna as part of our
joint efforts to bring peace to Europe. In 1995, it passed
the Dayton Accords at part of our joint efforts to bring
peace and stability to Bosnia and Herzegovina. But in
2018 the Russians refuse to work with us to bring peace
to Syria.
Instead, since the first attack on Ghouta and
chemical-weapons use, in 2013, the Joint Investigative
Mechanism has ascribed two uses of mustard gas to
Da’esh, three uses of chlorine to the Syrian regime and
one use of sarin to the Syrian regime before the latest
attack. As my French colleague has set out, the United
Kingdom, the United States and France are members in
good standing of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
10/22

13/04/2018

We are members and supporters of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its
Fact-finding Mission. In the debates in the Security
Council earlier this week, we would have dispatched
an investigative mission, had Russia and Bolivia not
blocked that effort (see S/PV.8228).
Syria is the latest pernicious chronology of Russia’s
disregard for international law and disrespect for the
international institutions we have built together to keep
us collectively safe. This is revealed in actions over
Georgia 10 years ago, over Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 and over the attack in Salisbury, which we will
return to next week.
Let me repeat what I said in the Security Council
last week. My Government and the British people are
not Russophobic. We have no quarrel with the Russian
people. We respect Russia as a country. We prefer a
productive relationship with Russia, but it is Russia’s
own actions that have led to this situation.
What has taken place in Syria to date is in itself
a violation of the United Nations Charter. No purpose
or principle of the Charter is upheld or served by the
use of chemical weapons on innocent civilians. On
the contrary: to stand by and ignore the requirements
of justice, accountability and the preservation of
the non-proliferation regime is to place all our
security — not just that of the Syrian people — at
the mercy of a Russian veto. We will not sacrifice the
international order we have collectively built to the
Russian desire to protect its ally at all costs.
The Russian Ambassador set out what Russia is
doing on the ground in Syria. He thought that might
be inconvenient for me to hear. However, it is not
inconvenient for me to point out that Russia has given
$5.5 million to the United Nations appeal. The United
Kingdom has given a $160 million, and this is part
of a contribution totalling $3.5 billion in all. It is not
inconvenient for me to say that; it may be inconvenient
for the Russian Ambassador to hear it.
The Russian Ambassador also asked why we were
not joining in and trying to stabilize actions in Syria
and bring about peace. We have tried. Indeed, we have
tried very hard to support Staffan de Mistura in getting
the Geneva political process under way, and we shall
continue to so. But we do not join Russia, because,
sadly, its efforts have not been to try and restart the
Geneva process. Instead, their efforts have been to
support Syria in the use of chemical weapons and the
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

bombardment of the Syrian people. In the area known
as T-4, they helped the regime liberate this area but
they took their eye off the ball and Da’esh took it back.
They took it again, but, sadly, foreign fighters have
been able to re-establish themselves there. This is not
de-escalation. This is not political progress. This is a
gross distortion by Russia of what is actually happening
on the ground.
The circumstances that we face today are truly
exceptional. My colleagues from the United States
and France have set out in great detail the catalogue
of awful things that are happening to the Syrian
people. That catalogue goes to the heart of what the
Geneva Conventions, the non-proliferation regime,
the United Nations and the Security Council are
for. It is not only dangerous what Russia is doing in
vetoing our resolutions and in supporting the Syrian
regime’s actions against its own people. It is ultimately
prejudicial to our security. Indeed, it will let Da’esh
re-establish itself. It is something that we believe we
need to take action to defend.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing today, for his efforts and for
his good offices.
Last weekend, reports once again began to emerge
of horrifying allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, this time in Douma, with reports of a large
number of civilian casualties. Like many others, we
were alarmed by these extremely serious allegations,
and we called for an immediate, impartial and thorough
investigation to establish the facts. In that regard, we
welcome the fact that the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which we fully support, has been deployed to
Syria. Full access and cooperation by all parties must
now be ensured.
I want to reiterate once more that Sweden will spare
no effort to combat the use and proliferation of chemical
weapons by State or non-State actors anywhere in the
world. We unequivocally condemn in the strongest
terms the use of chemical weapons, including in Syria.
It is a serious violation of international law, it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, and their
use in armed conflict is a war crime. The international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime must be
safeguarded, which is best achieved through true
multilateralism and broad international consensus.

S/PV. 8231

We share the outrage and the frustration of many
in this Chamber about chemical-weapons use in
Syria. Those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable. We cannot accept impunity.
The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year, and we
are at a dangerous moment. We fully share the deep
concern expressed by the Secretary-General about the
risks of the current impasse and the need to avoid the
situation escalating and spiralling out of control and to
pay further attention to the divides, tensions and fault
lines in the region, as described again by the SecretaryGeneral this morning.
We remain deeply disappointed that the Security
Council has been unable to agree and move forward
on a substantial, swift, and unified response to the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We deeply regret
that Russia once again used its veto and blocked the
Council from taking action this week (see S/PV.8228).
Over the past few days, we have tried to ensure that
all peaceful means to respond have seriously been
considered. We are working tirelessly to ensure that no
stone is left unturned in efforts to find a way forward
in the Security Council. The Secretary-General offered
to support such efforts through his good offices, which
is an opportunity that should be seized. That is why
yesterday we circulated yet another proposal that asks
for four things.
First, it condemns in the strongest terms any use of
chemical weapons in Syria and expresses alarm at the
alleged incident in Douma last weekend, because the
use of chemical weapons constitutes a serious violation
of international law.
Secondly, it demands full access and cooperation
for the OPCW Fact-finding Mission, because we need
facts and evidence about what happened in Douma
last weekend.
Thirdly, it expresses the Council’s determination
to establish a new impartial, objective and independent
attribution mechanism based on a proposal by the
Secretary-General, because the perpetrators of
chemical-weapons attacks must be identified and held
to account, and, to that end, we need a new mechanism.
Fourthly, it requests the Secretary-General to
dispatch immediately a high-level disarmament mission
to Syria because we need to resolve all outstanding
issues on chemical weapons and rid Syria once and for
all possible chemical weapons that might still exist in

18-1072811/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

the country. Such a mission would add political and
diplomatic leverage to the necessary technical and
professional work of the OPCW. We therefore call on
all members of the Council to muster the political will
and respond to the appeal by the Secretary-General so
as to come together and move forward.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave threat to
international peace and security. It is indeed deplorable
that the Council has not yet been able to come together
and agree on a timely and firm response. Even though the
use of chemical weapons in itself violates international
law, any response must comply with international law
and respect the Charter of the United Nations. The time
has now come to urgently revert to a political process
under United Nations auspices for a political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and for Syria
and the Astana guarantors to move forward without
further delay and live up to their commitments so that
resolution 2401 (2018), which demands the cessation of
hostilities and humanitarian access, can be fully and
urgently implemented. That is the only way to end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and end the brutal
seven-year-long conflict.
We firmly believe that there is a way for the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter. We
believe that there continues to be a way for the Council
to come together. We believe that we need to ensure
that we have exhausted every peaceful effort and every
diplomatic option to stop further atrocities from being
carried out in Syria, hold those responsible to account,
come to terms once with the chemical-weapons issue
in Syria, cease hostilities and find a political solution.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for having illustrated for us the chaotic and
dangerous situation currently prevailing in the Middle
East by providing a detailed overview of every one of
the conflicts in that vulnerable region, from Libya to
the desolate and devastating crisis in Syria, which,
as all evidence suggests, runs the imminent risk of
dramatically deteriorating.
In line with the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, we reaffirm Equatorial Guinea’s firm
belief that in confronting such situations we must
always have recourse to dialogue and establish and
respect mechanisms intended for achieving the
peaceful settlement of conflicts until such options are
12/22

13/04/2018

exhausted. A unilateral military response could be
counterproductive, and, far from solving the problem,
it would lead to more suffering and chaos than already
present, as the Secretary-General indicated — and
additional disorder as in case of Libya, with which we
are well familiar in Africa, and the consequences of
which affect the entire Sahel region and part of Central
Africa. We stand categorically against the use of force
with the sole exception that it be justified under the
conditions set forth under the Charter of the United
Nations Charter and that it be used as a last resort after
all other means have been exhausted.
We are concerned about the rhetoric that is
being used. It sounds dangerously familiar to us, and
we do not like where it might lead us. We appeal to
Governments’ sense of responsibility, and in particular
to the permanent members of the Security Council, as
we believe that they have the additional responsibility
of defending the relevance of the Council.
We would like to ask the following questions. Who
benefits from the inability of the Security Council to
make decisions? Are we contributing to delegitimizing
the Council? Are we actively eroding the Council’s
relevance in the international political arena? If the
Council is unable to take action, how long will it take
before the international community withdraws its faith,
hope and trust in the Council?
There is no military solution to the Syrian issue.
We must therefore continue to look for ways to solve
the problem through diplomatic channels. All Council
members must act responsibly and agree to establish
an independent and impartial monitoring mechanism
to ascertain what took place in Douma and ensure
accountability and that the perpetrators are brought
to justice.
The Secretary-General stated his disappointment
with the Council’s failure to establish a mechanism
that would identify and attribute responsibility to those
using chemical weapons. We could not agree more with
that statement. Only a few days ago, our delegation
stated its frustration when the Council failed to adopt
three draft resolution put to the vote (see S/PV.8228).
The Secretary-General’s offer concerning his good
offices must be considered, and we must provide him
with that opportunity.
In conclusion, we reiterate the position of
Equatorial Guinea in arguing against and condemning
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8231

the use of chemical weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction regardless of who uses them.

The Charter of the United Nations, which prohibits
unilateral action, must be upheld.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting. We welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral among us. His assessments are always very
precise and useful, and we thank him for the intensive
work that he is doing for the benefit of upholding the
purposes and principles of the Organization.

Another key detail to remember is that the
Security Council is not representative of the five
permanent members it comprises, nor of its 15
members seated around this table; rather, it represents
the entire membership of 193 States, both the nations
and their peoples. The Security Council must not be
utilized as a sounding board for war propaganda nor
interventionism. It should also not be made into a pawn
to be sacrificed on the chessboard of war, geopolitics
and petty interests.

For some reason, some members of the Security
Council are avoiding addressing the main reason
for convening this meeting, which is that one State
Member has threatened the unilateral use of force in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. Much
has been said about the use of chemical weapons, and
Bolivia would like to make clear its total and absolute
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons or the
use of chemical agents as weapons as unjustifiable and
criminal acts wherever, whenever and by whomever
they are committed. For their use is a grave crime
under international law and against the interests of
international peace and security. Those responsible for
committing those terrible and criminal acts must be
identified, investigated, prosecuted and punished. We
demand a transparent and impartial investigation that
must identify those responsible for any act of the use of
chemical weapons.
Needless to say, it is essential that the Security
Council ensures an independent, impartial, complete,
conclusive and, above all, depoliticized investigation.
We regret that the Security Council has as yet failed to
achieve that objective. Nonetheless, we will support all
work intended to accomplish that goal. It is crucial that
the Council continue to discuss the issue of the use of
chemical weapons, but I reiterate that what has brought
us together at this meeting is the threat of one State
Member’ illegal use of force.
Over the past 72 years, humankind has built a
framework that is not only physical or institutional,
but also juridical. Humankind has setup instruments of
international law intended precisely to prevent the most
powerful from attacking the weakest with impunity so
as to establish a balance in the world and prevent grave
violations to international peace and security. We have
built an international system — the Security Council is
clear evidence of it — based on rules. It is the duty of
the Council and of all the organs of the United Nations
to respect those rules and defend multilateralism.

We have heard many stories from history about
the prohibition of chemical weapons, and Bolivia is an
active participant in that system, but I would like to
talk about the story of our Charter. When one is unsure
about how to act under certain circumstances, I read
that the best way to settle such uncertainty is to recall
the principles of the French Revolution and reflect on
where the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are upheld. Those principles form part of the genesis of
the Charter. Another part comes from the Magna Carta,
of course, which, for the first time in history, limited
the exercise of power precisely to defend the weakest.
Another antecedent to the Charter is the Yalta
Conference. I read that the Conference established the
system of control and checks and balances, which is
the Security Council with its five permanent members.
Bolivia did not attend the Conference. As I understand
it, just Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin were present.
The outcome of the Conference was ratified at the San
Francisco Conference a few months later in 1945. That
is the system that we have agreed to uphold, which
is why I believe that is essential to understand the
principles of our Charter. Our Charter is not words on
page, meant to hand out to tourists visiting the United
Nations Headquarters, but rather a set of norms that we
have agreed to comply with and uphold. Article 2 states
that
“The Organization and its Members, in pursuit
of the Purposes stated in Article 1, shall act in
accordance with the following Principles.”
Principle 4 of Article 2 reads,
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of

18-1072813/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
That is to say that any use of force must be authorized
by the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter.
Any form of unilateral action therefore contravenes
international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter.
Another point worth mentioning is that we have
listened, with due respect, to our colleagues speak
about the criminal use of chemical weapons, and we
completely agree with them on that. However, it would
be very dangerous to fight an alleged violation of
international law with another violation of international
law and the Charter. That is why, in this specific
case, we hope that there is an independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive investigation.
Allow me to offer a clarification to my dear
colleague from the United Kingdom. While Bolivia
voted against one draft resolution, it voted in favour
of two others. It voted against the one because,
regrettably, this platform was being exploited for
political motives. Draft resolutions are presented for
nothing more than the spectacle of it, for the television
cameras. Draft resolutions are presented knowing that
they will be vetoed, and not all efforts are put forth to
reach consensus, though that is what we normally do
for resolutions.
We believe that this meeting is very important
because we not only discussing an attack on a Member
State, or the threat of a military strike against a Member
State of the United Nations, whichever it may be, but
rather because we are living at a time of constant attacks
on multilateralism. Let us recall that the achievements
in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change have been
undermined. Let us recall that the gains reached with
the Global Compact for Migration have been eroded.
Let us recall that there is a clear policy and mindset
of multilateralism subversion. What happens is that
for some the discourse on human rights is used until it
no longer serves their interests, and then they violate
those rights.
My region is a witness to that. We endured
Operation Condor, as it was called, during the 1970s,
which was planned by the intelligence services of some
Member States. When democracy did not suit them,
they financed coups d’etat. When they were unhappy
with the discourse on human rights, they infringed
human rights. When the discourse of democracy was no
14/22

13/04/2018

longer enough, they were ready to finance coups d’etat.
The use of unilateral practices leaves behind unhealed
wounds, despite the passage of time.
Some of the members of the Council have spoken
on the situation in Iraq and Libya, which I believe are
some of the worst crimes that have been committed this
century. The invasion of Iraq, with its dire consequences,
left more than 1 million dead. The effects of the strikes
against Libya and the regime-change policies imposed
on it, which, as my colleague from Equatorial Guinea
aptly said, they still feel, suffer and endure throughout
the entire region of the Sahel and Central Africa. But no
one wants to talk about the root causes of those conflicts,
and no one will talk about the impunity enjoyed for
those serious crimes. It warrants repeating. Those are
the most serious crimes committed this century. We
hope that all the members of the Security Council,
given the high degree of responsibility we have — 10
of us elected by the membership and five enjoy the
privilege to have a permanent seat on the Council with
the power of veto — must lead by example for the rest
of the membership on the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
By way of conclusion, I would like to reiterate
what former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said
in a similar situation in 2013: “The Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security”. That is my appeal.
Everything must be addressed within the framework of
the Charter. The use of force is legal only in the exercise
of the right to self-defence, in line with Article 51 of
the Charter, or when the Security Council approves
such action. That was the reason for the meeting, and
Bolivia’s position is to categorically condemn any
threat or use of unilateral force.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would very much like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing today. We share
his concern about the fact that the Middle East is
experiencing crises and challenges that unquestionably
represent threats to international peace and security.
The situation will undoubtedly deteriorate if the
Security Council resolutions are not implemented by
the relevant parties.
The question of Palestine, the practices of the
Israeli occupation there and its continued violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant Security Council resolutions
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

are testament to that. The most recent is its repression
of peaceful protests in Gaza and the use of excessive
force. That led to the deaths of dozens of civilians and
injuries to hundreds as they exercised their legitimate
right to demonstrate peacefully in support of the March
of Return. Kuwait condemns those Israeli practices in
the strongest terms. We regret that the Security Council
has not taken action to condemn such acts of repression
or to call on the Israeli occupation forces to end them.
The Israeli occupying Power should not be an exception.
Everyone should respect and abide by international
law and the Charter of the United Nations and should
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
with the aim of achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace that can fulfil the Palestinian people’s
legitimate political right to establish their own State on
their own land, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We have had a number of meetings over the past
few days. Today’s meeting would not have taken place
if we had been able to agree on a new mechanism to
investigate the allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. This disagreement has led to deep
divisions among the members of the Security Council.
We must step up our efforts to advance the stalled
political process in Syria. We have been concerned
about escalating tensions among all parties since
the beginning of the year. Through the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), which primarily calls for a
cessation of hostilities throughout Syria for at least 30
days, we tried to improve the humanitarian situation.
Unfortunately, however, it has not been implemented
and has in fact been violated in flagrant disregard for
the will of the international community.
We share the concern and disappointment of the
Secretary-General about the deteriorating situation in
Syria and the ongoing allegations of the use of chemical
weapons, and support his call for an agreement on a new
mechanism to ensure accountability and end impunity
in Syria. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to establish the facts
surrounding the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma, in eastern Ghouta, and emphasize that there
must be accountability for the perpetrators of those
crimes, if they are confirmed.
In view of our responsibility as members of
the Council, we should do our utmost and not lose
hope, and we should continue our efforts to agree on
the establishment of an independent, impartial and

S/PV. 8231

professional mechanism for attributing responsibility
and ensuring accountability. The continued violations
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2118 (2013), by the warring parties
in Syria further convince us that, in the case of grave
violations of human rights or crimes that amount to
war crimes or crimes against humanity, there should
be a moratorium on the use of the veto as a procedural
matter, so that such tragedies for innocent civilians are
not repeated.
The State of Kuwait takes a principled and firm
position, in line with that of the League of Arab
States. We call for preserving the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria, as well as for a cessation
of the violence and hostilities in order to put an end
to bloodshed, protect the Syrian people and achieve
a peaceful settlement. This would be done under the
auspices of the United Nations and through the efforts of
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to Syria, based
on the Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), with the aim of achieving
a political transition agreed on by all sectors of Syrian
society and of meeting their legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and personal presence at
today’s meeting. In our view, since his appointment as
steward of this world Organization, he has ceaselessly
promoted a very important approach, which is the use
of amicable and preventive diplomacy.
Following an alert to the world, the Security
Council underlined in its first presidential statement
of 2018, on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace (S/PRST/2018/1), adopted during Kazakhstan’s
presidency of the Security Council, that the ways
to address conflict may include measures to rebuild
trust by bringing Member States together around
common goals. That has been particularly important in
situations where international relations have featured
confrontations and tension behind which the contours
of a global war are increasingly apparent. We are
right now in a moment when we must exercise special
caution and vigilance in making decisions about our
actions, especially in the Middle East. We believe
that it is time to tap into all the tools available for a
comprehensive strategy of preventive diplomacy in
order to avoid the very serious consequences of any

18-1072815/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

military action that could have repercussions for global
security and stability.
The recent escalation of the rhetoric on Syria and
the threat of the use of unilateral actions has left the
delegation of Kazakhstan deeply concerned about
the unfolding situation, which has the potential to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security. We all bear a responsibility for complying
with international law and order, and none of our
countries has the right to violate the Charter of the
United Nations or to act or threaten to act unilaterally
with respect to a sovereign nation under any pretext,
unless that is decided by the Security Council. The
Security Council is a collective body and is designed
to take balanced decisions with regard to the issues of
peace and security. We can agree or disagree, but we
are mandated to work together to achieve a decision for
which we have to bear a collective responsibility.
Kazakhstan believes that the most effective way to
prevent conflicts is to use diplomacy and mediation,
not military means. We look forward to the next round
of talks to be held in Geneva and in our capital, Astana,
when the parties will address the stepping up of efforts
to ensure observance of their respective agreements,
among other issues.
In addressing the disputes over the issue of
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Douma in
Syria, which has provoked the most recent tension in
international relations, we consider it necessary to
state the following. Kazakhstan strongly condemns
any use of chemical weapons, if confirmed. Impunity
is not permissible. We should act resolutely to stop any
further use of such inhuman weapons, but we should
act on the basis of proven facts. In this particular
case, where there are doubts about the actual use of a
poisonous substance, Kazakhstan calls on the members
of the Council to be patient, at least until the expert
group of the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to Syria is deployed to the site of the alleged attack
and can report on the findings of its investigation,
particularly given that yesterday we learned that the
Syrian Government has granted visas for the OPCW
investigators and pledged to facilitate access to the sites
of the alleged chemical attack. We should first establish
and understand the scientifically and professionally
ascertained facts, after which the Council should decide
on the appropriate line of action to take.
16/22

13/04/2018

At this stage, any military action or threat of it
without the prior approval of the Security Council
is undesirable. It could have a long-lasting negative
impact that would be very difficult to overcome and
could result in unprecedented and unanticipated
complications. Kazakhstan remains committed to
the Charter of the United Nations and to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at resolving the political and
humanitarian aspects of the Syrian conflict. We believe
it is crucial to exercise restraint and refrain from any
rhetoric that might exacerbate the already fragile and
volatile situation. Such a pause for reflection on the
consequences is essential to preserving international
peace and security.
In the light of the prevailing circumstances, it
is more critical than ever that all Council members
implement resolution 2401 (2018). The crisis in Syria
can be resolved only through an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process, based on the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), subsequent Security
Council resolutions and the relevant statements of the
International Syria Support Group. Lastly, we fully
endorse the views articulated by the Secretary-General
on 11 April about the risks of the current impasse that
we are witnessing today (see SG/SM/18984). We must
at all costs avoid the situation spiralling out of control.
Our ultimate goal should be to put an end to the horrific
suffering of the Syrian people and to help them to move
forward on a path of peace and progress.
Once again, this is an alarming moment, and we
need to work together to restore unity and effectiveness
in the Security Council by rebuilding trust and
consensus in order to preserve global peace and
security. We need cooperation within the Council to
establish a workable attribution mechanism, which we
passionately advocated today in this Chamber. Let us
make it happen and transform our words into real deeds.
The delegation of Kazakhstan is ready for that and calls
on its colleagues to go the extra mile in that direction.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and deeply appreciate his
efforts to weigh in on the grave challenge that we are
facing, in order to ensure that what should and must
be avoided will not happen because of miscalculation
or a lack of thoughtfulness or of appreciation for the
tremendous responsibility that the Security Council,
especially its permanent members, bears. The Cold War
is back with a vengeance, the Secretary-General said,
but this time, he went on to tell us, in a less managed
18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

manner. It is difficult to quarrel with him. His approach
was quite comprehensive, focusing, as he said, on the
multiplicity of dangerous conflicts that the Middle East
is facing. While his approach may be better, I choose to
focus on Syria because it is the current flashpoint.
Following the alleged chemical attacks in Douma,
it is regrettable that the Council was not able to adopt
a resolution to create an independent, impartial and
professional investigative mechanism for identifying
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. This is a problem that has been with us
for some time and a reality that sadly reflects the
lack of unity in the Council even on matters that are
manifestly in the common interest of all. We certainly
welcome the deployment of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission to Syria to establish the facts surrounding
the alleged use of chemicals as weapons. We have
repeatedly stated that using chemicals as weapons is
inhumane, and we condemn their use by any actor
under any circumstances. One matter remains, and that
is establishing a mechanism for attribution. We hope
that will be done as soon as possible, but that does not
mean that in the meantime we should cease to exercise
maximum restraint in the interests of peace.
Right now, pragmatic considerations and simple
rational calculation suggest that we must get our
priorities right. We need to continue to live if we are
to be able to fight evil. We have continued to express
our deep concern about the current dynamics in Syria
and their devastating implications for regional and
international peace and security. We fully concur with
the Secretary-General, who stressed in his statement
of 11 April that it is vital to ensure that the situation
does not spiral out of control (see SG/SM/18984).
He stressed that legitimate concern again today. The
Security Council, as the principal body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should not and cannot allow that to happen. At a time
when we are talking about preventive diplomacy — as
well as after appointing a Secretary-General who told
us, in his maiden speech to the Council (see S/PV.7857),
that prevention is not merely a priority, but the
priority — now is the time for the United Nations
to undertake the search for diplomacy for peace in
earnest. If we are seriously committed to moving
our Organization from a culture of reaction to one of
prevention, now is the time to stand firm, speak with

S/PV. 8231

one voice and take proactive and collective action that
can be respected by all major stakeholders.
That requires the Council to be united for global
peace and security. We know that is difficult, but we
believe that we have no other sane option. This is
the time for the Security Council to stand up and be
counted. The Security Council is the custodian of the
Charter of the United Nations, which, growing out of
the devastation of the Second World War, promised to
save succeeding generations from that scourge. That is
a clarion call the Council should heed and act on. The
situation should not be allowed to spiral out of control.
The Secretary-General is right and the Council should
listen to him.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and insightful
briefing. His statement rightly focused on the broader
Middle East. However, I will focus on the most pressing
issue at hand, the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Charter of the United Nations starts with the
words “We the peoples of the United Nations”, and
while the Russian Federation is blocking the Council
from taking effective action on the crimes of Russia’s
ally Syria, all peoples of every nation are outraged by
the continued unrestrained violence that the Syrian
regime has unleashed against its own people. As the
Secretary-General just said, the people of Syria have
lived through a litany of horrors. No responsible
Government can ignore the universal outrage that those
horrors have provoked.
Our collective incapacity in the Council to stop
the crimes in Syria should weigh heavily on the
conscience of all our members, but on the conscience
of one permanent member in particular. It was our
collective conscience that created the Charter of the
United Nations. It was our collective conscience that
created the Chemical Weapons Convention. The use of
chemical weapons is unlawful in and of itself. It is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. It is a
serious violation of international law and may constitute
a war crime and a crime against humanity.
We strongly believe that the international
community must fully uphold the standard that the
use of chemical weapons is never permissible. As the
Secretary-General just said, the norm against the use of
chemical weapons must be upheld. The non-proliferation
regime must be upheld. Accountability for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria is therefore neither optional

18-1072817/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

nor negotiable. The images of last weekend’s attack
in Douma are appalling. Atrocities have once again
been inflicted on Syria’s civilian population. Once
again, dozens of innocent civilians have been killed
and hundreds injured. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
believes that it is highly likely that the Syrian regime is
responsible for the attack. It has a proven history of such
attacks, having used chemicals as a weapon against its
own people in 2014, 2015 and 2017. It is unacceptable
that four years after Syria joined the Chemical Weapons
Convention, its declarations can still not be verified as
accurate or complete.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a long-time
supporter of fighting impunity when it comes to
chemical weapons. Regrettably, all attempts to achieve
accountability in the Council have failed. Referral to the
International Criminal Court was vetoed. The renewal
of the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) was also vetoed. This week, accountability was
again vetoed. With its vetoes, the Russian Federation has
assumed much responsibility for the crimes committed
by the Syrian regime. The draft resolution for a new
accountability mechanism that was vetoed this week
remains the bare minimum of what is acceptable to
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We will not settle for
anything less than an independent, impartial attribution
mechanism that can ensure that the culprits of that
vicious attack will be identified and held accountable.

13/04/2018

Let me end with warm words of appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his tireless efforts for justice
and the international legal order.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing and
to assure him of our full support in finding a political
solution to all conflicts, not just the one in Syria.
Since we are discussing the situation in the Middle
East and in particular the current situation in Syria, let
me begin with a very sad observation. Even with our
unanimously adopted resolutions, such as resolution
2401 (2018), we are still not seeing any substantial
change on the ground. The fighting is far from being
over and the human suffering is tremendous. Taking
into consideration the current situation and the growing
risk of the loss of human life owing simply to a lack
of food or medicine, we should try to do our utmost
to find possible ways to ensure that life-saving aid
convoys can reach those in need. Unfortunately, that
applies not only to eastern Ghouta but also to Idlib and
Aleppo provinces. We must find a way to alleviate the
suffering of ordinary Syrians. The civilian population
in Syria has already suffered too much.

No veto can wipe from our memory the clear
findings presented by the JIM on the use of chemical
weapons by the Al-Assad regime and Da’esh. No
veto can stop our compassion for the victims of the
chemical-weapon attack last weekend. No veto can end
our determination to achieve justice for the victims and
for the people of Syria as a whole.

International public opinion is watching our
meetings and sees our lack of agreement on the most
basic principles under international humanitarian law.
The Council bears enormous responsibility and will
be held accountable for its actions. We therefore call
on the Council to take the necessary steps to ensure
that all the parties to the conflict, especially the
regime and its allies, implement the ceasefire, enable
humanitarian access and medical evacuations and fully
engage in the United Nations-led talks in Geneva, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which represent the
best path to peace.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to fighting impunity. We reiterate
our strong support for an international, impartial and
independent mechanism, the Commission of Inquiry,
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons and a referral of the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court in The
Hague, as the most appropriate path to accountability
and justice. At the heart of our policy on Syria is a deep
desire for peace and justice for its people. Impunity
cannot and will not prevail.

With regard to the issue of chemical weapons, a
century ago that was a normal way to wage war. Just
recently we commemorated the hundredth anniversary
of the first use of chemical weapons, on the Western
and Eastern fronts of the First World War alike. French,
British, American and other Allied soldiers were
targeted with chlorine in Ypres, while Russian soldiers
were dying from the same gruesome weapons in
Bolimów, now part of Polish territory. Now, a century
later, we are being challenged by these ghastly weapons
yet again. Our nations are seeing the effects of the same

18/22

18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

toxic gas through the images of civilians who sought
refuge in basements in Ghouta and other areas in Syria.
Chemical weapons were banned when the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) cam into effect
in 1997. We had begun a new chapter in the history
of non-proliferation and disarmament. All of us in
this Chamber agree that the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere is deplorable and unacceptable.
Can we really allow the success story of the CWC to
be reversed? Will the Security Council allow the vision
of a world free of chemical weapons to be destroyed? It
is regrettable that the establishment of an independent,
impartial investigative mechanism on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria was vetoed on Tuesday
(see S/PV.8228), thereby enabling those responsible for
chemical attacks to remain unpunished. Accountability
for such acts is a requirement under international law
and is central to achieving durable peace in Syria.
As members of the Security Council, we must find a
way to reach agreement on how to properly respond
to chemical attacks in Syria. We hope to see the Factfinding Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) deployed to Douma
as soon as possible. We reiterate our appreciation to
the Director-General and staff of the OPCW for their
commitment to its goals and work, often in particularly
challenging circumstances.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire thanks
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing
on new developments in the critical situation in several
countries in the Middle East, in particular Syria, since
the Security Council considered the issue on 9 and
10 April (see S/PV. 8225 and S/PV. 8228).
Despite the relative lull in the fighting in Syria,
the humanitarian situation remains troubling in the
light of the allegations of the recurring use of chemical
weapons by parties to the conflict. As a result of its
internal divisions, despite our goodwill, the Council
has failed to ensure the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), which we adopted unanimously in order
to deliver humanitarian assistance to people in need.
In the light of the continuing reports of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma, the Council was unable
to reach an agreement on a statement that at the very
least would have conveyed our solidarity to the Syrian
people at this difficult time. The delegation of Côte
d’Ivoire remains concerned by the current impasse
in the Security Council, which has, unfortunately,

S/PV. 8231

prevented it from reaching agreement on a mechanism
to combat impunity vis-à-vis the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.
In this context, we reiterate our support for the
impartial, transparent, independent investigation
to be conducted by the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
with the aim of shedding light on allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Douma, in eastern Ghouta.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its strong condemnation
of any use of chemical weapons, by any party, during
peacetime or during wartime. Once again we beseech
members of the Council to unite so as to set aside their
differences and successfully set up an accountability
mechanism to ensure that those who use chemical
weapons are held accountable.
We remain alarmed by the tensions stemming
from the current political impasse, and we encourage
the Secretary-General to make use of his good offices
with stakeholders to restore peace and calm, in order to
prevent any further escalation of the situation. To that
end, my country invites all parties to exercise restraint
so as to peacefully resolve this issue and in so doing
safeguard international peace and security, which is
our shared legacy.
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms our conviction and our
principled position that there can be no military response
to the crisis in Syria. The solution needs to be sought
through dialogue and an inclusive political process, as
stipulated in the road map set out by resolution 2254
(2015). My country remains convinced that dialogue
alone will lead us to an equitable settlement of the
conflict in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
statement in my capacity as the representative of Peru.
We would like to express our gratitude for the
briefing by Secretary-General António Guterres and
to thank him for his willingness to help to achieve a
solution to the impasse in which the Security Council
currently finds itself. We encourage him to continue
to spare no effort in this respect, in line with the
prerogatives conferred upon him by the Charter of the
United Nations.
Peru expresses its deep-rooted concern at the
divisions that have emerged in the Council, in particular
between its permanent members, and at the regrettable
use of the veto, which limits our capacity to maintain

18-1072819/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

international peace and security and to resolve the
humanitarian conflicts and crises that form our agenda.
We note with alarm the fact that the conflict in
Syria continues to involve atrocity crimes committed
with impunity and that it has deteriorated into a serious
threat to regional and global stability, to the point where
it is giving rise to serious tensions.
With respect to reports of the further use of
chemical weapons in Douma, we believe it necessary
to resume, as a matter of urgency and in a renewed
spirit of compromise, negotiations that will lead to
ensuring full access, as required, for the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, which is being deployed in Syria
to determine what happened; and to create a dedicated,
independent, objective and impartial mechanism to
attribute responsibility.
On that understanding, we believe it important to
recall once again that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian conflict and that any response to the
barbaric events taking place in that country must be
in keeping with the norms of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
We recall also that in its resolution 2401 (2018), the
Council ordered a humanitarian ceasefire throughout
the entire Syrian territory, and that it is urgent to make
headway in the political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
As the Secretary-General himself said, of particular
concern is the potential threat posed by the current
deadlock. We must at all costs prevent the situation
from spiralling out of control. This must not occur
given that our duty is to put an end to the suffering of
millions of people and to impunity for atrocity crimes.

13/04/2018

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First, I should like, on behalf of my
Government, to express our condolences to the people
and the Government of Algeria in connection with the
tragic military plane crash that claimed the lives of
247 passengers.
Secondly, I welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General in this very important meeting. I
thank him for his comprehensive and accurate briefing,
which made clear that he and others in the Council
did in fact understand this meeting’s agenda item. He
spoke in a manner commensurate with the threats to
international peace and security posed by the allegations
and accusations against my country and its allies.
My colleague the Ambassador of Sweden said that
the use of chemical weapons is a war crime. This is true.
I agree with him, as does my Government. However, I
would ask him whether he believes that war in itself
is a crime and needs to be stopped and prevented.
Perhaps this would be a very good title for a book by
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
and perhaps this would make clear to Member States
that war in itself is a crime.
My colleague the representative of the United
States said that the Syrian chemical weapons that killed
civilians had been used 50 times; that is what she said.
Chemical weapons were used 50 times and killed 200
civilians. Imagine that — the Syrian Government
reversed the course of the global terrorist war against
my country by killing only 200 civilians after having
used chemical weapons 50 times. Are these not the
words of amateurs? This is a scenario for DC Comics’
Superman series. Is that how the White House
strategists think — that a certain Government has used
chemical weapons 50 times to kill 200 civilians? How
is that logical?

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

My American colleague overlooked one important
detail — that her country, on board the MV Cape
Ray, destroyed the Syrian chemical stockpiles in the
Mediterranean, along with ships from Denmark and
Norway. How could it be that the experts in the United
States delegation did not tell her that Ms. Sigrid Kaag
told the Security Council in June 2014 that there were
no more chemical stockpiles in Syria. Could they have
simply forgotten all of that?

I would like to recall the statement by the President
of the Security Council contained in document
S/2017/507, on the length of interventions.

Some believe that the massive western military
forces in the eastern Mediterranean are due to a Sufi
Western affection for a handful of terrorist yobs in

Peru reiterates its commitment to living up to the
lofty responsibility that the maintenance of international
peace and security entails. My delegation will continue
to work towards a solution to the conflict and protect
the Syrian people, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

20/22

18-10728

13/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

Douma. By the way, those yobs were chased out to the
North, as the Council is aware. They are now on their
way to Saudi Arabia and thence to Yemen. They will
be recycled and used on other fronts, including Yemen.
No, the massive military forces in the Mediterranean
do not target that handful of terrorists. They target the
State of Syria and its allies. That should be the topic
discussed today in this meeting.
My colleague the American Ambassador was not
horrified that her country used 20 million gallons of
Agent Orange in Viet Nam in 1961, killing and injuring
3 million Vietnamese. Four hundred thousand children
are born with deformities every year due to the use of
Agent Orange at that time. She was not horrified by
her country’s forces killing thousands of Syrians in
Raqqa and thousands of Iraqis in Fallujah and Mosul
through the use of white phosphorus, which is a
chemical weapon. I ask my colleague, the Ambassador
of Sweden: Is that not a war crime?
I would like to read a remark of the former Defence
Minister of Britain, Mr. Doug Henderson. He spoke
of the use by his country and the United States of
white phosphorus in Iraq. I would ask my friend the
British Ambassador to listen to this. Mr. Henderson
said that it was unbelievable that the United Kingdom
would occupy a country — meaning Iraq — to look for
chemical weapons and at the same time use chemical
weapons against that very same country.
George Orwell, the well-respected and ethical
Western author said: “In a time of universal deceit,
telling the truth is a revolutionary act”. The truth
that needs to be told today is that three permanent
members of the Security Council are dragging the
entire world once again towards the abyss of war and
aggression. They seek to obstruct the Council’s work
in maintaining international peace and security, which
is the main principle agreed upon and endorsed by our
founding fathers when they adopted the Charter of the
United Nations in San Francisco on 26 June, 1945. Even
though my colleague, the Ambassador of Bolivia has
already read it out, I would like to once again remind
the Council of paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter:
“All members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations”.

S/PV. 8231

The truth that needs to be told today is that those
three States have a legacy based on fallacies and
fabricated narratives in order to launch wars, occupy
States, control their resources and change their
governing systems. The truth that needs to be told today
is that the entire world and the Council stand witnesses
to the invasion, occupation and destruction of Iraq
based on a United States lie in this very Chamber 14
years ago. They stand witnesses to France’s exploitation
of the Council to destroy Libya under the pretext of
protecting civilians while ending the future of an entire
people for the very simple reason that its President
at the time, Mr. Sarkozy, wanted a cover up for his
financial corruption. This is an ongoing case, of which
members are all aware. However, some countries still
fall for those lies promoted by those very same States
in order to attack my country, Syria.
God bless the days when France the policies
of Charles de Gaulle in the Council followed and
repudiated the aggression of the United States and
Britain against Iraq. We yearn for those days. France
no longer respects the policies of Charles de Gaulle and
is now one of the countries that launch attacks against
other countries.
The truth that needs to be told today is that the
international community has not sought to rein in those
who are reckless and undermine international relations,
subjecting them to disaster time and again since the
establishment of this international Organization. Our
biggest fear is that if the international community does
not come together to end the abuse of those who are
reckless, then the Organization will die in circumstances
very similar to that which led to the death of the League
of Nations.
The truth that needs to be told today is that after
the failure of the United States, Britain, France and
their proxies in our region to achieve their objectives
in Syria through providing all forms of support to the
armed terrorist groups, we see them today tweeting
and bragging about their nice, new and smart rockets,
and defying international legitimacy from the Council
Chamber. They dispatch war planes and fleets to
achieve what their terrorists have failed to achieve over
the past seven years.
The truth that needs to be told today is that the
Syrian Government liberated hundreds of thousands of
civilians in eastern Ghouta from the practices of armed
terrorist groups that used them as human shields, held

18-1072821/22

S/PV.8231

Threats to international peace and security

them hostage for years and prevented any medical or
food assistance from reaching them. The terrorist
groups used the schools, homes and hospitals of those
civilians as military bases to launch attacks on 8 million
civilians in Damascus.
The truth that needs to be told today is that some
reckless people are pushing international relations
towards the abyss based on a fake video prepared by
the terrorist White Helmets, pursuant to instructions by
Western intelligence.
The truth that needs to be told today is that the socalled international alliance used its war planes to serve
Da’esh in order to block the victory of the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies against that terrorist organization.
That international alliance made the White Helmets
its media division to fabricate and falsify incidents in
order to benefit the Al-Qaida terrorist organization.
The government of my country took the initiative to
invite the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to dispatch its Fact-finding Mission to visit
Syria and the alleged site of the incident in Douma.
The Government of my country has provided all the
facilitation needed for the team to work in a transparent
and accurate manner. The team is supposed to start its
work in a few hours. This invitation was issued out of
strength, confidence and diplomatic experience, not
because we are weak or afraid and giving in to bullying
or threats.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms the Governments of these three States
for launching their threats to use power in a flagrant
violation of Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which identifies the primary purpose of the
United Nations as the maintenance of international
peace and security and the suppression of acts of
aggression and other breaches to peace.
With the exception of the United States, Britain and
France, we all understand that the Security Council is
the organ charged with the maintenance of international

22/22

13/04/2018

peace and security and should stand against attempts
to impose the law of the jungle and the rule of the
powerful. However, some Member States think that the
United Nations is just a private business company that
works on the basis of pecuniary interests, market rules
and the principle of supply and demand to determine the
fate of peoples and States, and that use it as a platform
for cheap theatrics and the dissemination of lies. This
is the truth that disappoints the hopes and aspirations of
the peoples of the world.
I am not reinventing the wheel in this Chamber. The
history of our relations with those States is filled with
agony, pain and bitterness as a result of their very wellknown policies of aggression. Another more important
and shocking truth that should be told today is that the
silence of the majority with respect to those aggressive
policies does not constitute collusion with these States,
but it does arise from fear of their arrogance and
political blackmail, economic pressure and aggressive
record. Those States do not blink when they go after
anyone who is telling the truth.
In conclusion, if those three States — the United
States, Britain and France — think they can attack us
and undermine our sovereignty and set out to do so,
we would have no other choice but to apply Article 51
of the Charter, which gives us the legitimate right to
defend ourselves. This is not a threat the way they do; it
is a promise. This is a promise. We will not let anyone
attack our sovereignty.
Why do I say that this is a promise? I say this
because a thought commonly ascribed to the great
United States leader George Washington, who lived
more than 200 years ago comes to mind — the sound
that is louder than that of the cannons is the sound of
the truth that emanates from the heart of a united nation
that wants to live free. We in Syria also have leaders
and prominent figures as great as George Washington.
They are doing the same thing for Syria — protecting
the unity and sovereignty of their country.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-10728
