S/PV.7335

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7335th meeting

Thursday, 11 December 2014 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nibishaka
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

14-68488 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1468488*

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sellassie.
Ms. Sellassie (spoke in French): I am pleased to
inform the Security Council of the latest developments
in the Sahel. The particular and sustained attention
that the Security Council devotes to the Sahel as a
region with unique characteristics allows us to take
an approach that integrates the regional dimensions
of the challenges. Without such an approach, conflicts
and crises would be resolved in one country only to
reappear in another.
In the realm of governance, the Sahel region
continues to suffer from a lack of basic services, social
exclusion and barriers to trade and investment. The
recent outbreak of the Ebola epidemic in Mali may
prove to be one shock too many for the region. That
new challenge deserves all our attention. It is vital for
the countries of the Sahel to develop the necessary
capacities to prevent the spread of the epidemic.
(spoke in English)
The crisis in Burkina Faso and the persistent
conflict in Mali attest to the fact that our efforts in the
Sahel will not be productive unless the countries of the
region commit to a certain standard of governance. The
security situation in the Sahel continues to be impacted
by the crises in Libya, northern Nigeria, northern
Mali and the Central African Republic. The persistent
allegations that the Islamic State has set up training
camps in Libya are particularly worrisome. If the
situation in Libya is not quickly brought under control,
many States of the region could be destabilized in the
very near future.
In Mali, despite progress achieved in the
inter-Malian talks in Algiers, the security situation

2/19

11/12/2014

in the north has deteriorated, with the intensification
of deadly attacks targeting peacekeepers and
communities along the border with the Niger. It is
encouraging that the recent meeting of the African
countries contributing troops to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), hosted by the Niger, concluded
that there was a need to strengthen regional security
cooperation mechanisms. I am also pleased that the
Council has held a brainstorming meeting to consider
options to address those challenges, including through
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
The unspeakable Boko Haram atrocities in northern
Nigeria have become a major threat to some Sahel
communities and countries. An estimated 100,000
people have fled to the Diffa region of the Niger
and some 10,000 more are in Chad and Cameroon.
Perhaps more alarming are the recent allegations that
Boko Haram is recruiting rebels among the refugee
populations.
The interconnections between terrorist and
criminal networks in Libya, Mali and northern Nigeria
are becoming clearer. Those networks provide the
markets for the exchange of weapons, fighters and other
forms of illicit trade, including drug trafficking. It is
estimated that close to 20,000 firearms from Libya have
crossed into the Sahel, and the greater part of the 18
tons of cocaine, worth $1.25 billion, that are dumped in
West Africa transit through the Sahel region. It is worth
noting that the profits from that illicit trafficking by far
exceed the security budgets of most countries of the
region. In view of the complexity and regionalization
of threats, my Office intends to work more closely
with MINUSMA, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and other relevant United Nations entities in
order to enhance regional analysis and programming.
Furthermore, particular attention needs to be paid
to the thousands of migrants who cross the Sahel and
the Sahara en route towards Europe and the Middle
East. Unfortunately, that practice of migration will only
increase in the prevailing security and humanitarian
conditions and can only lead to increased loss of life
and the recruitment of desperate migrants into armed
groups. More disturbing is the fact that 60 per cent of
the human trafficking victims detected in the region
are children.
Humanitarian indicators across the Sahel remain
disquieting. Five million more people have become food-

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

insecure since the last reporting period. The number
of children affected by acute malnutrition in the Sahel
also increased from 5 million in January to 6.4 million
today. Of those, 1.6 million require treatment for severe
malnutrition. In addition, spiralling insecurity and
conflicts have displaced 3.3 million people, representing
a twofold increase from 1.6 million in January. With
just over $1.1 billion provided by donors to date against
a $1.9-billion appeal, humanitarian interventions in the
Sahel remain underfunded.
Since assuming office in May, I have focused
on engaging with key stakeholders with a view to
gaining an understanding of their perspectives, taking
stock of the progress made and identifying existing
challenges. I have urged leaders and Heads of State in
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
to address challenges affecting the Sahel through a
regional approach and have pledged the support of the
United Nations to implement initiatives in the Sahel.
I have been engaging with major partners working on
the Sahel to emphasize the importance of coordination
and coherence. Building on those consultations, and
following up on the visit of the Secretary-General
to the Sahel last year, I convened a meeting of major
partners in November that resulted in the establishment
of an International Contact Group on the Sahel. In
order to enhance regional ownership of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, I have been
engaging with Governments in the Sahel and regional
organizations to seek convergence with their priorities.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7203), progress has
been achieved in terms of mainstreaming the priorities
of the strategy into existing programmatic frameworks.
Allow me to highlight a few examples. Under the
resilience pillar, the European Union-led Global
Alliance for Resilience Initiative partnership, with a
pledged contribution of €1.5 billion from the European
Union for 2014-2020, continued to provide a critical
framework for regional cooperation on resilience. The
country resilience priority plans for Burkina Faso, Mali,
the Niger and Chad will be reviewed in mid-December.
Meanwhile, a World Bank-United Nations Fund for
Population Activities programme of $207 million to
manage population dynamics in the Sahel is being
considered for approval.
Under the governance pillar, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has been supporting
Mali in mainstreaming social cohesion in the delivery
of social services, and has trained 300 community

S/PV.7335

mediators. It has also been supporting the Niger in
promoting durable development and inclusive growth.
UNDP has been building the capacity of Government
institutions in Mauritania and the Niger on conflict
prevention, the protection of human rights and
transparent electoral processes. At the regional level,
UNDP and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate have jointly embarked on a study to assess
the perceptions of communities living in border areas
with respect to the drivers of radicalization, insecurity
and violent extremism in eight Sahel countries.
Under the security pillar, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has been supporting the
development of accessible, efficient and accountable
criminal justice systems in the Sahel to combat illicit
trafficking, organized crime, terrorism and corruption
in the region. The United Nations Office for West Africa
has also supported the Lake Chad Basin Commission
in the development of a regional counter-terrorism
strategy.
I am also glad to report that several non-United
Nations partners continue to implement initiatives in
the Sahel that complement the broad objectives of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. In
January, the World Bank launched the new multi-donor
Sahel Adaptive Social Protection Trust Fund. With initial
grant funding of $75 million, the programme will assist
more than 1.5 million people in Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal. In October,
the Board of the African Development Bank approved
a $240-million programme to enhance the productivity
of the agro-silvo-pastoral and fishery sectors, including
through investments in rural infrastructure, in Burkina
Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger
and Senegal.
I am pleased to report that a regional approach to
addressing security threats in the Sahel is also being
promoted by the African Union through the Nouakchott
Process for the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture in the Sahel.
Given the deterioration of the political and
security situation in the region and its adverse impact
on humanitarian and development gains, the need for
sustaining Security Council attention to the Sahel is
greater than ever. Since my appointment, my Office has
made great strides in terms of helping put together the
necessary structures and coordination mechanisms to
ensure a more coherent approach of the United Nations

14-684883/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

system and the international community at large in the
Sahel region.
Despite these important and necessary steps, the
Sahel region continues to face multifaceted challenges to
peace and development. The situation calls for stronger
commitment on the part of Governments of the region
to improving governance and undertaking changes that
are required for the achievement of the objectives of the
strategy, including by working towards greater regional
cooperation and economic integration.
(spoke in French)
On the basis of all this, my priorities for the
coming months will be, first, to support the accelerated
implementation of national and regional projects, in
close collaboration with regional partners. Secondly, I
shall help to strengthen the coordination of assistance
from the international community to the Sahel,
including through the International Contact Group
on the Sahel. Finally, I will seek to promote regional
ownership by strengthening cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group of
Five Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Sellassie for her briefing today and for
her important work. We appreciate her close work with
the countries and people of the Sahel region and with
international partners towards achieving sustainable
security and prosperity for the people of the Sahel.
The States of the Sahel region face many complex
threats to peace and security. Among the most visible
and pressing of these is threat from violent extremism
posed by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups. But there are other
challenges as well: enduringly weak institutions and
flagging governance reforms, as we witnessed recently
in Burkina Faso; cyclical environmental shocks that
have contributed to a situation in which 20 million
people experience food insecurity; refugees and
internally displaced persons who need basic assistance
in Mali; vast and sometimes ungoverned spaces; fragile
economies and poverty. These factors all contribute to

4/19

11/12/2014

unnecessary suffering and create the conditions under
which terrorists and transnational organized criminal
organizations thrive. These challenges are neither
unique to distinct States nor new, and the threats they
pose unfortunately do not end at national borders.
We commend the Sahel States for their efforts to
address these intertwined challenges, including their
commitment to disrupting extremist networks, such
as their sustained efforts in Mali that began with
Operation Serval and the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali and continue today with their
contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
international community must work towards reinforcing
the region’s capacity and commitment to addressing all
of these threats, both to their individual countries and
across the region, in a manner that continues to protect
and respect human rights and the rule of law.
We have already seen the benefits of the region
enhancing its own coordination and cooperation to
address transnational security challenges. At the
initiative of the region, the Group of Five Sahel
is working to enhance security and development
cooperation through such funding initiatives as
the Priority Investment Programme, which aims at
pairing donor institutions with Sahel Governments,
infrastructure projects and the establishment of a
Group of Five Sahel secretariat. Furthermore, the
7 October Lake Chad Basin Commission summit in
Niamey underscored the commitment of the regional
Governments to improving coordination to address the
threat of Boko Haram to the subregion.
But there will be much to do over the next year. We
welcome the important work that has been done so far
to integrate national strategies within the region, but
our primary focus should not be so much on process
as on outcomes — that is, what are the concrete efforts
to combat violence and terrorism that work best in the
Sahel region, and what can we, as the international
community, do to support them? A comprehensive
and coordinated strategy is important, no doubt, but
the measure of our success must be real solutions that
impact real people’s lives — solutions that address
security, humanitarian, human rights and governance
problems.
The United Nations — including through the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, as well as the Special Representatives for

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

West and Central Africa — is an integral part of those
efforts. The high-level engagement of these officials
with senior Government and the particularly close
relationships that they have developed with the leaders
of African Union Commission, the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and the European Union
have clearly increased coordination. Deconflicting
overlapping or redundant initiatives should remain
central to their efforts. If that is to be successful, it
is also important that the Sahel States take strong
ownership of this engagement, and cross-pollination is
emphasized not just at the senior political levels, but at
the working level as well.
For our part, the United States is fully committed
to supporting regional counter-terrorism efforts and to
the wider promotion of stability across the Sahel region.
President Obama, recognizing the danger posed to the
region and beyond by this nexus of failing institutions,
insecurity, humanitarian challenges and poverty,
announced the Security Governance Initiative in
August, through which the United States has committed
$65 million for the first year to developing the security
sector institutional capacity in six partner countries,
five of which are either part of the United Nations Sahel
initiative or its immediate neighbours. The Initiative
will provide tailored support to national capacitybuilding and security-sector governance, including
through access to justice, countering transnational
threats and contributing to regional and international
security and stability. Across the Sahel, the United
States provides assistance to build the capacity of
military, law enforcement and civilian and civilian
actors through the Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism
Partnership and other initiatives.
We also remain committed to continuing our longstanding efforts to address the serious humanitarian
and development challenges in the region. The United
States has provided over $275 million in 2014 for
humanitarian aid to the region. In a region where, as the
Special Envoy has told us, some 20 million are foodinsecure and some 6.5 million children are at risk of
moderate or severe malnutrition, we have focused the
largest proportion of that funding on the humanitarian
sectors most in need: agriculture and food security,
nutrition and economic recovery. We applaud the
efforts of the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Sahel, Robert Piper, to integrate humanitarian and
development efforts throughout the region, including

S/PV.7335

through coordinated support to refugees, internally
displaced persons and affected host communities.
For those bilateral and multilateral programmes
to be truly successful, the Governments in the region
must also redouble their efforts to make institutional
and governance reforms — a critical pillar of the
United Nations Sahel strategy. As we saw in Burkina
Faso recently, when political leaders turn their focus
away from their commitment to constitutionally
mandated processes, such as democratic elections,
then the Government loses its legitimacy and the trust
of its people. It becomes less stable, not more so. The
transitional Government of Burkina Faso must pay
particular care to ensure that effective preparation
is conducted for the previously scheduled national
elections in November 2015.
No matter how much humanitarian assistance is
provided, without important governance, rule-of-law
and democratic reforms, no amount of international
support will lead to the concrete positive gains that
the peoples of the region desire, we all seek and the
region requires. We welcome Special Envoy Sellassie’s
efforts to continue to encourage the region’s leaders
to undertake the kind of difficult institutional reforms
needed for lasting peace. I again thank her for leading
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. We anticipate strong results
from her work over the coming year and look forward
to our continued cooperation towards achieving peace,
stability and prosperity in the region.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As itself a Sahel country,
Mr. President, I particularly welcome Chad’s leadership
in organizing this briefing. I would like to thank
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Hiroute Guebre
Sellassie for her update on the efforts and response of
the United Nations to implement the integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which is not an easy task.
Since June, we have seen a very sharp increase in
targeted attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
in Mali, a deteriorating security situation in Libya,
political instability in Burkina Faso, barbaric terrorist
acts by Boko Haram and the first cases of Ebola in Mali.
Chronic fragility and instability continue to impact the
region and to pose a direct threat to civilians. There
are almost 25 million people in the Sahel — certainly
more than 20 million — who face food insecurity right
now. That is over 65 per cent of the population, which is
substantially more than the entire population of my own

14-684885/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

country. The region hosts over 1 million refugees. Its
population, which is the fastest-growing in the world,
is expected to double in the next 20 to 25 years, which
can only worsen the challenges.
The strategy can be a useful tool within the
United Nations system, and, more broadly, to provide
a multidimensional approach to address problems
that transcend the borders in the region. As always,
however, the challenge is in its implementation, which
has struggled to date. However, the strategy probably
remains the initiative with the most potential to bring
the existing plethora of security and development
actors under a single framework. With the large number
of actors in the Sahel, coordination is crucial but still
insufficient. A recent mapping exercise showed that
many of the core countries of the region were covered by
at least seven different regional or international Sahelfocused strategies. We must enhance coordination, or
the United Nations Sahel strategy itself will fail. At
the same time, coordination cannot be a substitute for
concrete action.
It has been just over a year since the SecretaryGeneral’s joint visit to region, together with the
Presidents of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. That is the model we need to achieve
results in complex situations like the Great Lakes and
the Sahel. When the Council last met on the Sahel in
June (see S/PV.7203), the Special Envoy spoke of the
importance of breaking down the institutional barriers
between those organizations to ensure better targeted
and coordinated action based on areas of comparative
advantage. I would welcome any further assessment
from her as to how that is being accomplished in
practice. Greater clarity on the division of labour
between her Office and the United Nations Office for
West Africa would also be useful.
We are encouraged by the growing leadership
from the region, including through the Ministerial
Coordination Platform. National ownership and political
will are obviously essential to achieve lasting progress.
The participation of the Group of Five Sahel in the
most recent meeting of the Platform, held in Bamako
on 18 November, was a necessary sign of increasing
coherence and cooperation. We welcome the Special
Envoy’s information today about the establishment of
an international contact group on the Sahel.

6/19

11/12/2014

Such cooperation is vital in particular in the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. The
Sahel has been particularly affected by that scourge,
with Al-Qaida affiliates in the region exploiting local
conflicts and weak State authority and taking advantage
of trafficking and criminal networks to move around
arms and resources. The trend of small-arms smuggling
in the region is increasing. Nowhere is that more
prevalent than in Libya — a pressing problem given
weak institutions and the continuing flow of weapons
out of the country. Clearly, the Security Council needs
to give Libya more attention. The interphase between
terrorism and transnational crime in the region is
clear. It is obviously fuelling conflict. That is why
the debate to be convened by Chad’s presidency next
week, as well as its initiative to put forward a draft
resolution to address the linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime holistically, will be
so useful. We pay tribute to French counter-terrorism
efforts in the Sahel through its regional military force,
Operation Barkhane. We also commend the efforts
to operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force
to combat Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. The
Council should support that initiative.
To deal with the terrorist threat we need not only
security and law-enforcement approaches, but also
efforts to counter violent extremism at the community
level. Programmes need to target youth in particular, the
largest demographic constituency in the region, perhaps
half of whom are without jobs and whom we know are
highly succeptible to radicalization. We urge the United
Nations to leverage the full range of development and
security entities to help build community resilience
against terrorism.
The Council’s Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains
a critical partner for national and regional counterterrorism strategies in the Sahel. Despite the Council’s
recent focus on Iraq and Syria, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and its Monitoring Team continue to target
Sahel-based Al-Qaida affiliates. The Committee’s most
recent listings, on 19 November, included two Libyabased entities associated with Al-Qaida in the Maghreb.
The key is for all United Nations entities, missions
and offices in the region, as well as agencies, counterterrorism bodies and the relevant sanctions committees
and groups of experts to work together in support of
joined-up solutions to address terrorism and organized
crime — for example, by helping to strengthen border
security.

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Beyond security, we also need to ensure that we
tackle the root causes of cyclical crises in the Sahel
region, including by strengthening governance, in
particular at the regional level. Providing concrete
support and programming to strengthen governance
over such a vast and diverse expanse is obviously a
challenge, but it is one that must be prioritized. We
need to see concrete projects on the ground to kick-start
change. We would welcome any further views from the
Special Envoy on how greater progress can be made in
this area.
In conclusion, while we remain confident that the
Sahel strategy is the right tool to address the challenges
of the region in a coordinated manner — and while
we are thankful for the Special Envoy’s efforts in that
direction — there is a very real risk that, absent concrete
programmes and real coordination, the strategy will
atrophy. We therefore continue to look to the leadership
of the Special Envoy to drive forward implementation.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this meeting. I also thank
the Special Envoy for her briefing and I offer her our
full support.
The immediate challenges posed by Ebola virus
disease in West Africa have attracted much of the
international community’s attention in recent months.
However, it is important that we do not lose sight of a
subregion that faces its own particular concerns and is
thus far managing to avoid a full-blown assault from
Ebola.
Almost two years on from the beginning of the
crisis in Mali, the Sahel region remains on the front line
in the struggles against jihadist terrorists — such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Eddine and the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa — drugtrafficking and organized crime, food insecurity and
poverty, and political instability. As we have seen
with recent events in Burkina Faso, the Sahel region
needs the support of the international community if
it is to stay on the path to long-lasting security and
development. That means not only responding to crises
effectively — and I commend the leadership of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States in Burkina Faso — but also taking early
preventative action to avoid instability and violence,
and in this area we must do better.
Success in resolving the Mali crisis continues to
elude us. In 2014, 31 members of the United Nations

S/PV.7335

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) have been killed and almost
100 wounded in attacks by terrorists. I commend
the brave MINUSMA peacekeepers, in particular
those from Chad, who face such terrorist threats on a
daily basis. Attacks against United Nations staff are
totally unacceptable. While work is under way in the
Council to strengthen the Mission’s capabilities and
its resilience to the terrorist threat, that alone will not
address the underlying causes of the crisis. Only a
political settlement will enable Mali to move forward to
a peaceful future. I commend the work of Algeria and
other mediators in bringing the parties to the negotiating
table. But let us be clear that the responsibility falls to
the parties themselves to find the peace that Mali’s
citizens deserve. It is important that they redouble
their efforts, work in a spirit of compromise and joint
endeavour, and find practical arrangements that will
enable the citizens of Mali to pick up their lives once
again.
The challenges facing the Sahel come from both
within and outside the region. To the South, the barbaric
behaviour of Boko Haram has shocked the world, yet it
has also brought Nigeria and her neighbours, the Niger,
Chad and Cameroon, to a better understanding of and
cooperation on mutual security. The United Kingdom is
supporting, and will continue to support, this important
work.
To the north, the prolonged struggle in Libya
continues to have repercussions for the Sahel, and
the growth of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
could threaten the region further. Meanwhile the
trafficking in weapons and narcotics across porous
borders continues to damage the social fabric and
prevent States from governing effectively. In the face
of these challenges, United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel provides a strong framework to enable
the region to tackle these diverse challenges. Its three
pillars, of governance, security and resilience, remain,
in our view, the right ones. Yet much more can be done
to implement the strategy’s priorities. A the Special
Envoy highlighted this morning, governance is critical.
We must work with Sahel States to strengthen human
rights, including the rights of women, and help to build
their capacity to deliver core services, particularly
outside the urban areas.
On security, we must continue to build States’
capacity to tackle organized crime, counter terrorism
and manage borders more effectively. The work of the

14-684887/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

Global Counterterrorism Forum and the creation of the
Group of Five Sahel can help to develop more effective
regional approaches.
On resilience, we need to upstream work on
developing food security, including preparing for shocks
through regional cooperation. With a further United
Nations appeal for the Sahel expected in February next
year, the risks of not doing this important work are
clear to see. The United Kingdom recently announced
a multi-year assistance programme for the Sahel worth
more than $160 million.
In coordinating international work on the Sahel,
the Special Envoy will have a important role to play. As
she takes forward the implementation of the integrated
strategy into 2015, she and her team in Dakar will have
the United Kingdom’s full support.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Chad for having convened this meeting devoted
to the Sahel under its presidency of the Security
Council. My thanks also go to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Guebre Sellassie, for her
briefing on the progress achieved in the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Her statement rightly underscored the important need
for the international community to have a coherent and
coordinated regional approach that is complementary
to national policies to strengthen governance, security,
resilience and development in the Sahel region.
Since the last time the Special Envoy addressed the
Council, in June (see S/PV.7203), the security situation
has continued to deteriorate in the north of Mali, in
Libya and around Lake Chad. Armed conflicts, the
proliferation of arms, transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking, and the links between such
criminal activities and terrorist groups, continue to
pose a serious threats to peace and security region.
The rise in violence has for further exacerbated
the extremely fragile humanitarian situation in the
Sahel. As the Special Envoy has just recalled, at least
20 million people remain exposed to food insecurity
and more than 6 million children are at risk of acute
malnutrition.
Today no State is in a position to meet those
challenges alone. Business as usual is no longer
an option. Strengthening regional cooperation is
imperative. Two initiatives are under way to that end,
which we welcome. On the one hand, there is the

8/19

11/12/2014

Ministerial Coordination Platform, chaired from 2013
to 2015 by Mali, which benefits from crucial national
and regional ownership and is supported by a technical
secretariat. On the other hand we have the Group of Five
Sahel, made up of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger and Chad. The third meeting of the Ministerial
Platform was held on 18 November in the presence,
for the first time, of the permanent secretary of the
Group of Five Sahel. In that context, I would like to
ask Ms. Sellassie to what extent closer work between
the two initiatives — the Ministerial Platform and the
Group of Five Sahel — could build trust among the
countries of the region to pave the way for stepped up
security cooperation.
In late October and early November, we witnessed
an unprecedented popular uprising in Burkina Faso,
which led to the resignation of the President and to the
establishment of transitional authorities in a peaceful
manner with respect for the Constitution. These
events illustrate the importance of strengthening the
legitimacy of States as a priority.
The Sahel countries will undoubtedly require
additional security capacities to meet the challenges
I have mentioned. At the same time, it is important
to encourage the emergence of institutions that are
accountable to citizens and able to provide basic
services to the entire population, including access to
justice. That would help to reduce internal tensions and
find lasting solutions to the root causes of instability
in the region. The participation of women, who are
often left outside decision-making process, must be
encouraged. Civil society must also be able to play
its full role. Governance that promotes development
and the resilience of democratic institutions serve as
effective bastions against violent radicalization and the
emergence of national and regional conflicts.
In parallel, particular attention must be paid to
border areas and to infrastructures that facilitate
regional integration. That will also make it possible to
improve territorial control and strengthen the authority
of the State throughout its territory. In that regard, I
should like to mention the fact that since 2012, as part
of our regional cooperation programmes, Luxembourg
has been financing, among other programmes, in
partnership with the West African Economic and
Monetary Union, a regional programme of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund known as Local
Cross-Border Initiative. The programme aims to
strengthen the governance framework for cross-

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7335

border cooperation in West Africa. At the regional and
national levels, it involves the adoption of strategies to
strengthen cooperation beyond borders. At the local
level, the programme has made it possible to develop
support tools for local authorities for financing crossorder investment. The tranche of the programme
related to the Niger, Mali and Burkina Faso clearly
illustrates the resolve of the local authorities of these
three countries to work together to create cross-border
socioeconomic development areas, which are also an
important part of regional integration.

Criminal networks have taken advantage of the porous
borders and large uninhabited spaces to traffick in arms.
To address this, the Nigerian Government is actively
engaged in cross-border intelligence sharing to monitor
the flow of weapons within our region. Combating
terrorists and criminal elements requires denying
them access to the weapons that fuel their activities.
We encourage genuine cooperation among States in
the region and beyond in order to develop a permanent
mechanism to address the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in the Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General of the full support
of Luxembourg in this task. Bolstered by these
cooperation programmes and Luxembourg’s longstanding relations with the countries of the Sahel region,
my country will continue to be resolutely engaged in
strengthening international efforts for peace, security
and development in the region — three objectives to
which the populations of the Sahel have long aspired.
Let us not dash their hopes.

In terms of governance, which is the second pillar of
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, it is essential that
countries of the region address the roots and triggers of
instability in order to minimize the potential for violent
conflict and strengthen the institutional framework
for peace, security and the rule of law. Exclusion and
marginalization are among the root causes of conflict.
In order to prevent conflict, therefore, political leaders
should do more to promote inclusion and foster a sense
of belonging among all groups and communities.
Inclusiveness is an attribute of good governance, and
where good governance prevails, the likelihood of
conflict is reduced. This is a challenge that countries
in the Sahel need to address in order to strengthen
national cohesion and lay the foundations for peace,
stability and progress.

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I wish to thank Special Envoy
Sellassie for her briefing.
The Sahel region continues to face many complex and
interconnected challenges in its political, humanitarian
and security landscape. Concerning security, which is
one of the three pillars of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, considerable challenges still
remain. Terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram, are active in the
region. These groups pose a grave threat to the peace
and security of the region and beyond. Fighting them
should remain a top priority for all Sahelian countries,
and indeed for the international community.
In that regard, the States members of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the Republic of Benin are
in the process of deploying a multinational joint task
force with the aim of combating and ultimately booting
out Boko Haram. The French Operation Barkhane has
gone a long way towards complementing our efforts at
combating terrorist networks in the Sahel and denying
them safe havens in the region. A sustainable solution
for countering terrorism in the region is of prime
importance. We therefore call on the international
community to continue to support initiatives that will
put an end to terrorism in the Sahel.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
remains a core contributor to insecurity in the Sahel.

In terms of resilience, the third pillar of the
integrated strategy for the Sahel, the region is still
faced with considerable challenges. The humanitarian
situation in the Sahel remains fragile, with millions
facing food insecurity, malnutrition and displacement.
Addressing these challenges will require sustained
engagement on the part of the international community.
We commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other international humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, such as the Red Cross, Oxfam and
Médecins Sans Frontières, for the admirable work they
are doing on the ground to bringi relief to the millions
of people in need of assistance.
While these efforts have helped to strengthen
resilience among communities in the Sahel, much more
needs to be done. We therefore urge the international
community not to relent in support of efforts to address
the humanitarian needs of the people in the Sahel.

14-684889/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting on peace and
security in the Sahel region. I am also grateful to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
region for her tireless efforts in mobilizing support to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which has three main pillars requiring an
integrated regional response to the various challenges
facing the region.
The deteriorating political, economic and cultural
situation in the Sahel have made it fertile ground for
terrorism. The growth of terrorist activity in the Sahel
by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram,
Ansar Eddine, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa and Al-Murabitun, as well as the spread
of organized transnational crime and of arms and drugs
have had a servere negative impact on the security of
individuals and societies in West Africa. Economic
vulnerability, extreme poverty and the lack of food
security suffered by more than 20 million people in the
area, as well as the impact of climate change and weak
governance and institutions, are extremely complex,
intertwined issues that are exacerbated by racial
conflicts and regional tensions. The suffering is tragic,
while the impact on democratic transitions and regional
coherence has been dire.
Peace and security in the region can be established
only through regional cooperation that paves the way
for appropriate solutions to all the overlapping and
intertwined problems in the region, particularly in
northern Mali. A comprehensive political analysis of
the Sahel would be the key to understanding the scope
of the crisis in Mali and to facilitating its transition.
On this basis, we must activate and operationalize
preventive diplomacy and redouble our coordination
efforts to promote dialogue and negotiations, while
respecting the unique cultural and linguistic identities
of the countries of the region. Marginalizing those
elements would lead to increased conflict. Therefore,
no long-term solution will emerge without consensual
social participation.
In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
the role of regional organizations in implementing
measures aimed at achieving stability in the region,
particularly by coordinating security between the
countries of the region, supporting Government efforts
to deal with structural challenges, and coming up
with mechanisms for building institutional capacities

10/19

11/12/2014

through an integrated vision, so as to operationalize the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
ensure its success in forming a regional system that can
grapple with the challenges in the region and achieve
peace and security there.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We note with great interest the briefing by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
Ms. Guebre Sellassie, and reiterate our full support to
her, as we did at the Council meeting on 19 June (see
S/PV.7203).
We consider the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel very
important, since it should focus not only on security but
also on such vital elements as development and social
inclusion. In our view it is fundamental to implement
policies that can help the population of the Sahel
emerge out of extreme poverty by creating sustainable
employment and fair income distribution within the
countries involved. We believe it is right to focus
that African problems must be dealt with essentially
by the countries of Africa. In that regard, we support
and welcome the work of the Group of Five Sahel in
strengthening cooperation on the integrated strategy, as
well as the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the
integrated strategy in the Sahel, chaired by Mali for the
next two years, and the efforts, supported by Chile, to
bring peace to northern Mali.
My delegation believes that particular attention
should be paid to strengthening the rule of law and its
institutions in the countries of the Sahel. A democratic
system is the best way to achieve equitable economic
development and ultimately peaceful co-existence.
We would urge that over the next few months free and
transparent elections be held in Burkina Faso leading
to a transition to a civilian Government in November.
Chile has always considered the protection of
civilians and the issue of internally displaced persons
to be important aspects of the work of the Security
Council. We are therefore concerned about the fact
that, according to the most recent data in the SecretaryGeneral’s June report (S/2014/397), the number of
internally displaced persons exceeds 3.3 million. In that
regard, we would like to ask Ms. Sellassie, working with
the relevant international organizations, to continue to
focus on finding a solution to the problem.
The Sahel region is currently facing not only
enormous social challenges but also those related to

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

terrorism, criminal activity and now Ebola. We firmly
believe that the way for the region to make progress is by
effectively implementing the United Nations integrated
strategy under the leadership of the Special Envoy and
other international institutions. For those efforts to
succeed, they require cooperation and responsibility on
the part of the national authorities in order to ensure
sustainability, strengthened institutions and respect
for human rights, and the definitive establishment of
democracy.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Sellassie for her
briefing, which reflects the evolution of the situation
in the Sahel region in all its manifold aspects, as well
as the main challenges and the steps being taken to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy in
the Sahel. The events in this turbulent area should
be the focus of constant attention on the part of the
international community.
The closely interrelated issues of improving the State
administration system, finding effective responses to
security problems, providing sustainable development
and addressing humanitarian challenges require
reliable collaborative efforts. In that regard, we believe
that Ms. Sellassie’s mandate should enable management
of the strategy to be centralized in one place, or we
will have to forget about the strategy’s comprehensive
nature. We cannot allow a practicable initiative to fall
to pieces. Moreover, it would be a fundamental error to
see the Sahara-Sahel region as a field where donors can
compete for spheres of influence.
The leading role in implementing the strategy
should belong to the States of the region themselves.
The role of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel is particularly important in that regard. We
believe that regular meetings in its format will help
achieve the desired goals and bring concrete results.
Another important element, in our view, is the Group of
Five Sahel, which is intended to be a kind of nucleus for
promoting and achieving major initiatives. Integrational
organizations, with the African Union at their head,
also play an irreplaceable role. United Nations bodies,
particularly their regional offices, also have important
functions.
The whole complex of security threats in the
region is a source of never-ending worry. The belt of
instability it represents across the continent is merging
with the highly turbulent Middle East region, and the

S/PV.7335

poorly controlled desert spaces of the Sahel serve
as an excellent bridge for terrorists and criminal
elements. The so-called Arab spring and outside
military intervention in Libya have had extremely bad
reverberations in the Sahara-Sahel. Mali found itself on
the verge of collapse, and only very recently have some
of the preconditions for normalizing the situation begun
to emerge. The threat posed by Boko Haram continues
its inexorable spread, producing a constant flow of
fresh victims among civilians. Political instability
and countless social ills are fueling negative trends
and increasing radicalization among young people. It
is therefore particularly important to respond swiftly
and appropriately to dangerous incidents in the political
arena, such as the recent events in Burkina Faso.
At the same time, we do not agree that interference
is needed in the internal affairs of States in the region
or their electoral processes on the pretext of preventing
possible crises and on the basis of contrived, ambiguous
and politically motivated concepts such as early
indicators. We hope that consistent implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy, with the
participation of interested partners, will contribute
to overall improvement of the situation and raise the
standard of living of the people in the region.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to welcome and thank
Ms. Sellassie, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, for her briefing, which we have
studied and carefully.
In our view, Mr. Prodi’s outline of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which covers
security, governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues, represented a significant step
towards achieving an essential integrated approach to
the Sahel. When I talk about an integrated approach,
I also mean a sincere approach to the issue of the
Sahel, because it is that kind of approach that makes
it possible to aspire to greater effectiveness and
coherence in the context of a multitude of national,
regional and international programmes. That coherence
and coordination — which the Special Envoy has
defined as one of her goals — are indispensable,
urgent and essential if we are to continue to maintain
full attention on the Sahel region. Without such an
integrated approach and coordinated action among the
multiple players at various levels, it seems to us that we
could risk getting lost in the individual characteristics

14-6848811/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

11/12/2014

of the various conflicts that ensnare the countries in
the region.

situation worsens or is transformed in the certain need
for development.

For example, the legitimate fight against terrorism
is essential. The primary cause will be illuminated
in the project. Humanitarian issues might be another
priority area. That is why we believe that it is essential
to understand that working on isolated aspects is
ineffective. We support the integrated approach by
which various areas — humanitarian efforts, promoting
and protecting human rights, eradicating cross-border
crime, fighting against and eradicating terrorism,
eradication of poverty — are all addressed together. I
believe that is the most concrete step we can and should
take.

In that sense the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel is essential in reminding us that a response
focused on security alone is insufficient. There must
be a parallel concentration on development and a
dignified life, particularly in a region — as noted many
times — with one of the lowest human development
indexes in the world. In our view, not only in the Sahel
but in various parts of the world, ensuring security as
the axis of the rule of law and development has not led
to progress. We have seen the failures. Poverty cannot
be eradicated on the basis of solutions from countries
that have focused only on security. That approach only
punishes the poor; it does not eliminate poverty.

With that in mind, Argentina endorses the
congratulations addressed to the countries of the
Sahel region that have clearly taken this necessity on
board, as shown by the third meeting of the ministerial
coordination platform for the Sahel, held last month in
Bamako. We welcome the specific steps taken at the
meeting to strengthen coordination, adopting the terms
of reference for the platform and the thematic groups
that have been established. We also welcome greater
coordination among the platform and the Group of Five
Sahel.
With respect to the individual issues examined
on 18 November, I wish to briefly say that Argentina
agrees with the conclusions of the platform regarding its
concerns and condemns the many attacks on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We therefore call on the parties to
make progress in the talks in Algeria, whose work with
the members of the mediation team we deeply value.
We also agree with the assessment of the grave
situation in Libya and the support expressed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
that country. That situation reminds us of the need to
respond to the structural causes of conflicts. Absent
that, the various illegal networks and the threat posed
by various extremist and terrorist groups operating
in the region will continue to spread. It is also true
that they will continue to spread if we continue with
business as usual. It is not written in stone that the
Sahel, more than any other region in the world, is
condemned to be packed with weapons, perpetrators
of violence and extremist and terrorist groups. The
actions of the countries of the region and of the
international community will determine whether the

12/19

In that respect, as it is my delegation’s last meeting
with Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, I would like to
reiterate two items of importance to my country.
First, I recall that the primary responsibility for
peace and security and development in the countries of
the Sahel is that of the countries of the region themselves.
It is they who must address the deep structural roots of
their problems and conflicts and strengthen agreements
and strategies to implement programmes and policies
through short-, medium- and long-term plans to resolve
those structural problems and conflicts. However,
Argentina very much believes in the importance of
the support that the international community and the
United Nations should provide, especially taking into
account the challenges due to climate change and the
economic and financial crisis that originated in the
wealthiest countries of the world. Their effects are also
impacting on the Sahel region.
Secondly, I wish to stress that many of the problems
are, in our opinion, consequences of structural causes
that must be met with substantive information and not
palliative measures. We cannot just point a finger and
say that countries of the region need to strengthen the
rule of law and decide to move towards sustainable
human development. I believe we must also look at each
other, as the international community, and ask ourselves
whether we might also contribute to sustainable human
development in the Sahel by changing the disciplines
and structure of the functioning of the global economic
system, so that the economic and financial instruments
might serve sustainable human development, rather
than generate, again and again, injustice and inequality.

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Today’s meeting has meaning only insofar as
it supports the efforts of the countries of the region
and keeps the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel on the Council’s agenda. However, in
considering ways to achieve a more substantive and
enriching discussion, Argentina considers it would be
useful to be able to rely on concrete measures to assess
implementation. We therefore invite the Council to
consider how to ensure that the follow-up to the issue
will be more effective.
I recall that at the Council’s most recent meeting (see
S/PV.7203) we said it would be important, for example,
to have detailed information of the disbursements of the
$1.5 billion that was promised for new investments in
the region by the World Bank Group. We also suggested,
with regard to all the programmes and approaches to
be presented in the reports, requiring objective data
on the accounting of all funds assigned to each of
the strategic goals and implemented programmes, as
well as assessments of the impacts. No one is against
follow-up mechanisms. Everybody recognizes that they
are necessary. To us they seem essential to be able to
maintain the dynamic that has kept attention focused on
the Sahel since 2013, and to continue making it visible
within the complex reality of the region.
The human rights of women, children, girls and
boys cannot be guaranteed by minimal or scattered
efforts. We should work through integrated action and
strategic coordination to ensure that women, children,
the youth — everyone, as Amartya Sen said — can live
without fear, hunger or discrimination. We are confident
that appropriate implementation of the integrated
strategy will enable significant progress in solving the
structural causes of conflict. That is why ensuring its
implementation is the best and most sincere response
we can provide to ensure peace and security in the
Sahel.

S/PV.7335

the ever more serious threat of transnational organized
crime. The Sahel covers a broad area, with interrelated
traditional and non-traditional conflicts. China believes
that the issues in the Sahel region must be tackled
comprehensively at three levels: the national, regional
and international.
First, we should focus on the settlement of regional
hot-spot issues. At present, the political and security
situation in Libya is deteriorating. The national
reconciliation process in Mali is on a difficult and
treacherous road. The political transition in Burkina
Faso is also fragile. The international community
should therefore take targeted measures on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned
so as to help the countries of the region to push forward
political processes aimed at improving the security
situation and promoting national reconciliation, with a
view to de-escalating tension in hotspot situations and
seeking lasting solutions.
Secondly, proactive support should be provided
to regional and subregional organizations in their
efforts to maintain regional peace and stability. China
appreciates the successful mediation efforts of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States on the issues of Mali and Burkina Faso
and supports the African approach of the resolution of
African issues by the Africans themselves.
We welcome the development of collective
security mechanisms by regional organizations such
as the African Union and support the planning and
establishment of the rapid-reaction force for the crisis
in Africa. African regional organizations enjoy unique
advantages in resolving African issues and as such
deserve the support of the international community.

At present, the situation in the Sahel region is
generally stable, with continuing economic growth and
steady progress in the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

Thirdly, coordination and cooperation between
the United Nations and the international financial
institutions should be strengthened. The lack of
development and development imbalances figure among
the root causes of the conflict in the region. In the past
year, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, together with
the heads of the World Bank and other international
financial institutions, have visited the Sahel and raised
a large amount of resources for the countries in the
region, thus making important contributions to their
national development and poverty-reduction processes.

On the other hand, there are also multiple challenges
in the Sahel region, such as the fragile security situation,
development imbalances, the spread of terrorism and

At the same time, a new model was launched
involving tripartite cooperation among the United
Nations, international financial institutions and regional

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the convening of today’s meeting. We also
thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.

14-6848813/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

organizations, in a concerted effort to settle regional hotspot issues. Thereafter, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
together with the President of the World Bank, also
visited the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa,
with positive results. We hope that the United Nations
will continue with such visits and draw lessons from
successful experiences, so as to further promote the
economic and social development of the countries in
the region.
The Government of China attaches great importance
to our relations with Africa. Through bilateral channels,
it has made its utmost effort to provide assistance to
the countries concerned in the Sahel region. China
also proactively supports United Nations peacekeeping
operations in countries such as Mali. We are also
exploring with the African Union ways of providing
support to the rapid-reaction force for the African crisis.
China is ready to continue to make contributions,
together with the rest of the international community, to
promoting the settlement of hot-spot issues in the Sahel
region and help the countries in the region to achieve at
the soonest long-term peace and stability and security.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important briefing. I should also like to extend my
appreciation to Special Envoy Sellassie for her update
on the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel.
The Sahel region continues to face considerable
challenges, with terrorism and extremism gaining
momentum in the region as a result of porous borders
and weak institutions. We are particularly concerned
at the alarming situation in the north of Mali and at
reports of the pledge of support to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant from Boko Haram Nigeria, Ansar
Beit al-Maqdis in Egypt and Ansar al-Sharia in Libya,
worrying developments that could further threaten the
stability of the entire region.
The political and security instability of some of
the countries in the region such as in Libya, which has
become a safe haven for numerous armed and terrorist
groups and is on the brink of an all-out civil war, could
further impede real progress in the region. The high
level of youth unemployment, the chronic humanitarian
situation and the impact of the recent Ebola outbreak
in the region are cross-cutting challenges that need
to be addressed through a comprehensive and holistic
approach.

14/19

11/12/2014

The task of addressing these interlinked challenges
is daunting but not impossible. We already have a
clearly defined approach through the United Nations
strategy for the Sahel, which encompasses governance,
security and an integrative development mechanism.
The real challenge remains the implementation of that
strategy and for it to produce tangible results.
To achieve that, the implementation of the Sahel
strategy must be owned by the countries of the region,
with the strong support of the international community.
We commend in that regard the joint visit last year of
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union, the Presidents of the World Bank and of the
African Development Bank, as well as the European
Union. In addition, there is a need to, first, enhance
coordination and synergy between key regional and
multilateral partners so as to maximize effectiveness
and avoid duplication; secondly, to ensure the rapid
disbursement of pledges, which is critical in addressing
the interlinked challenges in the region, particularly
in building self-resilience and ownership; thirdly, to
promote cross-border cooperation between the Sahel,
the Maghreb and the West Africa and central African
regions in the fight against the spread of terrorism;
and, fourthly, building respective national security
capacities as well as supporting the efforts of the
African Union in establishing and operationalizing the
African Standby Force.
As the time frame for the implementation plan of
the strategy is set to end by 2016, we would like to
recommend a review of the strategy and its readjustment
in accordance with developments on the ground.
In conclusion, Rwanda remains committed to
continuing to provide full support to the United Nations
strategy with a view to bringing about long-term peace
and stability in the Sahel region.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel for her briefing and to reiterate
France’s full support for her mission.
The stabilization of Mali is of crucial importance
for the Sahel. After having mobilized the attention and
energy of the Security Council for two years, Mali
is now entering a period that could be historic. The
peace negotiations under way in Algiers are bringing
together the Malian parties for the first time under the
auspices of the international community as a whole. In
that regard, I should like to welcome the investment

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

of all international partners in these negotiations, in
particular Algeria and the United Nations.
An inclusive and truly applied peace agreement
in Mali would have beneficial consequences for the
entire Sahel region and beyond, and there would be
a clear improvement of security in the region. At this
crucial time, the United Nations and, more broadly,
the international community as a whole have a major
responsibility to fulfil. We must continue to encourage
the parties in Mali to negotiate in a spirit of compromise
in order to conclude a lasting and inclusive peace
agreement.
France is very committed to helping the countries
of the Sahel to meet the challenges they face. In
addition to its involvement in the European Union and
the United Nations, in 2013, France revised the SahelSaharan strategy it had launched in its national capacity
in 2008. Our strategy is to develop a comprehensive
approach combining issues security, governance
and development. The French Sahelo-Saharan
strategy covers the cooperation of France with six
countries — Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso,
the Niger and Chad.
The strategy focuses in particular on the following
four priorities: first, to contributing to improving the
living conditions of the population, through, inter alia,
access to basic services, opening up remote areas,
expanding the State’s territorial network and sustainable
economic development; secondly, strengthening the
capacity of States to give them the means to fight against
terrorism and large-scale trafficking; thirdly, fighting
against radicalization by supporting the development
of education and the media; and fourthly, encouraging
and facilitating regional security cooperation. The
French Sahelo-Saharan strategy represents more than
€400 million — $500 million — in bilateral development
assistance each year. As part of this strategy, France
makes 160 technical and security experts available to
these countries.
The French military Operation Barkhane represents
the contribution of France to the fight against terrorism
and to the improvement of security in the Sahel.
Operation Barkhane was launched on 1 August 2014 at
the request of five countries of the Sahel and in close
collaboration with them. It mobilizes more than 3,000
soldiers, substantial air assets and hundreds of vehicles.
Operation Barkhane’s efforts are regional in scope in
order to deal with the movement of terrorist groups in

S/PV.7335

the Sahel. It has two objectives: first, to fight against the
terrorist threat at the regional level — last night, during
an operation near Gao, French forces killed one of key
terrorist leaders in the Sahel, the former military chief
of the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa,
who was personally responsible for several murders
and takings of hostages; and secondly, helping to build
the security capacity of the Sahel States.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel should help all stakeholders to coordinate their
efforts for the Sahel. The variety of initiatives over the
Sahel — from the United Nations, the European Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the World Bank, the African Union — is the sign of a
strong mobilization of the international community. I
welcome in this regard the creation of the Group of Five
Sahel, which aims to coordinate the efforts of the key
countries concerned.
To be effective, it is important that these strategies
be coordinated. In that context, the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel, implemented at
the time of the Secretary-General’s visit to the Sahel
in November 2013, is a unique framework, which, now
chaired by Mali, is the only forum that brings together
all the States of West and North Africa, as well as
concerned international and regional organizations. I
welcome the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General’s
efforts to bring about convergence of the regional
and international efforts for the Sahel. I particularly
welcome the strengthening of cooperation between
Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group of
Five Sahel countries.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
should result in concrete projects in all areas. In the
area of governance, a significant number of elections
in the Sahel and West Africa will be held next year.
The United Nations objective will be to assist States
that seek such support in organizing the elections in a
transparent and credible manner.
On the occasion of the fifteenth Francophonie
summit, held on 29 and 30 November in Dakar,
President François Hollande praised the courage that
the people of Burkina Faso have demonstrated in recent
weeks. Their example shows that it is the people who
must decide their futures. We hope that the Burkina
Faso people will now master this transition process and
ensure that reconciliation is achieved and that free and
fair elections will be held within a year.

14-6848815/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

Next, in the area of security, the Secretary-General
recalled that the terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
the Sahel increased from 60 per cent in 2013 compared
to 2012. The United Nations has as its mission to
assist States in the region and African organizations
to strengthen their cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We support the operationalization of these
initiatives in the context of African architecture of
peace and security.
Finally, in the humanitarian and development
field, in 2014, it is estimated that there are more than
20 million people suffering from food insecurity in the
region. Five million children are threatened by a risk of
serious malnutrition. The development of desert areas
should be a major focus of the efforts of the international
community. In each of these areas, Mr. President, you
can count on France’s strong commitment.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her briefing on
the progress towards implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I also wish to
commend the United Nations Office for West Africa for
its dedicated efforts in the region.
It is encouraging that the United Nations, as well as
the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), has developed
integrated strategies addressing the multiple challenges
of the Sahel. These strategies must be operationalized
in a coordinated manner to ensure the most effective
impact on the security, governance and resilience
of countries in the Sahel region. Strengthening
coordination and increasing collaboration with and
among the countries of the region as well as among
different stakeholders remains key. The third meeting
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform, held on
18 November in Bamako, was another positive step in
that regard.
For its part, the European Union (EU) is actively
engaging in the Sahel and, in view of the significant
developments in recent months, is updating its strategic
approach. Considerable EU efforts are focused on
strengthening security sector reform, via, namely,
the European Union Training Mission (EUTM) to
contribute to the training of the Malian Armed Forces,
and the civilian missions — the EU Capacity Building
Mission (EUCAP) Sahel in the Niger and the recently

16/19

11/12/2014

deployed EUCAP Sahel in Mali. As part of the EUTM,
my country continues to contribute to these efforts.
Since last June, when Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Sellassie first briefed the Council
(S/PV.7203), we have witnessed further deterioration
of the political, security and humanitarian situation
in the Sahel region. Humanitarian and development
challenges, as well as adverse effects of climate change
and the threat of an Ebola outbreak, pose significant
threats. Over 24 million people face food insecurity,
6 million children are malnourished and at least
3.3 million are displaced. The unemployment rates
are high and people, especially youth, are at risk of
being recruited by terrorist groups. The circulation of
and much too easy access to illicit arms compounds
continuing violence, disrupting and damaging civilian
lives and fuelling human rights violations.
The scourge of terrorism remains a major threat
across the Sahel. Weak governance, porous borders,
cross-border organized crime and the spread of terrorist
groups, notably Boko Haram, are the very acute
challenges that could further destabilize the situation
in the region. The recent attacks at Kano Central
Mosque in Nigeria left scores of innocent civilians
dead or injured. During the past months, terrorist
attacks throughout northern Mali have also claimed
lives, including those of United Nations peacekeepers.
As activities of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
other Sahel terrorist groups are increasingly financed
by drug dealing and smuggling, the nexus of drug
trafficking and terrorism in the Sahel is an increasingly
disturbing trend.
The foregoing are huge challenges for the region,
requiring complex, well-coordinated responses and
consistent engagement of regional and subregional
organizations, the United Nations and the international
community at large. In particular, further enhancement
of cooperation and coordination of intelligence
and information sharing, reinforcement of existing
mechanisms, in particular the Sahel Fusion and Liaison
Unit, and regular meetings of the heads of intelligence
and security services in the countries of the SaheloSaharan region play a key role in stepping up efforts to
counter the spread of the threat of terrorism.
It is essential that the United Nations counterterrorism machinery, in combination with the efforts of
other relevant international organizations, continue its
focused and needs-based assistance to countries in the

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

region. It is also important that the countries of the Sahel
region increase their individual and collective efforts
against cross-border security threats, including by
strengthening border controls and curbing the flows of
arms, as well as the movement of illegal armed groups,
across the region. We welcome the commitment of the
African Union and regional partners to strengthening
relevant mechanisms, including the Nouakchott Process
on security cooperation across the Sahel and the efforts
of the Group of Five Sahel.
The crisis in Mali affects the whole Sahel and can
be resolved only through a comprehensive, inclusive
and transparent peace process. It is regrettable that
the ongoing negotiations in Algiers have not yet
concluded in a sustainable peace agreement. Further
delay of such an agreement will only exacerbate the
security situation in northern Mali and, eventually, the
region. The United Nations, regional mediators and the
international community should send a strong message
of expectation that the Algiers process should lead to
durable peace, within the agreed parameters and with
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Mali.
As the situation in Libya remains dire, enhanced
efforts should be focused on finding a political solution,
bringing all parties to the negotiation table and putting
an end to the bloodshed and division in the country.
Absent the progress on the political and security
tracks, Libya risks becoming just another hotbed of
radical extremism and terrorism, with most serious
consequences for the entire region.
My delegation commends the joint efforts of the
United Nations, the AU and ECOWAS in Burkina
Faso, which led to the signing of a charter for the
transition and appointment of the civilian President of
the Transition in Burkina Faso. We will remain vigilant
on the political situation in the country and on the
transition leading to the elections in November 2015.
An implementation plan of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel with a focus on
governance, security and resilience has been developed.
It is now essential to ensure its swift implementation
through coherent and systematic activities on the
ground and the delivery of tangible results that ensure
the genuine sustainable development of the region and
benefit all its people.

S/PV.7335

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ms. Hiroute Sellassie, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.
Since the joint high-level visit to the Sahel region,
led by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in November
last year, the international community has scaled up
the political commitments and resources to respond to
a multitude of threats across the Sahel. The countries
of the Sahel and their partners have also pursued closer
cooperation and coordination. However, the Sahel
region continues to face persistent challenges in the
security, political and humanitarian sectors. Porous
borders and political instability facilitate transnational
organized crime, such as the flow of illicit arms and
drug trafficking, often providing a safe haven for
terrorist groups. In this regard, we believe the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is instrumental
in tackling the multifaceted challenges.
I would like to make a few observations regarding
the implementation of the strategy. First, with
regard to security, building security capabilities and
strengthening regional security cooperation is essential.
Increased threats across the Sahel, such as those coming
from the precarious situation in northern Mali and the
impact of Boko Haram on the whole region, are all
aggravating the vulnerability of the Sahel region. More
effective border controls, as well as counter-terrorism
cooperation, are necessary to meet such challenges.
In this vein, we take note of the recent joint efforts
undertaken by Nigeria and its neighbouring countries,
Benin, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger through the
framework of the Lake Chad Basin Commission. We
also recognize the meeting on the issue of Boko Haram
held in Abuja last September. We support more effective
security cooperation, including information-sharing
and joint patrols among the countries in the region.
Secondly, with regard to resilience, in order to
ensure lasting peace and stability in the region it is
imperative to tackle the chronic problems, such as
widespread environmental degradation, food insecurity
and the lack of opportunities for the youth. We are
especially concerned about growing displacement
caused by extremists, as demonstrated by more than
1.5 million people fleeing Boko Haram. In the Sahel,
millions of people remain at risk of food insecurity,
including children suffering from acute malnutrition.
Long-term and sustained solutions to this humanitarian
crisis must be solved to address the root cause of in the
instability in the region.

14-6848817/19

S/PV.7335

Peace and security in Africa

Lastly, coherence and coordination should be
improved for the various initiatives in the Sahel.
Avoiding overlap and prioritizing resources is
important to ensure assistance for the Sahel in the most
efficient and effective way. We note the efforts of the
Group of Five Sahel to ensure coordination with the
United Nations, including the holding of the ministerial
coordination platform meeting in Bamako last month.
We look forward to continued coordination through the
central role of that platform.
The international community should maintain
its commitment to advancing governance, improving
security and carrying out long-term plans for resilience
in the Sahel region. The Republic of Korea will continue
to support these efforts for peace and development in
the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I too thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her
briefing, and I congratulate her on her leadership.
Faced with the situation in the Sahel region,
characterized by multifaceted challenges, the
international community must waste no time in taking
action. Following the high-level visit of the SecretaryGeneral to the Sahel region in 2013, significant resources
have been mobilized in order to promote projects for
peace, stability and development. In this regard, we
welcome the $8.25 billion mobilized for projects to
stimulate growth and eliminate poverty, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/542) of
24 July on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
We underscore the fact that underdevelopment, in
particular youth unemployment, establishes a link
between terrorism and criminality, and we reiterate that
peace, stability, security and development go hand in
hand.
Chad takes note of the conclusion of the third
meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, which was held in
Bamako on 18 November.
Chad firmly condemns terrorist acts, specifically
those against the soldiers and facilities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We are counting on the Malian
authorities to carry out investigations and bring the

18/19

11/12/2014

perpetrators of those terrorist acts to justice. We
encourage the Special Envoy to continue to emphasize
the coordination of various initiatives for the Sahel and
to lend an attentive ear to the priorities of the countries
in the region, in particular the Group of Five Sahel.
We remain confident that the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, which has inspired
so much hope, will soon bring the benefits of
socioeconomic development, governance and security
to the countries of the region. The Security Council
urgently needs to give priority to regulating conflicts
in the region, in particular in Libya and northern Mali.
Moreover, it is also important to address the acts
of the Boko Haram terrorist group, which pose a grave
menace to peace and security in the Sahel as well as
in West and Central Africa. In that regard, we call
for a multifaceted platform of support, such as the
Nouakchott process, the Group of Five Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. The security of the countries in the region
lies in the strengthening of cooperation and coordination
to combat terrorism and transnational criminality. It is
in those countries that peace and security, the key to
development, will need to be established.
Finally, in accordance with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/17, of 27 August 2014, addressed
to the Secretariat, we request that the information
exchanges be strengthened with the countries of the
region through their representatives in New York in
order to better ensure monitoring of the strategy’s
implementation.
As other delegations have done, I would like to ask
a questionof the Special Envoy. Given the increasingly
worrisome deterioration in the security situation, how
can the strategy help to operationalize the initiatives I
have mentioned in order to strengthen cooperation and
coordination in the security sector among the States of
the region?
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Sellassie to respond to the
comments and questions of delegations.
Ms. Sellassie: On the first question — whether
partners working in the Sahel have managed to break
down institutional barriers and are working together — in
my briefing today I highlighted a few examples of joint
programming and partnership in the Sahel: the partnership

14-68488

11/12/2014

Peace and security in Africa

between the World Bank and the United Nations,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
European Union and the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. Of course, as
we strengthen our coordination mechanism, as was
the case in November during the last meeting of the
Ministerial Coordinating Platform, we hope that it will
yield more partnerships among the partners.
On the question on how the mandate of my Office
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel is demarcated from that of United Nations
Office for West Africa (UNOWA), my Office has been
mandated to facilitate the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is a tool
put in place to address the root, structural and systemic
causes of instability in the Sahel. That is expected to
be done through regional analysis and programming.
I coordinate the efforts of the whole United Nations
family in the Sahel. UNOWA is the United Nations
response to crisis and to preventive diplomacy. We
in my Office have been tasked to address root causes
through medium- and long-term programming. The
geographical area is also slightly different: the Sahel
includes part of West Africa, but it goes beyond that
region. I have just given Council members a few
highlights of the different roles we have.
(spoke in French)
On the question as to what extent bringing together
the Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group
of Five Sahel could help face the challenges in the
Sahel, during the second meeting of the Platform, Mali
was asked by the participants to engage the members
of the Group of Five Sahel and to invite them to the
third meeting. The reason was because they needed
greater clarity on the role of those two mechanisms. It
is now clear to everyone, especially following the third
meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform, held
in Bamako last month, which included the participation
of the interim Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five
Sahel, that the role of the Group is in fact an initiative
of the five priority countries of the region. It is an
initiative for national ownership of their future, and
also a mechanism for cooperation to assess and develop
common programmes. The roles are therefore clear.
The Coordination Platform coordinates the efforts of

S/PV.7335

all partners and brings together partners and countries
of the region, not just countries of the Sahel but of the
Maghreb as well as some countries of Central Africa
and West Africa. That coming together, along with the
fact that Group of Five Sahel is now a member of the
Platform, has served to clarify the roles. I think the
clarification of roles will facilitate work on the ground.
(spoke in English)
On the last question — how my Office can enhance
regional cooperation given the deteriorating security
situation — that is in fact the purpose of my Office. As
members have seen, what we have been attempting to do
since the beginning is to enhance coordination among
partners and between countries of the region. That will
be a tactic that we will pursue in the coming months.
But it also our duty to highlight to all concerned that
a situation that is not given enough attention, like the
one in Libya or the regionalization of the Boko Haram
phenomenon, has an impacting on the Sahel. I therefore
think that advocacy and programming will help to
operationalize regional cooperation in the Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Sellassie for her clarifications to the questions posed.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chad.
My question was not just limited to cooperation.
When I asked how the strategy for the Sahel could
coordinate all the different initiatives, I had in mind
the Nouakchott process, the Group of Five Sahel,
the Coordination Platform and, in particular, the
Multinational Joint Task Force for the Lake Chad
Basin. All those endeavours converge in a single goal,
which is to combat terrorism and reduce insecurity. I
simply wanted to know whether the Special Enovy had
an approach to bring all those efforts together and to
channel energies. I do not mean for her to respond to me
now, in public. I hope we can continue our conversation
after the meeting.
I once again resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

14-6848819/19
