UNITED NATIONS

_.

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS

1
UN LBMRY

THIRTIETH

OCTj 3883

YEAR

1816 th

MEETING: 25 FEBRUARY 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 18 16) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,................

1

L.W /

Th

Root

PleG

on

SlPV.1816

NOTE

fi’:(, 4 : Cd.3y@$&+$&Jnited
+

Nations documents are composed of capital letters com“bm&i with %&es. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
ouarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the ‘Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1816th

MEETING

,Held in New York on Tuesday, 25 February 1975, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. HUANG Hua (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendaIl816)
1.
2.

Adoption of the agenda
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625)
The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

3 . Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, I wish to take
this opportunity to congratulate you upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for
February. You have already presided over the Council
with great distinction. I am confident, Mr. Huang
Hua, that with your great wisdom you will guide our
deliberations ably in the days ahead. Nor do I wish
to overlook the abilities of Mr. Tchernouchtchenko,
the representative of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, who was President of the Council last
month. No meeting was held during his presidency,
but his diplomatic gifts would have been of great
service to the Council if it had met.
4. The delegation of Japan is most grateful for your
kind welcome. We feel highly honoured to return to
the Council. I wish to express my appreciation also
to Mr. Maiik of the Soviet Union for his words
of welcome to my delegation. We wish to thank also
the representative of France for his delegation’s
kind offer to collaborate with the delegations taking
their seats on the Council this year.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625)
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
In accordance with the decision taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece to participate in the debate without the right
to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clerides
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.
-2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
In accordance with the decision taken at the 1815th
meeting, and with the consent of the Council, I invite
the representative of Bulgaria to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber
in order to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President. Mr. Grozev
(Bulgaria) took the pla>e reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

5. We are very conscious of the duties incumbent
upon our country as a member of the United Nations
organ which is primarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security. As an
Asian country elected by the General Assembly to a
seat for the Asian Members of the United Nations,
we shall exert our best efforts to reflect the aspirations
and ideals of Asian countries in promoting world
peace in this great body.
6 . On behalf of my Government I wish to assure the
Council that Japan will do everything within its power
to co-operate with all members of the Council in
helping to solve the international problems that now
confront the Council or will be brought before it in
the years ahead.
- .
7. Much to the regret of the delegation of Japan,
the situation in the Republic of Cyprus has recently
taken a turn for the worse. Since the statement of
13 February by Mr. Denktas [S/11624, annex II],
the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community, who
announced the establishment of an autonomous
Turkish Cypriot structure “on the basis of a secular
and federated State” which would be a part of Cyprus
under a new federal constitution, relations between
the two Cypriot communities have seriously
deteriorated.

another country. These principles shonld be the
starting point for all efforts to bring about a settlement of this complex problem.“’

8 . The Cypriot representative, in requesting an urgent
meeting of the Security Council [S/11625], accused
Turkey of violating the provisions of the two recent
basic documents which state United Nations policy
regarding the Cyprus problem: General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and
Security Council resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December
1974, in which the Council endorsed that resolution
and asked the Secretary-General to report on progress
in implementing it.

1 3 . In the light of the present situation, we consider
particularly valuable the General Assembly’s commendation of the contacts that were then taking place
“on an equal footing” between the rep{esentatives
’ of the two communities, with the good offtces of the
Secretary-General. The Assembly’s further statement
that “all the refugees should return to the/r homes in
safety”, and the recommendation that ;the parties
concerned undertake “urgent efforts to ‘that end”,
also commends itself, in the view of my delegation,
to all who seek a humane and lasting’ settlement
for the good of the sorely tried people of the island.
I
1 4 . My delegation wishes to confirm also its support
of Security Council resolution 353 (1974), [adopted on
20 July 1974, at a time when the outbreak of serious
violence and bloodshed was already cr&ting, as it
stated, “a most explosive situation in the whole
eastern Mediterranean area”. The Gnfortunate
occurrences at that time led the Secuaty Council
to include -in the resolution a call for a cease-fire,
and a request that all States refrain from any action
which. might further aggravate the situation. In
addition, its resolution requested the States concerned
-Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom-to enter
into negotiations without delay “for the: restoration
of peace in the area and constitutional
in Cyprus”.

9. The annexes to the Secretary-General’s special
report on developments in Cyprus, dated 18 February
1975 [S/11624], contain the texts of replies to the
Secretary-General from the Cypriot and Greek
Governments. These offer assurances that they are
working to carry out the terms of the General
Assembly resolution. In these circumstances, the
delegation of Japan whole-heartedly supported the
Secretary-General’s initiative in going to Athens and
Ankara to discuss the question of Cyprus with the
Greek and Turkish Governments.
1 0 . My delegation listened with great interest to the
general conclusions formulated by the SedretaryGeneral last Friday in this chamber as a result of
his visit to these two countries [f814?h meeting].
11. The delegation of Japan gave its whole-hearted
support to General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
which was adopted unanimously, and to Security
Council resolution 365 (1974), approved with no
dissenting vote. It was our considered opinion then,
as it is today, that the two Cypriot communities
and, needless to say, the States concerned, should
do their utmost to comply with the terms of the
resolutions adopted by both the General Assembly
and the Security Council. The Council resolution
urges the parties concerned to implement the Assembly
resolution as soon as possible. The Assembly resolution calls upon all States “to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain from all
acts and interventions directed against it”, and it also
states that the “constitutional system of the Republic
of Cyprus concerns both the Greek Cypriot and the
Turkish Cypriot communities”.

1 5 . Indeed, in this new and dangerous
problem, my delegation wishes to endorse all the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council,
beginning with resolution 353 (1974). We[would urge
the Council to take all feasible measures to bring
about the resumption of negotiations so {hat the full
implementation of these resolutions may be achieved.
16. With regard to the resumption of negotiations,
I wish to emphasize, in the first place, our firm
belief that whatever framework of negotiations is
agreed upon, the core of the negotiatiobs must be
the direct talks between the two communities. Unless
full communication is maintained by the two communities, a mutually acceptable political settlement
cannot be arrived at. There has been a suggestion
that the forum of the negotiations should
to enable third parties to participate.
the feasibility of this approach, the
Secretary-General, who has been
in mediation efforts, should be given great weight,
and the agreement of the two sides would naturally
have to be sought. In any event, we
States concerned not to jeopardize the
to help it to produce results and to
results spontaneously reached in the

1 2 . On this last point, I should like to recall a relevant
statement I made in the General Assembly on 3 1 October 1974 during its debate on the Cyprus question.
I said:
“It seems to my delegation that although the
views of the parties concerned are far apart on
many important questions, they are all agreed on
the central and most essential principle, that is, that
any solution should be based on respect for the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. They are
also agreed in opposing any form of partition or
annexation of Cyprus, or any of its parts, by

17. In the second place, the United
recover the ground lost by the suspedsion of the
2

talks and help the communities to find ways to resume
the negotiations. But while it is easy to express our
hopes for the resumption of the talks, we all know
that the disentanglement of the knotty problems
which have produced their suspension is arduous
and difficult.

fully considered. Let us hope that the Council will
make clear that the plight of the unfortunate refugees
should be given timely consideration in any talks
between representatives of the communities.
24. We place high hopes in the role of the United
Nations, as exemplified by the latest efforts of the
Secretary-General, in providing good offices and
assistance for the reduction of tension and the eventual
solution of the Cyprus question.

18. It is of the utmost importance, therefore, to
create a climate conducive to the resumption of
constructive negotiations. Since the fundamental spirit
of the relevant resolutions is reconciliation and
mutual understanding, we wish to express our sincere
hope that the communities will do their utmost, with
the active encouragement of the other parties
concerned to pave the way for the reopening of the
dialogue and explore mutually acceptable methods of
safeguarding the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Cyprus.

25. In the days ahead, we strongly urge all the
parties and States concerned to exercise restraint
and moderation, avoiding any expansion of the dispute.
We request all Members of the United Nations--and,
in particular, all members of the Security Council-to
help the parties and States concerned to realize the
United Nations goals as effectively and smoothly as
possible. On behalf of my Government I wish to
give an assurance that Japan will welcome and
support all sincere efforts for the solution of the
urgent phase of the Cyprus problem, which will be
followed, let us hope, by a permanent settlement in
accordance with the significant United Nations
resolutions I have mentioned.

1 9 . All representatives will, I am sure, agree with the
Secretary-General’s statement to the Council last
week that “a new and fresh approach to the negotiating
process” [ibid., para. 101 is needed for the achievement of this goal. I hope that all of them will join in
proposing a new approach, which perhaps could
include new modalities, for carrying out the SecretaryGeneral’s valuable suggestion. The following ideas
might be considered by the Council.

26. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic of
Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation I should like to
extend to you our warm congratulations on your
assumption of the important post of President of the
Security Council for February and to wish you every
success in the performance of your delicate task.

20. First, it may be worth while to explore the
reactivation of the negotiating process at a place
outside Cyprus, in a different atmosphere, if that is
agreeable to the parties concerned.
21. Secondly, it is the sincere hope of my delegation
that the Council will request the Secretary-Genera1 to
intensify his endeavours to help renew such talks
between the two communities and that the Council
will follow this up by fully supporting these endeavours. Of course, the talks should be conducted
in the presence of the Secretary-Genera1 or his
Special Representative.

27. It is my pleasure also to convey to Mr. Tchernouchtchenko, of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, the great appreciation of my delegation
for the tact and efficiency with which he discharged
his functions as President of the Council last month.

22. Thirdly, my delegation considers it important
also that the Secretary-General be requested to report
back promptly to the Security Council the results
of the negotiations, including progress in the implementation of the relevant resolutions, and that the
Council should evaluate the information contained
in his report as soon as possible.

28. My delegation would like also to take this
opportunity to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. McIntyre of Australia, Mr. Jankowitsch of Austria,
Mr. Anwar Sani of Indonesia, Mr. Maina of Kenya
and Mr. Perez de Cuellar of Peru, who in the course
of their terms of office on the Security Council
have contributed with intelligence, competence and
devotion to the search for appropriate solutions to the
difficult problems facing this body.

23. Given the nature of the circumstances with
which the Council is confronted, talks between the
parties concerned would now centre on political
questions. However, I share the view of the representative of Sweden, who stated that the solution of
the acute humanitarian problems “must not wait
until there is agreement concerning the form that
the resumed negotiations should take, let alone until
a political solution has been achieved” [1815th
meeting, para. 421. It is the conviction of my delegation
that both aspects of the Cypriot problem should be

29. My delegation wishes also to bid a warm welcome
to the representatives of Guyana, Japan, Italy,
Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, whose
countries have just been elected to the Security
Council. I can tell them right away that the co-operation
and understanding which they will find forthcoming
from my delegation in our future work will be a
reflection of the excellent relations which so fortunately exist between their respective Governments
and the Government of the United Republic of
Cameroon.
3

30. When, on 13 December 1974 [181Oth meeting],
the Security Council last examined the question of
Cyprus, there were some grounds for believing that
the difficult problems that had been facing the island
for 10 or more years were soon going to be
solved once and for all in a peaceful fashion. Indeed,
the General Assembly had just unanimously adopted
resolution 3212 (XXIX). In the view of my delegation,
that resolution contained provisions which, if faithfully
applied by the interested parties, were likely to bring
about a rapid return to peace. Furthermore, the
constitutional head of State of Cyprus -had just
returned to his country at a time when the intercommunity talks had in certain respect taken an
encouraging turn.

35. It is exclusively the Cypriots of the two communities, Greek and Turkish, who have the crucial
role of determining, in total freedom and on a footing
of equality, the constitutional form of their State
that would best promote their well-being and respect
for their fimdamental and lawful rights. That is why
my delegation, in a friendly way, calIs uPon them,
as has already been done here, not to reopen old
wounds but, rather, to make extra efforts! to find a
constructive, just and mutually acceptable solution to
the constitutional problem of their country./ No other
State, no bloc of States, can usurp the inalienable
right of the people of Cyprus in this respecf.
36. The conviction that Cyprus, a non-aligned
country, can preserve its right to an independent
existence led my delegation unreservedly to support
resolution 3212 (XXIX), adopted by the General
Assembly unanimously-and hence with the konsent of
the Governments of Greece, Turkey and Cyprus-and
endorsed, also unanimously, by the Security Council
on 13 December 1974 in its resolution 365 (1974).
The provisions of those resolutions, which are still
relevant today, provide a serious basis for discussions
by the parties concerned, provided, of co!urse, that
the good will and the political determination finally
to settle this question prevail over the iforces of
1
national selfishness.

3 I. These favourable circumstances unfortunately
seem to be gravely jeopardized today because of
the increasingly marked interference of certain foreign
Powers in the internal affairs of the Republic of
Cyprus.
32. The excellent report that the Secretary-General
made available to the Council -[S/11624] and the important statement he made here on 21 February
[1814th mizeting], together with the versions of recent
events given here by the parties directly concerned,
clearly demonstrate that no progress has been achieved
in recent months towards a political settlement of the
Cyprus crisis.

37. It is high time that the unspeakable suffering of
the people of Cyprus stopped; it is high time that true
peace returned to that country. The territorial dismemberment of the Republic of Cyprus by force wotild
be a real tragedy not only for the people of that
country but also for all the small Powers/ Members
of the Organization that wish to live in freedom and
independence, without falling prey to the &hims and
aggression of countries that are militarily and
technically better equipped than they are. That is
why, in my delegation’s opinion, the principle of
the non-acquisition of the territory of a State by force
should be unambiguously reaffirmed in the present
case.

33. Quite the contrary: the statement of Mr. Denktas
of 13 February last [S/11624, annex II], concerning
the autonomous Turkish Cypriot administration,
seems to many States to represent a serious and
direct threat to the independence and territorial
integrity of a State Member of the United Nations.
And the statements made by Mr. Celik in the Council
on 20 and 24 February [1813th and 1815th meetings]
were not such as to reassure members of the Council
on this subject.

i

34. In the face of the extreme gravity of these
events, I should like to restate my Government’s
position of principle on this question of Cyprus.
The United Republic of Cameroon firmly supports
the lawful Government of Archbishop Makarios and
the entire Cypriot people in the valiant and just
struggle that that people is waging to safeguard the
fundamental right to independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. My
Government cannot, therefore, sanction any attempt to
partition that country which is not based on the free
and explicit wish of the entire Cypriot people. My
Government remains convinced that scrupulous
respect by all States for the independence and the
non-alignment policy of Cyprus and the withdrawal
of all foreign forces from the island are necessary
pre-conditions for serious negotiations on the
substance of this distressing matter.

38. The confidence that the peoples of \he world
have placed in the United Nations would ‘be rudely
shaken if specific and effective measures were not
taken by the Security Council to ensure. the full
and rapid application of the reIevant resolntions and
thus to safeguard ‘the independence of one of the
States Members of the Organization.
39. We whole-heartedly endorse, in this respect, the
opinion expressed by the Secretary-General in the
Council that “the Cyprus problem represents a crucial
test of the effectiveness and credibilit’ of the
Organization” [1814rh meeting, para. 81. y
40. The Security Council is in a position today to
discharge effectively its responsibilities in settling
the Cyprus crisis. Indeed, General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and Security Council res&tion 365
4

(1974), which lay down the fundamental principles
for a negotiated solution of the Cyprus crisis, were
both adopted unanimously by the Members of the
Organization. That fact in itself should encourage
the Council to be bolder at this stage of its intervention.

the exercise of your responsibilities. I should also
like to associate myself with the thanks that have
been addressed to your predecessor, Mr. Tchernouchtchenko of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic.

41. Although my delegation has not at this stage any
clear-cut ideas about what specific action should be
taken, it is none the less ready to support any appeal
that the Council might make to the parties to refrain
from proclaiming unilateral acts that prejudge the
outcome of future negotiations. My delegation would
similarly support any formula drawn up by the Council,
in agreement with the parties, laying down the practical
arrangements for the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the island, an essential pre-condition for the
continuation by the parties of negotiations that are
genuinely free and on a footing of equality, as
recommended in resolution 3212 (XXIX). My -delegation again expresses its confidence in the SecretaryGeneral, and we encourage him to continue his goodoffices mission in the Cypriot matter, in accordance
with any new arrangements worked out by the Council,

46. In addition, Mr. President, I should like to
address a special word of thanks to you and the other
representatives who have expressed themselves
similarly in welcoming my country and myself on the
occasion of the beginning of Italy’s new term of office
in the Security Council. My country is pleased to
commence this term in the company of Guyana, Japan,
Sweden and. the United Republic of Tanzania
-countries to which we are bound by special ties
of friendship and co-operation-and I should like to
convey to their representatives, as well as to those of
the permanent members, words of welcome and
my best -wishes. I should also like to associate
myself with the well-deserved tribute paid to the
outgoing members-Australia, Austria, Indonesia,
Kenya and Peru-and to their representatives, who
have earned the gratitude of the Organization by
their constructive contribution to the work of the
Council.

42. Of course, we are prepared to examine any
other measures that may be proposed by members of
the Council with a view to creating conditions
favourable to a resumption of constructive negotiations
on the question of Cyprus.

47. As my Government has. always emphasized,
Italy attaches fundamental importance to the Organization. My country is therefore well aware of the
responsibility inherent in membership of the Security
Couucil and participation in its work. It is the Council
which is called upon to play the primary role with
regard to crises which vnfortunately continue *to
plague the whole world; for it is the Council that
must discharge the task of seeking, through the
concerted action of States-and in particular of those
which are in a position to offer the most effective
contribution-lasting solutions founded on right and
justice, in an international climate characterized by
far-reaching change, and by growing interdependence
among nations.

43. In conclusion, I should like it to be clearly
understood that my Government’s position of principle
on the Cyprus question, which I have just explained,
is free of any prejudice vis-a-vis any of the parties
directly or indirectly concerned; the legitimate interests
of ail of them deserve the same consideration.
44. My Government’s concern in this matter is based
essentially upon considerations relating to the maintenance of peace and justice. Indeed, that is what was
stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Republic of Cameroon in his statement at the twentyninth session of the General Assembly. He said:
6‘ . . . my delegation, aware of the tense situation
which continues to prevail in Cyprus and, if truth
be told, throughout the eastern Mediterranean,
would look favourably upon and support any
initiative from no matter what. quarter tending
definitively to restore peace to the island and to
resolve no less definitively, in the interests of the
Greek and Turkish communities of the island, the
political problem posed by an arrangement whose
failure all deplore”.Z

48. Guided by the principles of the Charter, Italy
is determined to make the most effective and most
sincere contribution possible to the work of the
Council, pursuing its diplomatic activities, which are
geared to the quest for peace throughout the world
by eliminating the deep-rooted causes of international
disputes. 1 should like to assure you, Mr. President,
that the Council can rely on the most active and
serious co-operation of the Italian delegation in the
discharge of this task..
49. Italy has always followed the situation in Cyprus
with deep concern. This situation entails -a continuing
danger for stability in the eastern part of the Mediterranean, an area very close to my own country.
It fosters serious tension among countries which have
close ties with my own country as a result not only
of the links forged by history, but also of the association
of those countries with the European Community.
Lastly, it imposes on the friendly people, of the island

45. Mr. PLAJA (Italy) (interpret&ion from French):
Mr. President, may 1 be permitted first of all to
convey to you my. delegation’s congratulations on
your accession to the presidency of the Council and
to recall on this occasion the friendly relations
that my country maintains with your own. You
can rely on the sincere support of my delegation in
5

of Cyprus grave sufferings and severe loss of human
life and property.

57. My delegation has carefully examined
report of the Secretary-General [S/11624] anh listened
with great interest to the statements that he made
to the Council. I should like to pay a b articular
tribute to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts.
I would remind the Council that he has played an
important role in bringing about meetings between the
leaders of the two communities; and, the&fore, we
are entitled to hope-and the Italian delegation does
most warmly hope-that his action can lead to other
encouraging results. Accordingly the Italian delegation
wishes to associate itself with the ideas put forward
by other representatives who have spoken in this
debate and who envisage a renewed rolk for the
Secretary-General designed to facilitate the resumption
and progress of the negotiations.

50. The causes of the strife that is raging in Cyprus
have been repeatedly examined by the Council and I
shall not dwell on those points. Unfortunately, history
has left a heritage of division and suspicion on the
island, separating the two communities that make up
its population; and reconciliation efforts heretofore
have not achieved the results that we should have
wished to see.
51. The events of last summer have deepened our
concern. New problems have been piled upon the
old. I shall confine myself here to recalling that of
the refugees-and not only its humanitarian aspect.

58. I should also like to express my very warm
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Weckamnn-Muiioz, who is
carrying out a delicate and difficult task $I a quite
remarkable way.
1

52. What is the most constructive contribution that
the Security Council can make to the solution of the
crisis in Cyprus? So far as my delegation is concerned,
the answer to this question is dictated by the very
characteristics of the situation in the island. These
characteristics indicate that the responsibility for
seeking reconciliation-which alone can lead to a
lasting solution-lies solely with the parties directly
concerned, and in particular with the leaders of the
two communities.

59. And, lastly, on this occasion I shou fd like to
pay a tribute to the United Nations Peale-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), whose 1 courage,
dedication and high professional competence have
made it possible to avoid even more trapi: suffering
for the people of Cyprus.

53. The Italian delegation is convinced that the
Cyprus crisis can be resolved only by negotiations
carried out by those parties in an atmosphere of
freedom and good faith, and in a spirit of compromise.
Such a solution should be based on two fundamental
elements.

60. I have also listened to and examined with great
interest the statements made in the course of the
debate by the representatives of the Governments of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, as well as by the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community, Mr. Celik.
Above and beyond recriminations and polemics, it
seems to me that in those statements I can discern
a recognition of the fact that dialogue between the
parties still remains the key to the problem and the
only hope of emerging from the impasse and resuming
the search for a peaceful solution. Even on certain
substantive positions, it seems to me that I see
emerging some indication of a more flexible attitude,
and no matter how slight this change may be it
should be recognized and encouraged.
1
I
61. Since the events of last summer hened up
a new and critical phase in the situation in Cyprus,
Italy has worked steadily to encourage the parties
to be moderate, to reflect and to negotiate $ solution
of their differences. These bilateral approaches,
undertaken in the light of the excellent relations that
we have with the countries concerned, have gone
hand in hand with the positions taken jointly within
the framework of political co-operation by the nine
countries of the European Community. Even quite
recently, indeed as a matter of fact on 13 ebrnary,
the nine Ministers for For.eign Affairs, w1 Fo met in
Dublin, recalling the relevant resolutions of he United
Nations, stated:
I
“They continue to regard as highly desirable the
search by way of consultation between the two

54. First, it should ensure full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus. It is indeed encouraging to note that this
fundamental principle is recognized by all, as has once
again been demonstrated by the statements of the
representatives who have spoken in the course of
this debate; and, in addition, I am pleased to remind
the Council in this connection of the commitments
made by the representatives of Greece and Turkey
from the rostrum of the General Assembly.
55. Secondly, the solution will have to safeguard
and thoroughly reconcile the rights, interests and
legitimate aspirations of the two communities.
56. In my opinion, therefore, the task and duty of the
United Nations is to encourage these negotiations by
helping to create conditions favourable to the pursuit
of a dialogue between the two communities. This
is the course that has been followed heretofore
through the resolutions adopted by the Council and by
the Assembly. We shall have to continue to follow
this road, without allowing ourselves to become
discouraged, by reaffirming those resolutions, and in
particular Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and
Council resolution 365 (1974), which endorsed that
Assembly resolution, and by implementing them.
6

i

communities in Cyprus, for a negotiated solution
which would be both durable and equitable;

‘Arabia, requesting to be invited under the relevant,
provisions of the Charter to participate in our’ discussion withoui the right to vote.. In accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
and the established practice of the Council, I propose
to invite him to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.

‘:To facilitate the realization of this objective, the
nine are willing to. hoid discussions with representatives of all the interested parties.” [See S/11629.]
62. That statement, which was repeated on 21 February in the communique which concluded the
meetings between the Foreign Ministers of Italy,
Mr. Rumor, and the Federal Republic of Germany,
Mr. Genscher, in Rome, testifies to our continued
readiness-a readiness that the Council should bear
in mind-to render service to the countries which
are parties to the Cypriot crisis, because of the special
ties which, as I have already said, exist between them
and the European Community.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baroidy
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council .table.

67. The PRESIDENT (trunslatioti from Chinese):
I now call on the representative of Saudi Arabia. ”
(.
. ‘*.
68. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia):’ Mr. President,
and members of the Council, may .I thank you for
allowing me to appear before you to speak on, the
question under consideration. Mr. President, as an
Asian, 1 should like to say that ,I congraitilate
myself at seeing you occupy the presidency ‘of -the
Council. With your lucidity of thought and composure;
and drawing on the quintessence, of a civilization
that has made a tremendous contribution not only
to Asia but to the whole world, I am sure. that
ultimately you may be able to orient members of the
Council towards doing what is necessary to find a
practical solution to this intractable question.

63. Believing, as I have just emphasized, that the
solution of the problem of Cyprus can emerge only
from negotiations between the two communities, my
Government continues to be opposed, as it always
has been, to any unilateral action which would be
likely to prejudge the very options on which negotiations should be based, and which, therefore, would
complicate the search for the negotiated solution.
We have expressed this conviction in connection with
unilateral actions which have in the past created
situations of acute crisis in the Cyprus problem,
and.we state this position today in view of the recent
decision taken by the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot
community which, although presented as an internal
development, has led to the breaking off of negotiations. The Italian delegation wishes, in this context,
to recall the statements made by Mr. DenktaS in
Cyprus and by Mr. Celik here, to the effect that that
decision created no final situation that might make it
impossible to resume negotiations; and we hope that
the statements they have made will be confirmed by
deeds.

69. Needless to say, as one who has been here
since the beginning, I wish to laud all members who
have occupied the presidency recently, and previously,
for their dedication to the work of the Council,
without having to name each one of them separately.
70. Why did I take the floor? Just to add to what
has already been said? I must be frank with’ my
colleagues here. I think they have to a large extent
been dealing in platitudes. We have listened to a lot
about what should be done in connexion with the
resolution that was adopted on this question an< thai
had the concurrence or acceptance of the parties
immediately concerned. It goes without saying that
they should observe the provisions of that resolution.

64. My delegation would like to express the hope
that all the parties concerned will be ready to show
the right amount of good will and flexibility for a
resumption _of .negotiations between the two communities. In the face of the tragic prospect of new
mourning and suffering for their populations, I am
convinced that the leaders of the two communities
will be guided by the realism, the spirit of compromise,
and the imagination that are needed to reach a general
agreement, within a reasonable time, on all the
aspects of the problem.

71. The problem lies not only in the interpretation
of the resolution, but also in the set of circumstances
which has occurred to make ‘certain parties feel that
that resolution is just a sort of tranquilliser and does
not go to the root of the question. Now it so happens
that Cyprus is in the region to which I belong. With
your permission, Mr. President, and with the permisT
sion of the members of the Council, I shall give yoy
a little of the background of the Cyprus question.
I shall not, as some may be thinking, go back to
the days of the Caananites, who were called
Phoenicians by the Greeks, or further, back &fore
that era when even the Assyrians and the Pharaohs
occupied Cyprus at one time. That is way .bacls..
We will go back only to 1877. I think. some of my
colleagues have an idea of what I mean by I877.

65. 1 should like to conclude by emphasizing that in
this matter time is of the essence, for a prolongation
of the present state of affairs can only be prejudicial to
the resumption of negotiations and make those
negotiations even more diff’cult.
66. ‘Ibe PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
At this juncture, may I advise the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Saudi
7

72. It was the advent of effective intervention by
European Powers in the affairs of the Ottoman Empire.
Of course, some might say that the Ottomans, who
came from Asia and occupied Anatoliti and reached
the gates of Vienna at one time, spread too far. But
let us also not forget that all Europeans came
originally from Asia; they are of Indo--European origin.
So we cannot say that the Ottoman Empire, which
was the first commonwealth without any charter
to that effect, had no right to what at that time was
considered to be under its supremacy. I am not blaming
the Europeans, because now it is hindsight to say
what I am about to say, but it will give the Clues as
to why we are now suffering from what we witness;
and, as my colleague on my Jeft, the representative
of Sweden, rightly said, we should concentrate on
the humanitarian question rather than on the political
question.

follow me; you will see how it applies to ‘he
i situation today.
i

73.. But it is useful to know not .the ancient roots
of the’ trouble but the genesis of this question as to
the year -1877, when Tsarist Russia tried to occupy
Serbia and Bulgaria, which constituted part of the
Ottoman Empire in the Balkans. Now, you might
say: “What has this got to do with the problem?”
Of course it has a Iot to do with the problem. Whose
ire ivas roused but that of the Government of an island
known as the United Kingdom. They wanted to make
sure that Russia would not come through the Dardanelles to the Mediterranean. So what did they do? They
sent warships to the Sea of Marmara. In other words,
they gave the Russians notice that they would go to
war if the’ Rus%ti$ ‘canii” t0 ihe ‘warti’ \ira’teis bf the
Mediterranean.

77. But four years later-in 1882--thk British
occupied Egypt. Of course there was a pretextIbrahim Pasha and so on. Egypt became a Pretectorate.
.Now this had nothing to do with the Lab&r Party-.
There was no Labour Party at that time. There were
imperialists. We were imperialists too wheh we had
an empire. I mean the Arabs. Let us put ;the cards
on the table. Perhaps it was a good thing; it activated
Arab nationalism from that date, 1882. Jamb1 ud Din
al Afgani was an Afghan who resided in Egypt. An
Afghan started this sort of Moslem-Arab ntitionalism
after the occupation of Egypt by the British;
. ,~. ., ? L. * i -,” ,i *
78. And then” w6;’ was‘ iie&ed from thi British?
The Turks, naturally. After all, we leased Cyprus
to them and now they occupied Egypt. Thi’s is al1 in
my region; I was born an Ottoman subjed in 1905
in the reign of Sultan AbduI Hamid. I rdsearched
this not only from books but from peopIe &ho were
contemporaries of the Sultan--inrer ah, 1 his own
nephew, his own niece, whom I knew very well
along with her family, none other than the bidow of
Enver Pasha of the Young Turks. I also’ use my
own judgement. I was an Arab and the Tdrks were
Turks, and sometimes there was a sort of isuspicion
between Turk and Arab, which is natural because
there were many kinds of communities &side the
Ottoman Empire.
I
79. So what happened? Wilhelm II, the Ehperor of
Germany, began to flirt with the Sultan. [His first
visit was in 1889--correct me if I am mistaken. His
second visit was in 1898. You know all that happened
with regard to building a Berlin-Baghdad railroad
going to the Persian Gulf. That upset t.hd British,
who said, “If they go to the Gulf and, ‘then to
Suez, good Lord, the Germans”--it was the;Germans
then, not the Russians-“can cut off our/ route to
India, and if they cut off our route to India, what
will happen? Our interests will suffer.” So t’here was
great rapport between the Germans and thk Turksmore precisely, the Sultan.

76. Wisdom prevailed among the Russia& bf those
days and they did not go to seize the Bosphorus
and the Dardanelles and the Sea of Marm&a. After
arranging many conferences or, rather, pri&te talks,
which finally culminated in the Congress bf Berlin
in 1878, and because of the good offices kxercised
by the British, the Sultan leased Cyprus to the British
for the time being, so to speak, without iforfeiting
Ottoman sovereignty. The Sultan thereupon! received
a certain sum annually for the use of Cypru$. At one
time it was f50,OOO; at another it was fYO,OO& Correct
me if I am wrong. But the British were affluent in
those days, and I do not think that they Icollected
that much in taxes from the people. And the balance
of power was preserved.

74. Sultan Abdul Hamid, who was called the Red
Sultan, the Bloody Sultan-which was propaganda,
and propaganda is nothing new-was a man trying
to preserve his empire, just as the kings and queens
of. England or the Bourbons in France tried to do.
I would nbt say more, or less. Why did our good
British friends of those days-1 should say our
friends of these days and not of those days, because
then they were colonialists-want to stop the Russians
coming to the Mediterranean? It was because. they
had under their control a subcontinent-known as
India-and they wanted an Ottoman Empire that was
weak, although not too weak, but also not too strong.
They were afraid that if it were too weak the Russians
might grab it. If it were too strong-as at one time it
appeared to be, when Mohamed Ali, the Khedive in
Egypt, seni Ibrahim Pasha and he almost took
Konya-it would have been galvanized by new blood.
75. So both Tsarist Russia and the United Kingdom
-perhaps it was Palmerston at the time-sent separate
warnings to Mohamed Ali in Egypt, who was the
Viceroy, the Khedive, so to speak, of the Sultan,
saying: “If you do not withdraw your troops we
shall wage war against you.” What they wanted was
to maintain the balance of power. I hope that you
8

:

.“’

80. Then the Sultan was deposed in 1908. We do
not have to go into Turkish history now with respect
to the emergence of the Young Turks. They had
cells in France. Some of them were what could be
called, in a sense, the spiritual sons of the French
Revolution, and they wanted a change. Anyway,
the Sultan was deposed in 1908.

85. Finally, the League of Nations did not do
anything. Mr. Wilson, the President of the United
States, went back from Versailles a sad man. He
declared the principle of self-determination of peoples
and nations, and no less a person than Mr. Clemenceau took him by his tie and almost strangled him.
Someone who was in Versailles told me that. Clemenceau told Mr. Wilson, “You go back where you
came from”-1 am paraphrasing. They forgot that, had
it not been for the United States, they would have lost
the war. There would not have been any Hitler. There
would have been the Germans and then the various
European nationalities would have rebelled against
them. But that was not written in the books. It
was the United States that won the war for the
Allies.

81. Then came the bickering between the European
States. For what? Against German militarism? No,
sir. France was the biggest military Power then, with
all the discipline for which the emerging Germans in
the post-Bismarck period and in Wilhelm’s period
were known, and the biggest naval Power was the
United Kingdom. The United States was not known
at that time as a great Power. It minded its own
business. This was before 1917, because then the
United States was railroaded into the world war,
and I do not have to tell you by whom. But the United
Kingdom had the biggest naval power. I do not think
the Germans were saints. They were also trying to
use the old colonial methods to gain more territory.
Where? In Africa and also, if possible, in Asia. The
British Empire then had over 4 million square miles,
the French Empire had 3,600,OOO square miles,
and the Germans had the left-overs-about 1 million
square miles, mostly in South-West Africa, which we
,now call Namibia, and which was then a German
territory, and a few places where Kenya and certain
other countries are located today. That is what
happened.

86. Where does Cyprus come in? This is the background. We, including myself, who was an ex-of$cio
observer of the League of Nations, discovered the
deception. We discovered that the war was fought
not to save democracy but to preserve empire. Have
we forgotten that even in the 1950s the late Mr. Churchill said, “I was not appointed His Majesty’s Prime
Minister to preside over the liquidation of the British
Empire”? Where is democracy there? Where is selfdetermination? We woke up. Many of us had awakened
before. So it fell to someone like Baroody , in his
modest way, in 1948 and 1949, starting from the Palais
de Chaillot , to elaborate the principle of selfdetermination enunciated by the late Mr. Wilson of the United
States into a full-fledged right, and it now constitutes the first article of both International Covenants
on Human Rights, on which we worked for over
10 years. And we had to cross swords with our good
friends and colleagues, the British and the French,
and finally they had to give in. We were heartened.
At one time I had been told by none other than
Sir Samuel Hoare, “This is a vague principle; it
cannot be enunciated as a human right”. Years,
later, in London, I reminded him that in the British
Parliament the words “right of self-determination of
peoples and nations” were mentioned, as they were
in the Chamber of Deputies of our French friends.

82. So the Germans wanted a place in the sun-to
use that simile. They wanted grandeur, and the war
was fought not so much against German militarism
but against German mercantilism, because they were
making incursions into the markets of India and Latin
America. And wars, as we all know, to a large
extent revolve around economics. At one time my
good friend, Ambassador Malik, told me tI$s was
Marxism. -This was before Marxism, long before
Marxism. Wars are mostly economic. Once in a while
you have men like Alexander the Great and Napoleon
who are imbued with the love of power, but basically
wars are economic. This does not rule out the love
of power and glory.

87. Now, what constitutes a people? That is the
essence of the right of self-determination. A people
has a common interest. Sometimes it is the language;
usually it is the same language. Sometimes it is the
same way of life, geography, food. All contribute to
constituting a distinct people. They do not have to
be all uniform, homogeneous. No, no small region is
homogeneous. You find dialects; you find different
ways in city people and the people who live in the
hills. But what constitutes a people, aside from a
common way of life, if not common interests? Take
the United Kingdom. You have the Scats; you have
the Welsh; you have the Comish people. And at one
time you had the Irish people, but we shall not
talk about Ireland now; there is a problem there. But
let us take those I have cited. They had common
interests. They constituted a nation.

83. The United States made it possible for the Allies,
meaning Britain and France and the others, to win the
war over Germany. And ipso facto in 1914 this lease
changed hands and Cyprus passed into the hands of
the British. It became a British colony. No more
sending f50,OOO or f90,OOO to the Porte-meaning
to Istanbul-by the British. It became an integral
part of the Empire, with a Governor. I remember
the Governors of Cyprus in the 192Os-I was a young
man then, directly governed by the British.
84. This is objective history, with nothing added or
subtracted. Maybe we can add a few things, but they
might embitter some here unnecessarily, so I shall not
mention those embittering facts.
9

88. I was talking to our Belgian colleague today.
I said, “How are the Walloons doing in Belgium?”
They and the French-speaking people have common
interests, and they constitute a people, the Belgian
people.

now. We say it to provide a background to the
situation in Cyprus.
1
92. Now there exists a people known as the Cypriot
people. ,In the late 1950s or early 1960.&I have
forgotten precisely when-there was the late
Mr. Zorlu, the Foreign Minister. If the Turks did
anything wrong it was to hang that gentleman with
Menderes. I knew him very well. He was a very fine
man. He invited us to the house of Ambassador
Essin-instead of you talking in platitudes, I am
giving you facts-in Sutton Place. There were other
Ambassadors. Ambassador Essin told me, “The
Minister would like to see you after coffee.” I
stayed behind. He said, “I know you are among those
who elaborated the principle of self-determination
into a full-fledged right in the United Nations. Tell
me, what do you think about the Cypriot question?”
I said, “I have no directives from my Government.”
“No,” he said, “as a person.” I said, “No partition,
no enosis ” ; enosis means union with Greece, “Let
the Cypriot people decide their fate, their destiny,
their life”. That is the objective. But out of enlightened
self-interest we, the Arabs, do not believe in partition.
We had a tragedy in the partition of Palestine; we
do not think Korea should have been partitioned; we
do not believe Germany should have been partitioned.
It creates trouble. It serves the interests of the major
Powers.

89. Now, Cyprus is a conglomeration of people.
Do not think there are only Turks and Greeks. Some
were “Turkified” and some were ‘Greekified”,
maybe. We know there are Maronites from Lebanon
and Syrians from Syria who became Cypriots; there
are Greeks who became Cypriots and there are Turks.
They acquired a sort of way of life, a community
of interests, which formed a people. It was on that
basis that we in the United Nations were approached
about the question. It fell to me, not by choice but
through someone seeking my advice. Here I want you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council, to
note this very carefully: none other than the gentleman
sitting behind Mr. Clerides, Mr. Zenon Rossides,
came to me clamouring-in the early 1950s-for the
independence of Cyprus. We heard. I said, “Now,
is anyone going to play the role of Venizelos?” You
know who Venizelos was. He as an idealist imbued
with what is called Greek nationalism, egged on
by whom? By the late Mr. Lloyd George, in order
further to weaken Turkey. He fired the imagination
of many Greeks, misguided them into thinking they
could carve off a part of Anatolia and re-form the
ancient Greek empire. Well, there was no Greek
empire in ancient times; there were city States, as
we all know, but there was no sort of Greek empire,
with the exception of Alexander’s and he died at the
age of 32 in India.

93. We personally believe that the cohesive factor
should be enough to create a people in ;a region
and make it independent, in accordance iwith the
right of self-determination of peoples.
/I
94. That is what I said. He asked, “What about the
Turkish community?“. I said, “Do you want them in
Turkey?“. He said, “No, but they are Turks. You
know, people get emotional, and that is quite ‘hatural”.
I said, “Well, what I have said is based on the
assumption that no one will hurt anyone Ielse and
that religious tolerance will prevail, as it prevailed in
the days of the Ottoman Empire. We are in the
region. We do not want to see Cyprus become a base
for the major Powers”-and I do not haven to name
them; everyone know; who they areA”in the
Mediterranean”.
I,

90. That dream became a nightmare. Many of the
Greeks lived peacefully as Ottoman citizens and,
before there was an Ottoman empire, had preceded
even our Ottoman friends, who came, as I said
from the northern tier of Asia. They lived at peace
with the Ottomans. And, for your information, to
show that the Turks were not bigoted and had much
religious tolerance, Ibrahim Pasha-correct me if I am
wrong-the Prime Minister of Suleiman the Magniticent, as he was called, was a Greek. Ibrahim Pasha.
He was a Greek. I believe Suleiman married .his
sister or something.
91. And there were many Armenians who became
Ministers of State. There was someone from Lebanon
called Suleiman el Bustani, a Christian Maronite,
who became Minister of Posts and Telephones. Then
there was Faris Bey el Khouri, who later became
Premier of Syria. He was a member of the Chamber
of Deputies. I knew him personally. There was no
such thing as exaggerated religious intolerance,
until the Armenians fared badly because they were
activated by the European countries. Some of the
Lebanese Christians were also activated by the
European countries so that the Ottoman Empire
could be partitioned. I challenge anyone to refute
what I have said. But we do not say this with bitterness

95. He told me that he thought what I ‘had said
was quite reasonable. I told him, “Do not mke what
I have said as the policy of the Govemmend of Saudi
Arabia, because I have .had no directives, no instructions on this question”. He said, “For you< information, what you have said coincides with the policy
of His Royal Highness, Prince Faisal”-he was not
the King then; he was the Minister for;’ Foreign
Affairs. I said, “I am happy to hear that”. 1
96. On that basis, negotiations went on with our
friends the Greeks, with our friends the Turks;
indeed, I personally participated in somie of the
negotiations. At one point someone said o m e - 1
R
lbI

am not letting any secret out; I have forgotten the
name of the person involved; it was a long Greek
name: “You know, sometimes our Greek Cypriot
brothers give us more headaches than the Turks
do”. So you see how well disposed they were to
you Turks.

will sooner or later totter and fall. I have seen empires
fall because of injustice. Nothing can be greater than
what is prescribed by justice.
104. We ask the Secretary-General-this gentleman
who is becoming the Marco Polo of modem timeswhat purpose is served by going from one place to
another. What can he do? I am not at all questioning
his good faith. He comes from one of the most civilized
countries in the world. At one time I had thought,
“Good Lord, this sprawling Austro-Hungarian
Empire has been reduced to little Austria”. But it is
to the real glory of Austria that it has retained its
humanitarianism and is not drunk with the vainglory
of past centuries. But what can our Secretary2
General do? Just shuttle between the Greek
leaders and the Turkish leaders, between Mr. Denktas
and Archbishop Makarios or Mr. Clerides, or whoever
represents the communities? Nothing can be done
without the required good faith and good will.
_

97. If these people had been left alone, without any
outside interference, nothing would have happened.
Who was this Sampson who activated this renewed
idea of enosis? “Sampson” is an Anglo-Saxon name.
Is he a Greek, or what? I do not know who he is.
98. I happened to be in the region at the time. They
wanted to kill the head of State. Grivas had just died.
And then somebody emerged and created all this
trouble for the Greeks, for the Turks, for the Greek
Cypriots, for the Turkish Cypriots. One man and a
group around him were so mischievous as to create
an international incident.
99. But who was behind them? I am not going to
say. Why? Because the wound is there. What good
would it do to pour salt on it? In any case, what
purpose is served by recriminations and accusations?
I have listened to such discussions and sometimes
have even participated in them. They get us nowhere.
Some people were pulling the strings. I happened to
be in Lebanon at the time, and I kept my ears open.
Cyprus is not very far from Lebanon, you know.

105. Let me warn those who pull the strings-and
I am not going to name them: you will hurt your
fingers with your strings, and you may finally find that
you have no fingers to pull anything with, because of
the mischief you have sown. I would say the same
thing to the Arab people if they were pulling any
strings; do not think that I am trying to be supercilious. The old, antiquated approach to solving
these problems has backfired. Some historians, mainly
European, said that the Congress of Vienna had
brought peace. When I was in England,, and elsewhere, I used to say, “Peace? The Congress of
Vienna?“. An eminent gentleman by the name of
Henry Kissinger now says that detente brings peace.
But detente brings no peace unless there is good
will and good faith. What did Talleyrand and
Mettemich do? They divided Europe into spheres of
influence. And then what happened? Was everything hunky-dory-as the Americans say? No, sir.

100. It was a mischievous scheme, whoever initiated
it, an inhuman scheme. Why inhuman? Because I am
thinking of the refugees, to whom the representative
of Sweden referred. Those who pull the strings are
safe. Who suffers? The people. I do not care what
their national origin is; they are human beings; they
are all our brothers under the skin.
101. How is this question going to be solved? The
basis-no enosis, no partition-cannot be changed,
because if it is changed the mischief of yesterday
will continue in the future; it will be a festering
wound. Who are we to tell our Turkish brothers or
our Greek brothers, “You should do this”? Beware,
you who pull the strings. Stop pulling the strings. Is
not what we have witnessed in Viet Nam enough?
Is not what we have witnessed in Cambodia, and
are still witnessing there, enough? Is not what we
have witnessed in Laos enough? Is it not enough that
people are suffering?

106. There followed the revolutions of 1830 and
1848, then the France-Prussian War, then the war
between Turkey and Tsarist Russia-which the
Russians stopped, taking Cyprus as a commission
for the settlement. Then Fashoda, then the Balkan
War of 1911, after Fashoda, and then the Boer
War-I am not giving them in chronological orderthen in 1905 the Sino-Japanese War, which was also
manipulated by some outside Powers. And then,
before the hundred years were over, that century
of peace, 1815-1914-99 years to be precise-one of
the two major global wars.

102. We have here a Commission on Human Rights
and we elaborate a Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and International Covenants on Human
Rights. “Read and thou shalt be happy; try and thou
shalt be saddened”.

107. Detente without justice is like trying in modem
times to treat a certain virus with-as we say in
Arabic-a watermelon-rind poultice. The sickness is
in the blood, you have to use antibiotics; a watermelonrind poultice is not the cure.

103. The Powers that are vying for power in the
Mediterranean are resorting to the old game. At my
advanced age I warn their leaders not to go on trying
these things, because anything that is based on injustice

108. Now you Powers-one or more Powers-no
matter of what nationality, which are pulling the
11

strings for the sake of “balance of power” and
“spheres of influence* *, learn something new. You
cannot blame the Turks, on the one hand, for
asking for a federation or whatever.the name is-I
do not go by these names- because I know that
many Turks have been massacred; likewise, I cannot
blame the Greeks for having fears that if there is
partition they will be weakened.
109. But I ask both parties to give a little attention
to the fact that they should not be manceuvred today
by gun-boat diplomacy; that has gone. Why should
there be gun-boat diplomacy when intelligence
agencies can covertly subvert and plant activists
inside any country? Let them see to it that-1 am
not criticizing or prescribing any formula-they do
not become victims of the antiquated approach of
power politics and spheres of influence, but instead
live like brothers just as they-the Greek, the Turk,
the Christian Lebanese and the various denominations-lived in the days of the sultanate, before the
intervention of the Western Powers and Tsarist
Russia in their affairs. Of course there were .excesses.
The nineteenth century was not the golden era of
history, not even in the West where they brag about
“civilization”.
110. For years I used to stay at the Savoy researching
England in Victorian days. The gentry, the ruling
circles, the aristocracy did not know what happened
on the left-hand side of the Strand where Covent

Garden is-or was, because I think they are moving
it just as the French have moved Les Halles. They
knew nothing of the misery, the slums. 1Honestly,
they did not know; or, if they knew, they elosed
their eyes.
111. On this basis only, on the basis of ‘igood faith
and of reestablishing confidence between the communities, regardless of what each one wants, please,
both of you-and I am addressing both parties-do
not act rigidly. And above all see to it that no one
pulls the strings to hurt-not you people sitting here,
you can always manage, like all Governments-but
to hurt the people there and make them miserable.
112. I must thank you again, Mr. President, for
your indulgence and you, gentlemen, for your patience.
But, after all, I thought that, with all the’eloquence
manifested in the diction and presentation of the
statements made here without exception, !we should
ginger ourselves up and try to find a new approach.
But, above all, let those who pull the strings beware,
because in the long, long run they will !,totter and
fall, like others who have done the same thing.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
Note

i
Ij

’ See Oficial Records of the General Assembly, 1Twenty-ninth
Y
Session, Plenaty Meetings, 2273rd meeting.
1
* Ibid., 2257th meeting.
L

HOW TO OBTAIk UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
wortd. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les lib&ties et les agences Bpusitaires du
monde cntier, Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gen&e.
KdK IIOJIYtiSfTb

HBAAHEIIL OPrAHK3AUKlf

OIi’6EANHEHHhIX

HAtiHK

M3XaHHa
OpraxwsarrHH O~-~~XHH~HHL.IX
HaueR YIOX(HD aynsrh a xxxxnbm
Marazmxax H arenTcfaax BO acex pafioaax Mupa. Ha~onwre cnpaa%H 0 6 m~axiixx B
Bametd KsiHxcAom Mara3rme
HUH nmmf~e no aapecy : Oprami3auwzi OCi-bemiziemtblx
HaqxR. CeKUHR no nponme si3AanxR, Iibm-Hopx HUH Xenesa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLKACIONES
,’

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas part& de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccifmde Ventas,
Nueva York ;o Ginebra.

Litho in United Hatioti, New York

I

00300

13-2,200
