174

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to developments in American
Samoa,19
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to
Non-Self-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such missions is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in those Territories
and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples
therein with respect to their future status,
Welcoming the positive attitude of the administering
Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations
visiting missions,
~ ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying the
Territory's economy as a matter of priority, in order
to reduce its dependence on fluctuating economic
activities,
. 1. App~oves the chap~er o~ the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American Samoa;20
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources should .in n~ way delay the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure t~at the c~lture and identity of the
people of the Terntory continue to be reflected in the
Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Welcomes the holding of the first gubernatorial
elections in the Territory on 8 November 1977,
18_Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33i23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. III,
and vol. III, chap. XIX.
• 19 lbid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meetmg, paras. 1-9.
2o Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.1), vol. Ill, chap. XIX.

• whereby the people of the Territory elected two
American Samoans as Governor and Lieutenant Governor respectively;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of American Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
?ther organ~zations withi!-1 the United Nations system
in acceleratmg progress in all sectors of the national
life of American Samoa;
9. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the people of American Samoa, to safeg_uard the inalie~able right of the people of the Ternt~ry to th~ enJoyment of t~eir natural resources by
takmg effective measures which guarantee the right of
the people to own and dispose of those natural resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
10. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation with neighbouring island communities;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue
t? seek the best ways and means for the implementation of .the J?eclaration with respect to American
Samoa, including the dispatch of a visiting mission
to the Territory in consultation with the administering
P<?wer, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/33.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having e~amined t~e relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 21
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to ~olonial Co~~tries and Peoples,
and all other resolut10ns and decis10ns of the United
Nations relating to Guam,
Cons~ious of the 1;1eed to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 22
Noting that the administering Power continues to
maintain military installations in the Territory,
Consider~ng that. the J?Olicy of maintaining military
ba~es an~ in~tal_la~ions i~ Non-Self-Governing Territones which inhibit the nght of self-determination of
.

21 lb~d., vol: I, ch_aps. Ill and V, and vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
22 Ibid., Th1Tty-th1rd Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meet-

mg, paras. 1-9.

VII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations,
Noting that a constitutional referendum is proposed
to be held in the Territory in May/June 1979,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement by its people of the objectives embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversifying the Territory's
economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce
its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to Guam; 23
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Guam to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set
forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Welcomes the invitation extended by the Government of the United States to the Special Committee
to send a visiting mission to Guam to observe the
forthcoming referendum on a draft constitution and
to observe conditions in the Territory;24
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of Guam and to work out concrete programmes of
assistance and economic development for the Territory;
7. Recalls its relevant resolutions concerning military bases in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, recognizes that the presence of military bases
could constitute a factor impeding the implementation
of the Declaration and reaffirms its strong conviction
that the presence of military bases in Guam should
not prevent the people of the Territory from exercising
their .inalienable right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of Guam, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures
which guarantee the right of the people to own and
dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
2s Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/

Rev.1 ), vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
24 Jbid.,

annex II. See also A/ AC.109/575.

175

9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of Guam;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Guam, including the
dispatch of a visiting mission in consultation with the
administering Power, to observe the constitutional
referendum, to acquire first-hand information on the
situation in the Territory and to ascertain the views
of the people of Guam concerning their future political
status, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/34.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 25
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the United States Virgin Islands,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering Power, both through its active participation
in the work of the Special Committee and through its
willingness to receive visiting missions to small Territories under its administration,
Recalling the report of the 1977 United Nations
Visiting Mission to the United States Virgin Islands, 26
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 27
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United States Virgin Islands; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
u Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. III, chap. XXVI.

26 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1 ), vol. IV, chap. XXVII, annex.
27 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 26th meeting, paras. 1-9.
28 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/
Rev.I), vol. MI, chap. XXVI.
