IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and safety of all diplomatic and consular missions and representatives officially present in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their
territories illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the
perpetration of acts against the security and safety of such
missions and representatives;
5. Calls upon States to take all necessary measures at
the national and international levels to prevent any acts of
violence against diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives, as well as against missions and representatives to international intergovernmental organizations and
officials of such organizations, and, in accordance with
national law and international treaties, to prosecute or
extradite those who perpetrate such acts;
6. Recommends that States should co-operate closely
through, inter alia, contacts between the diplomatic and
consular missions and the receiving State, with regard to
practical measures designed to enhance the protection,
security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions
and representatives and with regard to exchange of information on the circumstances of all serious violations
thereof;
1. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the instruments relevant to the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives;
8. Calls upon States, in cases where a dispute arises in
connection with a violation of the principles and rules of
international law concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, to make
use of the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the good offices of the Secretary-General;
9. Requests:
(a) All States to report to the Secretary-General as
promptly as possible serious violations of the protection,
security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions
and representatives;
(b) The State in which the violation took place - and,
to the extent applicable, the State where the alleged
offender is present - to report as promptly as possible on
measures taken to bring the offender to justice and eventually to communicate, in accordance with its laws, the final
outcome of the proceedings against the offender, and on
measures adopted with a view to preventing a repetition of
such violations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To circulate to all States, upon receipt, the reports
received by him pursuant to paragraph 9 above, unless the
reporting State requests otherwise;
(b) When a serious violation has been reported pursuant to paragraph 9 (a) above, to draw the attention, when
appropriate, of the States directly concerned to the reporting procedures provided for in paragraph 9 above;
l I. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States to
inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session a report containing:
(a) Information on the state of ratification of, and
accessions to, the instruments referred to in paragraph 7
above;
40 06icial Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. Supplement
No. 4.f(N40/43).

309

(b) The reports received and views expressed pursuant
to paragraphs 9 and 11 above;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
and to circulate to all States, by 31 July 1986, a survey of
the operation, since their establishment, of the reporting
procedures provided for in paragraph 9 above, with a
view, in particular, to the strengthening of those procedures;
14. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session any views he may
wish to express on the matters referred to in paragraphs 12
and 13 above;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Consideration of effrctive measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
I 12th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/74.

Drafting of an international convention
against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence,
territorial integrity of States and self-determination of
peoples, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and developed in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations,2
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20
December I 968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969.
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970 and 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, and its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December I 960, as well as Security Council resolutions
405 (1977) of 14 April 1977, 419 (1977) of 24 November
1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and 507 (1982) of
28 May 1982, in which the United Nations denounced the
practice of using mercenaries, in particular against developing countries and national liberation movements,
Recalling in particular its resolution 39/84 of 13 December 1984, by which it renewed the mandate of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on its fifth session, 40
Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary to fundamental principles of international law, such
as non-interference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede
the process of self-determination of peoples struggling
against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of
foreign domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter,

310

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad Hoe
Committee has made some progress, it has not yet fulfilled
its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made by the Ad Hoe Committee.
especially during its fifth session;
2. Decides to renew the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee to enable it to continue its work on the drafting of
an international convention against the recruitment, use,
financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to use the draft articles contained in chapter
V of its report, 40 entitled "Consolidated negotiating basis
of a convention against the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries" as a basis for future negotiation
on the text of the proposed international convention;
4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals of Member States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments expressed at the current session of the General
Assembly; 41
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working groups;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
1. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
sixth session for four weeks, from I 6 June to 11 July 1986;
8. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its sixth session and to
submit a draft convention to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Ad /lot'
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries".
I I 2th plenary meeting
I 1 December 1985

40/75. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session, 24
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations 2 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
41 Ibid.. fi,rtwth Semon. Snth ( ·,,,n1nill1'c. 11th to 17th. 44th and 4Xth
meetings.

progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed interest for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the International Law Commission should continue its work on the
topics in its current programme, bearing in mind the clear
desirability of achieving as much progress as possible in
the preparation of draft articles on specific topics before
the conclusion of the term of office of the present membership;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission concerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 297 to 306 of its report; 24
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars and appeals to States that can do so
to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently
needed for the holding of the seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the fortieth session of the General Assembly4 2 and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
112th plenary meeting
II December 1985

40/76.

Preparation for the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States
and International Organizations or between
International Organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
hy which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
42 /hid .. Sixth ( ·omm111,•e, 23rd to 36th,--46th and 47th meetings; and 1h1d.
Snrh Comm1tte1·. Sess,onal Fasc1cle. corrigendum.
