UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/37
23 December 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3960th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 December 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council deplores the serious deterioration of the
situation in Angola and calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities.
It reaffirms its firm commitment to preserve the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola.
"The Security Council reiterates that the primary responsibility for
the failure to achieve peace in Angola clearly lies with the leadership of
the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA). The
persistent violation by UNITA, under the leadership of Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
of its obligations under the "Acordos de Paz" (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka
Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular those obligations related to the complete demilitarization of
its forces and the extension of State administration throughout the
national territory, has seriously undermined the peace process.
"The Security Council demands that UNITA comply immediately and
without conditions with its obligations and reiterates that only a
political settlement, on the basis of the relevant agreements and
resolutions, will bring a lasting peace to Angola.
"The Security Council, in this context, urges the Government of Angola
and UNITA to cooperate fully with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, including by facilitating his contacts with all those
key to reviving the stalled peace process and to implementing the Lusaka
Protocol. It expresses concern at the public statements blaming the United
Nations for the recent aggravation of the security situation in the
country. The Council reiterates its full support to the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), whose mandate has been extended until
26 February 1999, and emphasizes that both the Government of Angola, which
concurred with the extension of this mandate, and UNITA have an obligation
to guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of MONUA personnel.

98-40331 (E)

231298

/...

S/PRST/1998/37
English
Page 2

"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the worsening
humanitarian situation in Angola and emphasizes the responsibility of the
Government of Angola and the leadership of UNITA to facilitate humanitarian
assistance efforts, guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
humanitarian workers and permit an independent assessment of the needs of
the civilian population, to be carried out swiftly in any part of the
country as necessary. The Council also expresses concern at the plight of
those must vulnerable groups, such as children, women, the elderly and
internally displaced persons who are particularly at risk and need special
protection.
"The Security Council urges the Government of Angola and the
leadership of UNITA to ensure full respect for international humanitarian,
refugee and human rights law.
"The Security Council underscores the need for the full and immediate
implementation of the measures against UNITA contained in resolutions
864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and
1173 (1998) of 12 June 1998. It expresses deep concern at recent reports
of violations of these measures, particularly those related to arms and
diamonds, and expresses its intention to follow up on these reports.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at reports that
aircraft were shot down over UNITA-controlled areas and demands full
cooperation by all concerned, especially UNITA, in the investigation of
these incidents, including of the fate of the crews and passengers.
"The Security Council remains actively seized of the matter."

-----
