United Nations

S/PV.5637

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5637th meeting
Friday, 9 March 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Gayama
Mr. De Rivière
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Ansari
Mr. Leplinskiy
Mr. Burian
Ms. Pierce
Mr. McBride

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-26496 (E)

*0726496*

S/PV.5637

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
The Security Council will now hear a briefing by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Sir, for inviting me to participate
in this meeting. I also thank your country for the
important role it has played and continues to play in
stabilizing and bringing peace to the Great Lakes
region. During my four-and-a-half year tenure, which
ends in a few days, I have enjoyed the unswerving
support and wise counsel of your Government.
I also need to thank the Republic of South Africa
for the important political and diplomatic role it has
played and continues to play in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region. The International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region would not have been a success if the
peace processes in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had not also proceeded
smoothly. Once again, I thank you. Your presidency of
the Security Council this month and the convening of
this meeting are further testimony to South Africa’s
commitment.
On 20 December 2006, in the wake of the Nairobi
summit of 14 and 15 December — which represented

2

the culmination of the preparatory process for the
International Conference, adopting the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region — the Security Council decided to hold a
meeting to hear the conclusions emanating from that
important summit. On the basis of the Council’s
conclusions, an additional and final three-month
mandate was given to the Office that I have the honour
to head in order to ensure a harmonious transition
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and the
Executive Secretariat of the Conference established at
the Nairobi summit.
I will brief the Security Council today on the
basis of two themes. The first is the process of
transferring competencies from the Office of the
Special Representative to the Executive Secretariat of
the Conference, which has been under way since
1 January. I will then try very briefly to outline the
lessons learned from the experience of preparing for
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.
With respect to the transfer of competencies, in
accordance with the statement issued by the Council on
20 December 2006, we have been working since 1
January with Ambassador Mulamula, Executive
Secretary of the Conference, to undertake the transfer
from my Office to the Executive Secretariat. In that
context, we have worked in three areas.
First, we transferred the institutional memory of
the preparatory process for the International
Conference. We assembled and transferred all of the
documents drafted from June 2003 to March 2006. The
transfer is now complete and we are simply waiting for
the Executive Secretariat to acquire the necessary
facilities in Bujumbura to allow it to finalize the
transfer of the documents in hard copy and electronic
versions.
Secondly, we assisted in the establishment of the
new Executive Secretariat. That primarily involved the
drafting and adoption of management, legal,
administrative and financial manuals. We then assisted
the Executive Secretary in drafting and preparing the
headquarters agreement with the Government of
Burundi. In the same vein, we helped the Executive
Secretary in her other efforts with respect to the
Government of Kenya, which holds the Conference
presidency. Even as I speak, the Minister for Foreign

07-26496

S/PV.5637

Affairs of Kenya is hosting his counterparts at a
meeting of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee,
to which I will refer again later.
Thirdly, we assisted the Executive Secretary in
implementing the recruitment of consultants to the
Executive Secretariat for the transition period. As
Council members know, the Executive Secretariat does
not yet have any real budget. We also helped the
Executive Secretary to convene a number of meetings
and organized a meeting of national coordinators to
adopt the Executive Secretariat’s management
manuals. We further assisted the Executive Secretary
and the Association of European Parliamentarians for
Africa in organizing in Kinshasa a regional meeting for
parliamentarians of the Great Lakes region. That
meeting succeeded, first, in terms of the attendance of
representatives of all countries of the region, including
a number of delegations led by speakers of senates or
houses; and secondly, in adopting a declaration and a
report in which the parliamentarians undertook to assist
in the prompt ratification and speedy implementation
of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in
the Great Lakes Region adopted at the Nairobi summit.
We are currently assisting the Executive
Secretariat in preparing and organizing a meeting of
the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Great
Lakes region, a body established under the Conference.
The meeting is to be held in Bujumbura on 22 and
23 March.
Lastly, we are working with the Executive
Secretary to prepare for a meeting of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to be held on
13 March in Addis Ababa, which will focus
specifically on assessing the preparatory process for
the Conference and the joint role played by the African
Union and the United Nations.
We therefore believe that, as of 31 March, the
transfer of competencies will have been carried out in
its entirety. In that respect, at our suggestion the
Executive Secretary has written a letter to the
Secretary-General requesting that all of the equipment
from the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General be transferred as a donation to the
new Executive Secretariat of the Conference. The
Secretary-General, with whom I met yesterday, is
monitoring this request very closely and has issued
guidance so that a positive and rapid response may be
given to him.

07-26496

Perhaps the time has now come to try to draw
some lessons from this entire preparatory process. The
first lesson to be drawn is clearly the importance of the
role of the Security Council in the preparatory process
and, as a result, the importance of the role that the
Council should play in the implementation of the Pact.
Throughout the preparatory process, the Office of
the Special Representative has received diplomatic and
political support from the Council here in New York
and in the field. This support could have been more
effective if it had been accompanied by support in
terms of staff recruitment. The Council preferred to
maintain the Office’s staffing at the skeletal level.
Without the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), which backed us up
with two officers, the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), which provided an
officer, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which also seconded
one person, the Office of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General would not have been in the position
to carry out its function of facilitating the preparatory
process.
It is essential that the Council acknowledge the
consequences. The Council cannot issue a mandate as
important as organizing an international conference on
the Great Lakes region that includes 11 countries —
and the Council had insisted that the conference be
expanded to 11 countries — without providing the
resources necessary to complete the task.
The second lesson to be drawn is to look into the
future with respect to the Council’s role. It is important
that the process of ratifying the Pact be done as soon as
possible. I will come back to this point. But the
Council needs to support and accompany this
ratification process in order that it take place as quickly
as possible. The region is still fragile. The Conference
process has created an atmosphere of trust, but this
atmosphere is tenuous and, without prompt ratification
and rapid implementation of this Pact, it could
deteriorate at any moment. Therefore, I urge the
Council to use its moral authority to support and boost
prompt ratification of this Pact.
The third lesson to be drawn is one concerning
the member countries. The preparatory process was
built on three principles — the principle of ownership,
the principle of inclusion and the principle of
partnerships.

3

S/PV.5637

The principle of ownership is essential. Today,
more than ever, the countries of the region need to
effectively exercise their ownership of the process,
which, beyond establishment of the secretariat,
encompasses the rapid ratification of the Pact, the
payment of assessments to the regular budget for the
secretariat and the creation of the Special Fund for
Reconstruction and Development.
This political commitment was reaffirmed by the
heads of State, but it is essential that the commitment
be confirmed by action. To date, only two countries
have paid their assessments to the Conference
secretariat. Furthermore, with respect to ratification,
the Office of the Special Representative is not yet
aware of any State having ratified the Pact. It is
therefore essential that this primary responsibility of
countries of the region be highlighted, and for that I
also call here on the Council’s authority.
It is essential that the priorities adopted by the
Conference with regard to programmes of action and
protocols be implemented effectively. On this point,
there are number of key projects, some of which have
received financing upstream. That is the case with
reviving the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries, for which the European Union has already
committed to contributing $5 million for relaunching
the secretariat and $45 million for project
implementation.
As we know, the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries includes the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, that is to
say that, together with Uganda, it is a circle of fire, the
most unstable part of Great Lakes region. Thus is
urgent that these projects be quickly implemented.
Similarly, the Pact also laid out transborder areas
of development and established border areas for shared
management of border problems. Here again, the
Conference
could
anticipate
implementation,
particularly by drawing on an already existing
initiative, namely, the Tripartite Plus One initiative,
which includes the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda, under the authority of
the United States of America. It is essential that, as in
the work of the preparatory process for the Conference
with the authorities in Washington, there be better
synergy between the Tripartite Plus One and the
projects of the International Conference on the Great

4

Lakes Region with respect to transborder zones
involving those four countries.
Lastly, it is essential to maintain the momentum
from the Conference. For that, during the Security
Council’s periodic visits to the region, particular
importance needs to be given to implementation of the
Pact. That could also draw upon peacekeeping
missions that the Council has decided upon,
specifically, with regard to the Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi.
Moreover, I should say that, with respect to the
Conference, the principle of inclusiveness needs to be
maintained. That means giving non-governmental
players, particularly women and young people and civil
society, but also parliamentarians, the possibility to
take part in the process of implementing the Pact. The
Pact, if it is properly applied, could provide an
example of a regional, comprehensive approach that
could be duplicated in some other regions in Africa or
elsewhere because, from experience, we know that this
kind of regional comprehensive approach, bringing
together peace and security, democracy and good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, is the only likely way to tackle all of the
problems of human security in a comprehensive
manner.
Mr. President, I conclude by saying to you, with a
sense of pride, what a privilege and honour it has been
for me to serve both the United Nations and Africa
through this preparation for the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing. I
shall now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make comments or ask questions in response to
the briefing we have just heard.
Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for
his briefing and commend him for the good work he
has been doing, which has contributed immensely to
peace, security and development in that region. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to extend our best
wishes to him in his next assignment after the end of
this month, when the mandate of his current
assignment expires.
Barely three months ago, this Council had the
opportunity to congratulate the Governments and

07-26496

S/PV.5637

people of the Great Lakes region on their signing the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in that
region and called upon the regional leaders to commit
themselves to the implementation of all aspects of that
agreement. It was the hope of the Council that the
signing of the Pact would turn the region from a state
of desolation engendered by a long period of
instability, violent conflict, insecurity, carnage,
widespread violation of fundamental human rights and
underdevelopment into a state of sustainable peace,
security and socio-economic development.
In this connection, we are encouraged that a
regional parliamentary meeting of the Great Lakes
region, which took place in Kinshasa, supported the
Pact, which was signed at the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in December 2006 in
Nairobi. We are also delighted to note that the
parliamentarians
acknowledged
their
role
in
contributing
to
the
early
ratification
and
implementation of the Great Lakes regional peace pact.
This entire process will also require the sensitization of
the people, as well as strengthening relations between
civil society, Governments and parliaments.
The parliamentarians of the Great Lakes region
also committed themselves to establishing a regional
parliamentary forum in order to encourage dialogue
and to contribute to the mobilization of internal and
external resources for the implementation of the
programme. It is important to heed the call for States to
honour their financial contributions to the budget of the
secretariat of the Great Lakes if the Pact is to succeed.
While commending the efforts of the legislators
in moving the process of ratification and
implementation of the Pact a step forward, it is
worthwhile to mention that all of these good intentions
require the commitment and political will of the
regional leaders to succeed. The leaders should rise
above their national and sectional interests and put the
interests of the Great Lakes region first. The
parliamentarians must see themselves as uniquely
placed to encourage their respective member States to
harmonize their national legislation for the
implementation of the various protocols.
Regional ownership of the process is essential for
peace and sustainable development of the region. A key
element of full ownership of this endeavour will
require joint and coordinated efforts of neighbouring
countries and regional institutions. The regional leaders

07-26496

should also endeavour to convert the Conference into a
regional peacebuilding forum for the prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of conflicts.
In view of the current unstable situation in
eastern Congo and northern Uganda, there is an urgent
need for leaders of the Great Lakes region to cooperate
on cross-border security and trade, with the aim of
spurring development after decades of civil conflict.
Dialogue should become the only medium for
resolving conflicts.
For its part, the international community should
continue to monitor closely the peace talks between the
Government and rebel groups in Uganda and support
the implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, especially as
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants are
seen as crucial in the efforts toward the region’s
progress in the areas of good governance and economic
recovery.
In this regard, we commend the rebel groups in
eastern Congo for agreeing to disarm, and we urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to intensify its efforts at retraining ex-combatants and
reintegrating them into the national armed forces. The
international community should complement these
efforts by supporting regional peacebuilding projects
that address the plight of returnees, stem the flow of
small arms and light weapons, check the activities of
mercenaries in the region, promote demining
techniques and curb the illegal exploitation and illicit
trading of natural resources.
Finally,
we
commend
the
international
community, including the joint United Nations-African
Union (AU) secretariat and its team of experts, led by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, for their
contribution to the successful completion of the two
conferences in December 2006 and February 2007. We
also support the recommendation of the regional
parliamentary meeting for the Great Lakes region that
the international community, notably the United
Nations and the AU, continue their support for peace
and reconstruction of the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for organizing
this informational meeting on a region in the heart of
Africa that is dear to Belgium. I would also like to

5

S/PV.5637

thank Mr. Fall, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the briefing he has just given us.

hopes that this meeting will help speed up the
ratification process to which I have just referred.

Last December, the Security Council had an
opportunity to congratulate the countries of the Great
Lakes region for having brought to a positive
conclusion the second summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Nairobi
on 15 December 2006. The Council also congratulated
the countries for having signed the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development for the Great Lakes Region
on that occasion.

Finally, it is important for the Special Fund for
Reconstruction
and
Development
that
the
implementation of the Pact become fully operational so
that this Fund may fulfil its role. Each of the 11
member States must comply with their commitments
and provide funding. For its part, Belgium is prepared
to consider contributions to specific financing
mechanisms for projects and contributions as well to
the Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development,
once the Fund has been declared operational by the
African Development Bank. For my country, the
programme of action for peace and stability and the
confidence-building
measures
are
particularly
important, as is the protocol to combat the illegal
exportation of natural resources.

The adoption of this Pact was preceded by, and
was made possible by, particularly positive
developments in the region. In August 2005, Burundi
entered a new era. On 6 December 2006, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo placed President
Kabila in office following elections that put an end to a
lengthy transitional period. In Uganda, discussions
with the Lord’s Resistance Army are under way. And,
finally, we have seen considerable progress in Rwanda
in recent years.
These developments are, first of all, the result of
the efforts and the tenacity shown by the people of the
region themselves, supported in these efforts by the
international community. It is now crucial for the
commitments undertaken to be truly implemented.
In the first place, we need to ensure that the
regional follow-up mechanism — a secretariat headed
by Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Executive Secretary —
becomes fully operational. Setting up the secretariat in
Bujumbura will make it possible for the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) to hand this task over to
the member countries of the Conference. For the
secretariat to be truly operational, it is important for
the countries of the region to provide it solid
assistance, supported in that by donors. Belgium, for
its part, is prepared to consider support.
Secondly, the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development must be ratified in all countries of the
region. Mr. Fall has just reminded us of how important
that ratification is. In this respect, my delegation
welcomes the holding of the regional parliamentary
meeting on the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. That meeting, held from 26 to
28 February in Kinshasa was co-organized by the
Association of European Parliamentarians for Africa
(AWEPA) and co-financed by my country. Belgium

6

I would also like to underline the importance of
greater regional integration among the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. We
believe that the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries (ECGLC) has an important role to
play in this regard through establishing greater regional
integration among countries that have had to deal with
dire situations but that are now called upon to work
together to accelerate the economic and social progress
that their people expect.
The relaunch of ECGLC will provide support for
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region agreed at the International
Conference, which provides for cross-border security
and development in eastern Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi. The ECGLC will also provide support for
other integration efforts already under way in the
region, in particular the East African Community and
the Economic Community of Central African States.
Finally, it can provide a framework for cooperation in
the areas of energy, regional development and
agriculture. Belgium hopes that a ministerial meeting
of ECGLC will take place in April in Bujumbura,
thereby re-launching that important instrument.
I could not conclude without expressing warm
thanks to Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his tireless efforts in
support of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region throughout his mandate.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his
briefing. As his tenure will soon be coming to an end, I

07-26496

S/PV.5637

would also like to thank him for the excellent job that
he has done as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region. We know how
closely he has been working with the African Union
with a view to facilitating the Conference process.
The signing in Nairobi of the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region
provided new impetus to cooperation efforts among the
countries of the Great Lakes region. Such regional
cooperation is an essential component of the internal
stabilization process that a number of countries in the
region have had to undertake — a process that, for
some, is still under way.
As my delegation has already emphasized, we
believe that in this context two aspects are particularly
important. The first is security. As this is a cross-border
problem, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region opens a special framework within which
to seek solutions. The problem of security continues to
be relevant, although it is less pressing today than in
the past, which is a welcome development.
The second aspect is economic relationships.
Each country in the region will be able to develop in a
sustainable manner only if it can do so in the context of
a regional economic framework that is stable and
balanced. That requires strengthened economic
cooperation and the transparent and mutually
beneficial management of the natural resources of the
region.
I would like to welcome the determination of the
States of the region to work together to overcome their
common challenges. Such regional efforts must
continue. To that end, the States parties to the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
must take ownership of that new instrument.
Ownership is a prerequisite for the success of the
process undertaken at Dar es-Salaam and Nairobi. I
therefore welcome the decision of the States parties to
the Conference to seek to continue and enhance the
process under way through the implementation of
regional monitoring mechanisms.
The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, will remain committed, together
with the Great Lakes region, to contributing to the
success of the process. The Security Council will soon
have an opportunity to reconsider the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with a view to

07-26496

adapting it to the post-transition context. The
Peacebuilding Commission will provide support for
reconstruction and development efforts in Burundi.
More broadly, the United Nations system will, we
hope, remain deeply committed to the region, for
which is has spared no efforts.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
for his final briefing on the situation in the area. I
would like to commend him for a job well done since
he assumed his duties as Special Representative.
It is with satisfaction that one can say that the
situation in the Great Lakes region has improved to a
great extent when compared with that of just a few
years ago, when the international community tended to
regard the area as a byword for spiralling violence,
humanitarian chaos and social tragedy.
Indeed, before our very eyes, almost all of the
countries in the region have successfully emerged from
conflict and are on a steady and sound path towards
economic and social development. Over the past few
years there has been steady progress in the areas of
peace, security and democratization. That is a
remarkable achievement, and Indonesia is pleased to
commend all of the nations and peoples of the Great
Lakes region for their efforts and their determination to
create the foundation for lasting peace and progress.
My delegation is of the view that the convening
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region last December, followed by the signing of the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, is the culmination of efforts to
establish durable peace, security, stability and
sustainable development in the area. It is now time to
translate those aspirations into a concrete programme
of projects and plans.
In that regard, it should be noted that there are
still some outstanding issues to be addressed by the
countries of the region. These include combating the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, addressing
humanitarian and human rights issues, supporting
institution-building, strengthening the rule of law and
advancing good governance.
The signing of the Pact, as well as the creation of
the Conference secretariat, will also bring the countries

7

S/PV.5637

in the region to the level of the new regional ownership
concept. This approach is in line with Security Council
resolution 1653 (2006), which, inter alia, urged
countries in the region to develop a subregional
approach for promoting good relations, peaceful
coexistence and the peaceful resolution of disputes.
Finally, my delegation would also like to appeal
to donor countries, as well as to United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, to consider providing
necessary assistance to the Conference secretariat and
the Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development
in support of the implementation of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.
We have travelled very far with the Governments
and the peoples of what was once a very difficult
region. With the finish line in sight, we must do
everything necessary to help the people to complete
this remarkable and irreversible journey.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, for his briefing. We would like to express our
gratitude to him for his tireless efforts over the past
few years to assist the Great Lakes region. I would also
like to express my best wishes to him.
We are pleased to note the recent important
progress in the peace process in the region. Countries
there have gradually emerged from the shadow of
conflict and are actively carrying out post-conflict
reconstruction. The second summit of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region and the
meeting of regional parliamentarians were successfully
completed. The signing of the Stability, Security and
Development Pact for the region is an indication of the
new important progress by the countries to resolve
conflicts themselves and to make joint efforts towards
economic development.
We believe that through dialogue and
consultation, the countries of the region can seek
appropriate solutions to the issues and make further
efforts to consolidate good-neighbourly relations. We
hope that the International Conference can continue to
provide a platform for the countries of the region to
carry out constructive dialogue and cooperation, so as
bring about lasting peace and stability in the region
soon as possible.

8

Peacebuilding efforts in the region cannot be
carried out without the support of the international
community. The international community should
continue to monitor the countries in the region
emerging from conflict, as well as to increase its
economic assistance to them and help them in capacitybuilding. As a friend of all the countries of the region,
China will, in the framework of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation, continue to strengthen its
multidimensional cooperation with those countries in
order to make an active contribution to the
achievement of lasting peace, stability, and
development in the region.
Finally, China would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the African
Union and the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region for their contributions to peace and stability in
the region.
Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): As my
country is one of the 11 that make up the Great Lakes
region in the larger sense that Mr. Ibrahima Fall
mentioned, it is on behalf of all those countries — my
own, of course, but also those represented in the
Chamber, including those whose representatives are
seated at the side of the Council Chamber as well as
those whose representatives are currently away from
New York — that I would like today to express our
gratitude to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his professionalism and
commitment in carrying out his duties, which consisted
in establishing community institutions for the Great
Lakes region. We thank him most sincerely for that.
As Mr. Fall concludes his mission, it can be said
that the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region is now a reality. It is indeed a fragile institution
and must for that reason be strengthened —
specifically, by ensuring that the countries of the
region assume ownership for the mechanisms that have
been established. That is a requirement that must first
be met before the support of the international
community can continue. The countries of the region
should send a clear message as to their commitment to
the important tool for peace and development that they
have now established.
The ratification of the Stability, Security and
Development Pact then becomes a key and
indispensable requirement. Generally speaking, that
ownership can move from dream to the reality that, in

07-26496

S/PV.5637

all countries of the region, Governments and peoples
have always called for, namely, peace and
development.
The Great Lakes region is of key importance, not
just for Africa but also for the world. That region is
where one finds the Congo River Basin, which, after
the Amazon, is the world’s second largest ecological
lung, as it were. The region is also home to established
institutions operating to some degree or other. To a
certain extent, those institutions constitute the fabric of
the region. I am referring to the Economic Community
of Central African States, the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa and the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries, whose
reactivation is called for by all those concerned about
improving the situation in the region.
The international community has therefore rightly
called the Great Lakes region a special reconstruction
and development area. We therefore believe that it is
urgent that the Community’s secretariat be able to
function properly. The indispensable support of the
international community must be channelled through
the secretariat and its member countries in order to
ensure that the entire structure can operate.
With regard to institutional coherence, it is being
developed on the basis of the genuine cultural unity
that exists in the region. That is evident in the major
languages utilized in the region, namely, Swahili and
Lingala, among others. That will undoubtedly
contribute to an inclusive approach, in which we
believe civil society will be the primary participant and
beneficiary. It is for that reason that we welcome the
commitment undertaken by parliamentarians of the
region meeting recently in Kinshasa with a view,
primarily, to ratifying the Pact.
There is no doubt that many factors are
contributing to fragility in the region, especially given
that all the elements of peace have not yet been fully
consolidated. The sad reality is that small arms are
circulating freely. Among others, that situation benefits
all those who illegally exploit the vast natural
resources of the region. Fragility is also evident in the
fact that there is still mistrust among the members of
the region, and that mistrust must be eliminated. The
region therefore still needs the international
community.
In that connection, we think that the role of the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region will

07-26496

continue to be welcomed for some time to come. We
support the idea of the Organization’s continuing to
provide cooperation to the regional secretariat in
technical and material terms and in every possible way.
We know that the United Nations is now very
much involved throughout the region. It has been
working in Burundi, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and countries adjacent to the region,
particularly the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. But the United Nations has not done only
that. In Central Africa, it has also long promoted the
activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
which some time ago signed a non-aggression pact
bringing together many countries, particularly
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States. All of that reflects the historic United
Nations commitment to this region, whose recovery
will be a very important step for Africa as a whole.
That is why, at this point, it would be good if the
Security Council could define, or seek to encourage the
Secretariat to define, all support modalities that the
United Nations can provide to the Great Lakes
region — mindful, obviously, of lessons learned from
experience, such as those succinctly referred to by
Mr. Ibrahima Fall.
Mr. McBride (United States of America): I want
to thank Special Representative Fall for his briefing.
The United States joins the others in this Chamber in
thanking him for four years of leadership in the Great
Lakes region.
Over the past decade, this resource-rich region in
the heart of Africa has suffered from wrenching,
destabilizing conflicts that have produced almost
unimaginable suffering. Today the situation remains
fragile and the challenges remain immense, but the
prospects for peace and development have improved,
in part because of the attention of the international
community, but even more so because of the will and
efforts of the people in the region to overcome these
setbacks.
The transition in Burundi and the historic
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
among a number of encouraging developments. We
have all noted that a spirit of trust and cooperation is
growing among the States in the region. The Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, signed in Nairobi on 15 December 2006 by

9

S/PV.5637

11 African States, was a promising conclusion to the
United Nations-sponsored International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. This agreement has the
potential to become a means of preventing future
conflicts in Central Africa, while offering a road map
for consolidating democracy, good governance and
development.
We join others in encouraging the States in the
region to live up to their commitments, to respect
national sovereignty, to seek the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to cooperate to strengthen the economies
of the region. That is a vision that cannot be imposed;
regional ownership of this process is vital.
Bilateral agreements and other regional efforts
can and should complement this process. We would
note, in that regard, one initiative that my country has
facilitated: the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission, which
is aimed at promoting security and stability in and
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi. We are confident that those
countries, which are also signatories to the Nairobi
Pact, will fulfil their commitments to enhance
cooperation for peace among Commission members.
Mr. Leplinskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation expresses its
gratitude to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
for his substantive briefing. Progress in the peace
process in the Great Lakes region would not have been
possible without the active involvement of the Office
of the Special Representative and the African Union.
Together with the regional secretariat, they have made
much progress in terms of organizing the Dar esSalaam and Nairobi summits.
Today’s meeting attests eloquently to the
attention that the Security Council is devoting to the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We are pleased to
note encouraging developments. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo has held its first democratic
elections in four decades. Peacebuilding efforts are
under way in Burundi, whose problems are on the
agenda of the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission. Issues related to northern Uganda are
being gradually addressed; peacebuilding measures
have been elaborated and are being carried out.
Multilateral security mechanisms involving the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi are being implemented. Clearly, none of

10

that would have been possible without the assistance of
subregional organizations, partner countries, donors
and international financial institutions.
A critical event last year was the signing by heads
of State of the Great Lakes region, at Nairobi in
December 2006, of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
ushered in a new era of post-conflict rehabilitation and
social development. The primary task for participants
in the International Conference, now and in the near
future, will be to ratify the Pact and to begin the
progressive implementation of decisions taken and
arrangements agreed.
On 31 March the mandate of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region will conclude. The Special
Representative, Mr. Fall, and his staff have done a
great job and deserve the highest praise. Let me also
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to all
those who have assisted and will continue to assist the
Great Lakes region in seeking to achieve lasting peace,
stability and economic progress: the United Republic
of Tanzania, South Africa, the Group of Friends of the
Great Lakes Region, the regional Preparatory
Committee and the National Coordinators.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, I would like
to thank as our partner the Special Representative,
Ambassador Fall, for his comprehensive and detailed
briefing and for his tireless work in these years of
valuable changes for the Great Lakes region.
I wish to commend the positive developments in
the region, such as the successful and peaceful
conclusion of the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the efforts of Burundi in the
peacebuilding process, the achievement of stabilization
in Rwanda and the positive achievement of the Nairobi
Conference in December.
The Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region, adopted in Nairobi, is a
fundamental starting point towards establishing lasting
peace and sustainable development. However, we
remain concerned about the human rights situation and
the important issue of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which affect the economic perspective and
sustainable development of the whole region. At the
same time, we would like to express our concerns
about the stalemate in the Juba peace talks and the
continuing threat that the Lord’s Resistance Army

07-26496

S/PV.5637

poses to the peace and stability of the whole Great
Lakes region.
Good governance and the fight against corruption
are important pillars of the follow-up to the Great
Lakes Conference. It would be interesting for us if
Ambassador Fall could elaborate further on measures
to be taken in that field by the countries involved.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to join others in welcoming the Special Representative
here today, thanking him for his briefing, and also to
express our appreciation for his service and
commitment to the work he has been doing and to the
work of his team.
May I begin by underlining my own country’s
commitment to security, stability and development in
the Great Lakes region. In support of those goals, we
are providing approximately $1 billion in bilateral
development and humanitarian programmes in the
region, and we will continue to sustain a substantial
effort, bilaterally and through the European Union.
As other representatives have said this morning,
the signature of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development at the Great Lakes summit in December
2006 was a historic moment. It is a significant
opportunity to move towards lasting peace in the
region. We strongly urge, therefore, that the leaders of
the Great Lakes region press ahead with
implementation of the Pact. We hope that the new
Executive Secretariat, under the most able leadership
of Ambassador Mulamula of Tanzania, will be
established in Bujumbura in the near future.
The challenges that the countries and people of
the region face are shared, and the solutions must be
shared too. We will play our part in helping to resolve
them.
So much of what has happened in the region in
recent years is linked to events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is an important aspect of
the Security Council’s work. We were awe-inspired by
the determined efforts made by the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to overcome the
catastrophic effects of conflict and to move forward,
through democratic elections, to a secure and better
future. They deserve our praise and our help for what
they have achieved.
The United Nations, too, deserves our
congratulations for its part in that achievement. We

07-26496

look forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s
recommendations next week on the future role that the
United Nations can play in helping the elected
Congolese authorities meet the needs and aspirations of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council should, in our view, also
continue to monitor closely progress in the peace talks
between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s
Resistance Army, which uses the Garamba National
Park in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as its
base. That conflict has driven more than 2 million
people from their homes and, while some of those have
begun to return, stability on the ground in northern
Uganda remains fragile. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, former President Chissano, to find a
negotiated solution, and we hope and believe that the
Security Council will lend its strong vocal support to
his efforts.
Finally, may I urge the countries of the region to
join us in and add their weight to efforts to address
urgently the worsening crisis in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, one of the signatories of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development. It is sobering to
note that, just as the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi and elsewhere in the region are
beginning to experience the rewards and opportunities
that peace brings, their neighbours in Darfur are being
denied the most basic means of survival.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fall for his
briefing, and would like to join other Council members
in congratulating him and other members of his team
on their commendable work carried out during his term
in office, including the preparation and organization of
the Second International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region.
We agree with the observation made by Mr. Fall
that the momentum and positive atmosphere created by
the outcomes of the summit should be maintained and
utilized to strengthen regional cooperation through the
implementation of the decisions of the Conference and
to strengthen peace and democratization processes in
the countries of the region. The signing of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region is an important step for building trust and
confidence in the region, and should be fully supported

11

S/PV.5637

and followed up by the speedy implementation of its
provisions.
We congratulate the countries of the region on
establishing the Conference Executive Secretariat in
Bujumbura and the Special Fund for Reconstruction
and Development in the Great Lakes Region. We
express our hope that they will become fully
operational as soon as possible. We believe that the
international community must continue to provide full
support and assistance in that area, and we share the
concern expressed by Mr. Fall that the positive
atmosphere of trust that has been created could quickly
evaporate if we do not manage to carry through the
decisions and outcomes of the International Conference
and strengthen regional confidence and cooperation.
In that regard, it is crucial for the countries of the
region to assume full ownership of the process,
including by paying their assessments to the budget.
We agree with Mr. Fall that a successful project of
regional cooperation in the Great Lakes region can
positively influence developments in other parts of the
African continent, serving as a source of inspiration for
others to follow.
Nevertheless,
despite
all
the
positive
developments in the region, we remain concerned
about several pockets of instability in the area. In
particular, we are deeply concerned about the situation
regarding the peace negotiations with the Lord’s
Resistance Army. The stalemate in the peace
negotiations and the inability to extend the truce have
returned us to the situation that prevailed in northern
Uganda and the surrounding region a year ago. Unless
we proceed quickly and resolutely on that issue, we
may miss the best opportunity for peace in Uganda that
has emerged in 20 years. In that regard, we look
forward to the visit of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Lord’s Resistance Armyaffected areas, Joaquim Chissano, to New York later
this month and to hearing his ideas on how the Security
Council can help to reinvigorate the peace process.
Mr. Al-Ansari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his briefing. I wish him every
success following the end of his tenure this month.
I commend the special attention that the
Secretary-General has paid to the Great Lakes region;
his field visits to certain countries there upon assuming

12

his office; his attendance at the summit of the African
Union in Addis Ababa in late January; and the
important meetings he held at the margins of the
summit with representatives of important countries of
the Great Lakes region.
We recall Security Council resolution 1653
(2006), adopted following the First International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, held in Dar
es-Salaam in 2004. We also recall the conclusions and
declaration adopted at the Second Conference, held in
Nairobi in 2006, which resulted in the signing of the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region by the regional heads of State. The
Security Council adopted a presidential statement
supporting the summit and endorsing its results
following the open debate held on 20 December 2006,
under my delegation’s presidency. We look forward to
the ratification of the Pact so that its practical
implementation can begin.
One of the tangible positive steps taken by the
second Conference is the establishment of regional
follow-up and monitoring mechanisms through the
establishment of the secretariat in Bujumbura. We pay
special attention to the need for payment of the
assessed contributions to the secretariat in order to
ensure its smooth functioning. Its work will include the
promotion of all stakeholders and actors in civil society
and dealing with some of the main questions in the
Great Lakes region, including those pertaining to
women, youth, reform of the security sector and
exploitation of natural resources in the region.
It will be extremely important, in this regard, to
set priorities in implementation. We appreciate the role
of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region and
urge it to continue to play its role in the
implementation of the Pact. We also urge all
international partners to continue their positive
involvement, particularly after the decision of the
Great Lakes region to establish a trust fund for that
purpose. That means there will be an appropriate
mechanism to give the necessary support.
We must not lose sight of the fact that there is a
need to implement previous resolutions of the Security
Council, which are extremely important to the
countries of the Great Lakes region, particularly those
pertaining the prevention of conflicts, assessment of
the problem of armed groups and violations of human

07-26496

S/PV.5637

rights, as well as ways and means to preserve peace
and security in the region and solving the problems of
displaced persons and refugees in the region.
In this regard, we note particularly the
implementation of resolutions 1625 (2005), 1631
(2005), 1649 (2005), 1653 (2006), which, we believe,
will be a very important factor in ensuring the success
of the mechanisms established by the Great Lakes
region. Implementation will constitute a connection
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.
We also believe there is a need to benefit from
the role of other international regional and subregional
organizations in order to find means to deal with the
problems of the region. The Peacebuilding
Commission’s discharge of its mandate in the region
will have a direct and positive influence on the
resolution of the problems of the African continent as a
whole.
Fully aware of the challenges facing us, we
believe that sustainable development will not be
achieved without good governance and assured and
adequate sources of income, which can be achieved
only through security and stability. Security and
stability cannot be achieved, in turn, without clear
cooperation among the countries and the peoples of the
region and the support of the international community
as a whole. That will facilitate the conclusion of
transparent economic accords between the countries of
the region and international financial institutions.
Those accords and agreements must be based on a clear
understanding of the socio-economic situation in those
countries and the cancellation of their foreign debt, or
at least the amelioration of their debt situation.
Projects that are founded on sound economic and
financial bases must also be established, particularly in
view of the strategic location of the region on the
continent of Africa and its immense natural resources.
We also would like to reiterate the need for
regional ownership of all programmes and projects
carried out in the Great Lakes region. I would like to
ask Mr. Fall about efforts to implement the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region. When does he expect the Pact to be fully
implemented? And what are the impediments that are
blocking its implementation?

07-26496

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.
South Africa joins other members of the Security
Council in congratulating Mr. Fall on his commitment
to the efforts to bring about peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. South Africa is
truly honoured by the kind of service he has given to
the Great Lakes region and to Africa as a whole
throughout his service to the United Nations.
We also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Mr. Fall’s efforts in initiating, together with the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. We recall that the International Conference
was initiated after decades of armed conflict and
humanitarian disasters in the region, in particular the
genocide in Rwanda and the conflicts in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are pleased that we have recognized that
development has a political meaning, encompassing
security and stability, without which no sustainable
development is possible. This recognition has brought
a refreshing outlook to our understanding of peace in
the Great Lakes region.
Today, the Great Lakes region in Africa is on the
threshold of establishing lasting peace. There has been
a reduction in both intra-State and inter-State conflicts.
Even though we are still concerned about the negative
forces that remain active, particularly in the eastern
part of the Congo, tensions have been reduced.
Nonetheless, South Africa is pleased at the
progress that has been made in countries such as
Burundi, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which recently inaugurated a democratic
Government. The region has continued to suffer from
the lack of resources to help it meet developmental
objectives, including the Millennium Development
Goals. We are pleased that Mr. Fall’s efforts have
contributed immensely to addressing the critical and
sensitive issue of plundering national and natural
resources in the region.
The region is also experiencing increased
political dialogue and collaboration in the resolution of
conflicts and towards post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. There is now a chance that we may be
witnessing a new direction towards peace, stability and
development in the Great Lakes region.

13

S/PV.5637

In this regard, the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region signed by
countries of the region is significant because it creates
a positive environment for sustainable development.
The fact that it allows the leaders of the region to meet
regularly is, in itself, very positive, indeed.
South Africa is privileged to have been part of the
process leading to the convening of the International
Conference. We remain committed to assisting the
region in effectively addressing the objectives that
remain on the transitional agenda. Today, we look back
with pride and with hope for an African renaissance in
the Great Lakes region.
I thank Mr. Fall very much for his service.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ibrahima Fall to
respond to comments and questions that were raised.
Mr. Fall: First of all, Mr. President, I would like
to thank you for the appreciation expressed by you and
your colleagues in the Security Council for the work
done by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region. I will
convey those congratulations to my colleagues, as well
as to the other part of the joint secretariat, which is the
African Union (AU).
I am sure that the debate that has just taken place
will contribute immensely to helping the countries
realize the importance for them to work very quickly
for the speedy ratification of the Pact and for its full
implementation.
Questions were raised about good governance
and the fight against corruption. I must say that from
the beginning the issue of bad governance — lack of
democracy — has been central to the discussions that
led, first, to the adoption by the Dar es-Salaam summit
of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, which underlines the
importance of lack of democracy and lack of good
governance as factors that explain the conflicts and
wars that affected the region for the last decade. For
that reason, the cluster on democracy and good
governance is one of the most important within the
Conference.
Several protocols and projects are dealing with
the fight against lack of good governance and lack of
democracy. They include the protocol on democracy

14

and good governance, the protocol on judicial
cooperation among the members of the Conference, the
protocol on prevention of crimes against humanity,
crimes of genocide and so on, and the protocol on
illegal exploitation of natural resources. All these
protocols are really focusing on the centrality of good
governance and good democracy and on the fight
against corruption as a pillar for the stabilization of the
region.
Among the projects is the regional centre for
democracy, good governance and human rights, and
several forums that offer a framework through which
women, youth and civil society regionally can meet
regularly, discuss issues and put pressure on their
Governments to respect democracy and good
governance and to fight corruption.
Another question concerned the conditions for the
Pact to be implemented and the obstacles to
implementation. As for the first part of the question,
according to the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes region, it is only when
8 of the 11 countries of the region have ratified the
Pact that implementation will be enforced, 30 days
after the last ratification. We proposed that because one
had to find a balance between full ratification of the
Pact by all 11 countries — which is what we expect —
and, on the other hand, avoiding the fact that failure by
one country to ratify the Pact would mean its not
entering into force. So that was the balance between
unanimity versus the right of veto of one country and
the simple majority. We believe that if the
commitments taken by both the heads of State and then
the heads of parliaments are respected, the Pact could
enter into force very soon.
Concerning the obstacles, these are somehow
related to the bureaucracy of ratification, because so
long as the treaty has not been duly ratified, there is no
obligation for a Government to implement it. However,
countries committed themselves during the Nairobi
summit to doing their utmost not to affect their
commitment to ratification.
I think that cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is central to the Pact’s
implementation framework, and the proposal to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is critical.

07-26496

S/PV.5637

I take this opportunity, once again, to underline
the importance of the cooperation we have had with the
African Union. This is the first time we have had a
joint secretariat. It is not a decision taken by the United
Nations or by the African Union, but it is a de facto
decision that was taken by my Office and that of the
African Union to call ourselves, together as family, a
joint secretariat. I must also say that both the African
Union Chairman, President Konaré, and its
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Said Djinnit, have been constantly involved in
cooperative efforts towards the success of the
Conference, as illustrated by the next meeting of the
AU Peace and Security Council on the outcome of the
Nairobi summit.
Of course, speakers in this morning’s Council
meeting have alluded to some concern in the region —
in Darfur and in Uganda, and on the circulation of
small arms and light weapons. As far as the
negotiations in Juba between the LRA and the
Government of Uganda are concerned, as this Security
Council knows, President Chissano is currently visiting
the region and talking to the interlocutors, and the
Department of Political Affairs is happy to announce
that President Chissano will brief the Security Council
next week on the outcome of his démarche. Darfur, of
course, is a very important concern. We believe that we
have to combine the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement and facing the humanitarian situation in
Darfur. Lastly, but not least, on the subject of small
arms and light weapons, I am glad to inform the
Council that the European Parliamentarians for Africa
(AWEPA) and the Congolese authorities are organizing
a wide-ranging meeting in Brazzaville on 28 and
29 March 2007 to tackle this issue, especially within
the Congo.
The role of the United Nations in the
implementation has also been central to today’s
discussion. Beyond the political and diplomatic role of
this Security Council, it is important that the United
Nations be equipped to articulate a strategy to
accompany the implementation of the Pact, both at the
institutional and operational levels. I am glad to say
that, even before the summit, within the Steering
Committee, where all the United Nations agencies are
represented in Nairobi, each agency was encouraged to
articulate its own strategy and then come together to
merge their different strategies into a whole United
Nations system strategy to accompany the

07-26496

implementation of the Pact. The United Nations
Development Programme has already finalized its
regional strategy for the implementation of the Pact,
and all the agencies are working on that issue.
The Group of Friends and the European Union have
also been alluded to. I would like to take this opportunity
to again underline the fundamental role that the Group of
Friends has played during the whole process of preparing
for the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. I have just returned from The Hague, where a
few days ago the Group of Friends held a meeting
devoted to how best to support the Conference secretariat
and Ambassador Mulamula during the establishment of
the secretariat and until June 2007. The Group of Friends
should have met again by that time to consider its future
as the Group of Friends for the Great Lakes region.
The European Union has also been actively
involved, especially through Mr. Aldo Aiello, its Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes region, and I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay homage to him for his
actions.
Last but not least, the issue of financial
requirements for the implementation of the Pact has also
been central to our discussions. I would like to take a
symbolic approach. The cost of implementing projects
and protocol in the context of the Conference on the Great
Lakes Region is about $2 billion. That is a lot of money.
And of course, the responsibility of the Governments of
the region is pivotal — it is crucial. But the international
community cannot hide behind that central responsibility
and avoid its own responsibility. The $2 billion is
important, but let me say that it represents about two
years of the functioning of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As an African, I believe that the firefighter
approach that the international community, including the
United Nations, generally adopts by deploying
peacekeeping forces is crucial — but it is not enough. It is
better to prevent, it is better to reconstruct so as to prevent
the resurgence of conflict. In that framework, $2 billion is
not very important.
The President: I thank
clarifications that he has provided.

Mr.

Fall

for

the

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

15
