A/55/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

85th plenary meeting
Thursday, 14 December 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Ionatana Ionatana, late Prime Minister
of Tuvalu
The President: Before we take up the items on
our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the
memory of the late Prime Minister of Tuvalu, His
Excellency Mr. Ionatana Ionatana, who passed away on
8 December 2000.
It was only in September this year that the
General Assembly heard his statement on the occasion
of the admission of Tuvalu as the one hundred eightyninth Member State of the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to
convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Tuvalu and to the bereaved family of
Mr. Ionatana Ionatana.
I invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
Mr. Ionatana Ionatana.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
Agenda item 182
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/55/L.56/Rev.1)

The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Jin Yongjian (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services):
Before action is taken on draft resolution
A/55/L.56/Rev.1, I should like to inform members that
the draft resolution, inter alia, calls for an integrated,
coordinated, comprehensive and balanced approach in
the implementation of the Millennium Declaration. It
calls upon all relevant organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to be involved in the
follow-up to the Summit. It invites specialized agencies
and related organizations of the United Nations system
to strengthen and adjust their activities, programmes
and medium-term strategies as appropriate to take into
account the follow-up to the Summit. And it requests
the appropriate bodies to consider urgently how the
implementation of the Declaration should relate to the
biennium budget process and medium-term plan.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1, the Secretary-General
would ensure system-wide coordination to assist with
the implementation of the Declaration and would
identify, within the framework of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, innovative ways of
enhancing cooperation and coherence throughout the
United Nations system. In this context, he would
request the appropriate bodies of the relevant United
Nations system to consider how the implementation of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-79733 (E)

*0079733*

A/55/PV.85

the Declaration should relate to the biennium budget
process and the medium-term plan.

Agenda item 20 (continued)

The outcome of consultations with organizations
within the United Nations system would be reported to
the General Assembly in the context of the annual and
the quinquennial reports called for in paragraphs 18
and 19 of draft resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1, which
would be prepared by the Office of the SecretaryGeneral.

Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance

Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1, no additional resource
requirements are currently anticipated to arise in the
biennium
2000-2001.
Should
any
additional
requirements be later identified, these would be
reported to the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly in the context of its consideration of the
agenda items related to the programme budget for the
biennium 2000-2001 and for the biennium 2002-2003.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/55/L.56/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/162).
The President: We have just adopted the draft
resolution on the follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit. The consensus would not have
been possible without the cooperation and support of
all delegations. I believe that the membership has
shown that the Millennium Summit has indeed created
a momentum and new spirit of political will that will
help us to achieve the goals set in the Declaration.
I should like to thank once again all delegations
for their flexibility. I think that through this kind of
consensus-building and teamwork we can achieve
progress on many issues, and I look forward to
continuing to work with delegations on the follow-up
to the Summit.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 182.

2

Draft resolution A/55/L.64
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/55/649)
Draft resolutions (A/55/L.38/Rev.l, A/55/L.54)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolutions (A/55/L.35/Rev.l, A/55/L.36,
A/55/L.53, A/55/L.55/Rev.l, A/55/L.57,
A/55/L.59, A/55/L.60, A/55/L.61, A/55/L.65,
A/55/L.66)
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/55/L.63)
The President: I should like to remind the
Assembly that the debate on agenda item 20 and its
sub-items (a) to (c) was held at the 72nd plenary
meeting, on 27 November 2000.
In connection with draft resolution A/55/L.63, I
should like to draw the Assembly’s attention to two
technical errors.
The original languages should include English
and French instead of only English;
In operative paragraph 11, after the words
“29 April 1994”, the word “and” should be replaced by
a comma.
I now give the floor to the representative of
France to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.64.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the European Union and all the sponsors, I
have the honour to present the draft resolution entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”, contained in
document A/55/L.64.

A/55/PV.85

May I first of all inform the Assembly that the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Bulgaria, Croatia, Georgia, Guyana, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Togo.
Allow me, in response to the wishes of all the
Members of the United Nations who have asked me to
do so, to repeat our strong appreciation for the report
that the Secretary-General has submitted to the
Assembly together with the recommendations he deems
necessary. Indeed, it is his responsibility to ensure the
security of United Nations staff and associated
personnel, and the provisions adopted in this respect at
Headquarters and in the field can also benefit
humanitarian personnel in general.
We wish to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for the task he is undertaking, but this is also
part of our responsibility as Member States. It is with
this in mind that the European Union and the sponsors
of the draft resolution have pursued this initiative.
We welcome the spirit of cooperation,
understanding and consensus shown by all delegations
throughout this work, which allowed us to reach a fully
satisfactory result in keeping with our duties.
The aim was, first, to pay tribute to the personnel,
whoever they may be, and to express our firm
condemnation of any actions carried out against them
in the exercise of their functions. Such actions are
unacceptable, and it is the primary responsibility of the
State concerned to prevent them, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, and also to bring their
authors to justice, especially by adopting the necessary
legislation, as required by the text of the draft
resolution submitted this year to the Assembly.

Secretary-General with the necessary means for this
purpose for personnel under his authority.
Moreover, the General Assembly wishes to
confirm the need for a full-time Security Coordinator,
as was already emphasized in a previous resolution,
and the need to strengthen his Office and the current
United Nations security system. We emphasize that
these intentions should be put into effect quickly and
translated into decisions to be adopted by the relevant
organs in response to these requests, on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations.
Furthermore, note is taken of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on expanding the scope of
implementation of the 1994 Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel, and it is
proposed that the General Assembly refer the
comprehensive consideration of this matter to the Sixth
Committee as a specific agenda item of the fifty-sixth
session.
In conclusion, allow me to make a positive
correction to the draft resolution before us in document
A/55/L.64. In the sixteenth preambular paragraph it is
stated that the number of States parties to the 1994
Convention is 45; it is now 46, and that is the figure
that should be recorded as the exact number at the time
of adoption. We welcome this development, and we
hope that this draft resolution, on a subject that should
mobilize us all, will be able to be adopted by
consensus.
In this context, the European Union has noted
with optimism the commitment shown by Member
States to continue to strengthen texts on this subject in
the future, as the situation requires. The European
Union reaffirms its gratitude, in particular to the
sponsors, and its appreciation for the support and
cooperation shown by all delegations that actively
participated in the negotiations on this important
question.

Allow me to take this opportunity also to
remember all those who have lost their lives in
humanitarian service or in the service of the United
Nations, as sadly referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General, and to hope that the draft resolution
we are about to adopt will strengthen the security they
need in order to be able to fulfil their missions.

The President: I call on the representative of
Nigeria to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.38/Rev.1.

Among the elements introduced this year, we
should mention the appeal to all States to promote a
climate of respect for all United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. The text also emphasizes the
need to ensure adequate training before deploying field
personnel who are at risk, as well as to provide the

Mr. Osio (Nigeria): Thank you, Mr. President, for
the
honour
of
introducing
draft
resolution
A/55/L.38/Rev.1, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters
from relief to development”, on behalf of its original
sponsors, the Group of 77 and China, and Mexico.

3

A/55/PV.85

Nigeria feels further honoured by the opportunity
we were given to facilitate the informal formal
consultations between the original sponsors and other
partners — including the European Union, the Japan,
United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
group (JUSCANZ) and the Russian Federation — some
of which have since indicated interest in joining the list
of sponsors. The list, we are confident, will keep
growing. Why will the list keep growing? The answer
is not far-fetched: the negotiations were very frank, and
flexibility was mutual, leading to consensus.
Natural disasters are neither people-friendly nor
always country-specific. Thousands of lives and much
property, as well as means of livelihood, are always
lost in their wake, at a very high cost. That these events
happen in developing countries, where development
problems are enormous, is noteworthy. Also
noteworthy is the fact that the primary responsibility
for the initiation, organization, coordination and
implementation of humanitarian assistance lies within
each developing country’s territory. These occurrences
are also important because they reverse all gains made
through the development efforts of developing
countries. Therefore, the need for international
cooperation cannot be overemphasized.
In the face of declining official development
assistance flows and of the external debt burden, all
huge problems of development that militate against the
efforts of developing countries to initiate preparedness,
even efforts to mitigate disasters, have to be very
seriously considered in order to augment the efforts of
developing countries.
We have discovered — and this is the truth —
that natural disasters are one factor that joins humanity
in common agreement. Natural disasters are a great
cause of need, and humanity must be united when it
comes to need.
It is on this basis that we have decided that there
is a need for at least a partnership among Governments
of
affected
countries,
relevant
humanitarian
organizations and specialized agencies to promote
training in, access to and the use of technologies, to
strengthen preparedness for and response to natural
disasters and to enhance the transfer of current
technologies and corresponding know-how, in
particular to developing countries, on concessional and
preferential terms, as may be mutually agreed.

4

The Assembly has before it a draft resolution that
enjoys consensus its 22 operative paragraphs, which
have spelled out what needs to be done in the hope of
having proper guidance from the guiding principles and
from the Secretary-General’s report, which we hope
will guide our future endeavours in this regard.
Let me thank all those who took part in the
negotiations for their willingness and flexibility, and
particularly those who are going to join the list of
sponsors.
The President: I call on the representative of
Sweden to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.54.
Mr. Norström (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of its sponsors, the draft resolution
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance:
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”,
contained in document A/55/L.54. Since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Bulgaria, Chile,
Georgia and Guatemala.
The draft resolution was discussed in informal
consultations on 22 November. Valuable proposals
were made for the improvement of the text, and
agreement was reached on all paragraphs. My
delegation is grateful for the contributions made by
other delegations, and would like to thank the other
sponsors and other delegations for the good spirit of
cooperation and partnership in which the consultations
were held.
By this draft resolution, the General Assembly
would recall its previous resolutions on the topic, and
those of the Economic and Social Council. It would
take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/55/82); welcome the progress made by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in strengthening
the coordination of humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations; and note the efforts made by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the members of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee to implement
recommendations set forth in previous agreed
conclusions of the Economic and Social Council.
The General Assembly would welcome the
holding of the third humanitarian affairs segment of the

A/55/PV.85

Economic and Social Council last summer, and would
invite the Council to further enhance the segment in
future sessions. It would call upon relevant actors to
cooperate to ensure the implementation of Economic
and Social Council agreed conclusions of recent years.
Finally, the General Assembly would request
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-sixth session, through the 2001 substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council, on
progress made in strengthening the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations.
Let me add that we have noted the submission by
the Secretary-General of a note concerning the
enhancement of the functioning and utilization of the
Central Emergency Revolving Fund pursuant to
previous requests by the General Assembly. We look
forward to considering the note at the next session.
My delegation and the other sponsors hope that
the draft resolution contained in document A/55/L.54
can be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Antigua and Barbuda, who will speak on behalf of
the Caribbean Community, to introduce draft resolution
A/55/L.35/Rev.1.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): As the
President said, I am speaking on behalf of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) to introduce draft
resolution A/55/L.35/Rev.1, entitled “Emergency
assistance to Belize”. As listed in that document, the
sponsors of the text are Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Grenada,
Guatemala,
Guyana,
India,
Ireland,
Jamaica,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Saint Lucia, Suriname, Sweden,
Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and my own country, Antigua and Barbuda.
To that list I should like to add the following countries:
Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Malta,
Nicaragua, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Venezuela.
In speaking of this draft resolution, one is
speaking, in effect, of the perilous conditions that exist
in the Caribbean today — and by the Caribbean I am
not speaking only about the Caribbean islands but also

about the coastal areas of the continent. Last year, for
example, Venezuela suffered severe floods. And, of
course, it is often overlooked that, in the Gulf,
hurricanes usually batter various parts of Mexico. We
are subject to a number of natural disasters which we
can clearly see are connected to sea-level rise or to the
greenhouse gases that are certainly affecting us. We see
these effects in the rise of the level of the sea and the
denuding of our coastal areas, which is actually
affecting our countries’ ability to maintain their
standards of living and quality of life, because so many
depend so heavily on tourism. Some countries are now
finding that beaches of which they were once so proud
are no longer desirable areas in which foreigners would
choose to bathe.
We are in addition finding something that is
amply brought out by what happened to Belize:
whereas we could once speak about the countries that
lay within a hurricane belt, that is no longer true. A
hurricane went as far south as Suriname this year, and
caught by surprise people who thought themselves safe
from the perils faced by their Caribbean neighbours.
Even though Belize has, technically, experienced
hurricanes in the past, it was not expecting anything of
this magnitude. Even today, areas of Belize are still
under water because of what hurricane Keith did.
That is why it is so important that the United
Nations should understand the problems, in terms of
natural disasters, not only of Belize but of the entire
Caribbean region. It is not hurricanes alone. From my
island, Antigua, it is lovely to gaze to the south and see
the volcanic eruptions on Montserrat. But in reality,
they are causing so many problems for the beleaguered
people of that lovely emerald island. In addition, we
have, off Grenada, an undersea volcano known as Kick
‘em Jenny, which four or five years ago erupted some
four times in one year.
Thus, we are plagued by all these natural
disasters. But we have endeavoured to help ourselves.
When these disasters occur, the Governments of the
countries immediately make offers to the areas in
question. This is one area where our military personnel
are used very effectively. Our military personnel are
used mainly for rehabilitation, since we do not have
that many occasions on which they must engage in
actual combat. Along with the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Response Agency, to which we all
contribute, there is a spirit of togetherness which
causes us to act immediately when one of our brotherly

5

A/55/PV.85

or sisterly countries is affected. We were surprised this
year that Suriname and Belize — the latter being the
subject of this particular draft resolution — suffered so
much. That is why we wanted the draft resolution to
request the Secretary-General to give us a report. In the
past, such reports have enabled us to draw lessons from
them. When people visit some of our territories now,
they wonder what it is about the people who live there
— what it is about their resilience — that enables them
to continue with their everyday ways, means and forms
of living, and not be mentally or psychologically
affected by these constant disasters. One Caribbean
country that did not experience a hurricane between
1950 and 1989 has experienced six within the past five
years.
That is the type of peril with which the
inhabitants of the Caribbean countries live. That is why
we are asking the General Assembly to demonstrate the
togetherness and humanity of this glorious
Organization and institution in adopting this draft
resolution by consensus. It will send a clear message to
all peoples, particularly, at this time, the people of
Belize, that they have friends around the globe who not
only empathize with them but are willing to come to
their assistance through the parliament of parliaments.
I urge that this draft resolution be adopted by
consensus.
The President: I call on the representative of
Madagascar to introduce draft resolutions A/55/L.36,
A/55/L.53, A/55/L.55/Rev.1 and A/55/L.66.
Mr. Bakoniarivo (Madagascar) (spoke in
French): Under agenda item 20 (b), I have the honour
of introducing four draft resolutions relating to the
following four countries: the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mozambique, Somalia and Liberia. I am
speaking on behalf of all the sponsors mentioned in the
draft resolutions, which we shall consider one after the
other.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the draft resolution, entitled “Special assistance
for the economic recovery and reconstruction of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”, is contained in
document A/55/L.36. In addition to the countries
mentioned in that document, the following countries
have become sponsors: Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Madagascar, Namibia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, the United States of
America and Zimbabwe.

6

The issue of special assistance for the economic
recovery and reconstruction of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been on the General
Assembly’s agenda since 1997 because of the political
crisis in that country. The United Nations responded
favourably by creating a trust fund, which was set up
during the Meeting of Friends of the Congo in
December 1997. Despite the efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to facilitate
recovery, the people there continue to suffer, with
admirable courage, the vicissitudes of a long political
transition process that is having a devastating effect on
economic structures, as well as the ravages of two
successive armed conflicts that have hampered the
speedy reconstruction of the country and of the social
infrastructure, which has been hard hit by the years of
crises. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
therefore remains a poor and heavily indebted country.
We are greatly obliged to the Secretariat of the
United Nations for ensuring that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained
among its top priorities. Indeed, throughout this year,
the United Nations Development Programme office in
Kinshasa, acting as the coordinator of United Nations
system-wide activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, has been closely involved in the design,
development, coordination and implementation of
various development projects undertaken in the context
of the fight against poverty.
The report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/55/319, describes very aptly the current
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
should like to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude for the tireless efforts of the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and regional
leaders for their tireless efforts aimed at achieving
peace and development for the courageous people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I fervently
hope that the members of the General Assembly will
adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
With regard to Mozambique, the draft resolution,
entitled “ Assistance to Mozambique” , is contained in
document A/55/L.53. I am speaking on behalf of the
sponsors of the draft resolution. In addition to those
countries mentioned in the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Belgium,
Chile, Cuba, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, the United Kingdom of

A/55/PV.85

Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
Since 1976, the General Assembly has regularly
adopted a resolution on assistance to Mozambique as
part of the international community’s efforts to come to
the assistance of that country and its people as they try
to meet their reconstruction and development needs.
These resolutions have provided a juridical and
political framework for the bilateral and multilateral
cooperation and assistance given to Mozambique,
which has contributed to meeting the essential needs of
the people and to the implementation of a development
programme. With the considerable backing of the
international community, in the 1990s Mozambique
was on its way to achieving economic growth and
sustainable development, as eloquently shown by the
Secretary-General’s
report
on
assistance
to
Mozambique, contained in document A/55/317.
Nonetheless, at the beginning of this year,
Mozambique was once again devastated by cyclones
and floods that took a tragic toll in human life, property
and infrastructure. This natural disaster, with its
adverse impact on the economic, social and
humanitarian situation in the country, was widely
reported internationally.
The Mozambican Government is asking for
assistance from the international community in general
and the United Nations in particular so as to help it get
a grip on this humanitarian disaster and its
consequences. Recently, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 54/96 L by consensus, which set up the
appropriate framework for delivering international
humanitarian assistance to Mozambique. We want to
thank the international community for its support and
solidarity during these trying times.
The considerable impact of the floods will be felt
for several years to come in Mozambique. The natural
disaster compromised the remarkable economic growth
and sustainable development that Mozambique had
experienced. Beyond that, this disaster is sapping the
nation’s long-term economic development programme,
notwithstanding the praiseworthy efforts of the
Government and the valiant people of that country.
The draft resolution being submitted to the
General Assembly today is designed to mobilize
humanitarian
assistance
for
the
post-crisis
reconstruction and recovery programme, as well as
international support for long-term development and

national reconstruction. We hope that, by adopting this
draft resolution by consensus, the international
community will renew its commitment to coming to the
aid of Mozambique as it seeks to build on its
achievements in the framework of its development
programme.
Turning to Somalia, we have before us a draft
resolution entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief
and the economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”,
document A/55/L.55/Rev.1, dated 7 December 2000. I
am speaking on behalf of the sponsors listed in the
draft resolution, to which Eritrea and Ireland should be
added. I would say that this draft resolution is similar
to other such resolutions adopted recently. However,
this draft resolution contains some new paragraphs
because of a new and highly positive development in
the political situation in Somalia following the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference, held in Arta, the
Republic of Djibouti, from May to September 2000,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, and organized and facilitated by the
Government of Djibouti. The Conference led to the
adoption of a transitional three-year charter involving
the establishment of a transitional national parliament
and the formation of a transitional Government.
Nonetheless, certain political groups within Somalia
have remained outside the Arta process, thus
constituting a challenge yet to be met. We very much
appreciate the Secretary-General’s report contained in
document A/55/415. It should be updated to reflect
these political developments in Somalia.
Here in the Assembly, we want to thank all the
States, United Nations bodies and organizations, other
international institutions and international, regional and
non-governmental organizations that have helped
Somalia. The disastrous consequences of the prolonged
socio-economic and political crisis endured by Somalia
cannot possibly be resolved in a short time. They will
be felt for a number of years to come.
The draft resolution I am introducing to the
Assembly is designed to support the transitional Somali
Government in its actions to achieve comprehensive
national reconciliation in the context of the Arta
process, because the restoration of peace will be the
only way for the country to work calmly to achieve
national reconstruction and development. This can
happen after the establishment of appropriate civilian
institutions within a democratic system. We hope that,
by adopting this draft resolution, the international

7

A/55/PV.85

community, through the General Assembly, will
reaffirm its determination to help Somalia achieve
reconstruction and recovery.
On the subject of Liberia, draft resolution
A/55/L.66 is entitled “Assistance for the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Liberia”. Again, I am speaking
on behalf of the sponsors listed in that document.
Through the decisive efforts for cooperation and
peacemaking on the part of the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations and the
OAU, the people of Liberia have emerged from seven
years of devastating civil war, and democratic elections
were held in June 1997.
During the conflict and the post-war period, many
countries that were friends of Liberia sponsored draft
resolutions year after year to support the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of Liberia. Obviously, Liberia
continues to face daunting challenges in trying to
rebuild its infrastructure and reactivate its economy.
Despite the programmes initiated by the Government
designed to achieve reconciliation and reconstruction,
the pace of development has been less than satisfactory,
and international assistance for the country’s
reconstruction programme has declined. We fully agree
with the Secretary-General’s statement in his report of
26 June 2000, contained in document A/55/90, that it is
absolutely essential for the international community at
large and for the chief donors in particular to become
more aware of the problems Liberia and the subregion
are facing in the post-conflict period.
In addition to all this, the people of Liberia need
subregional stability as a basis for sustained
international support for Liberia’s development efforts.
We, the sponsors of this draft resolution, express
our gratitude to all the donor countries, the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, the European
Union, the Bretton Woods institutions and nongovernmental organizations for their participation in a
joint mission held in Monrovia from 15 to 19
November 1999 to assess the National Reconstruction
Programme and the use of donor funds committed at
the 1998 Paris Donors’ Conference for the
reconstruction of Liberia. We ask those that have not
yet honoured their pledges to do so.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
continuing efforts to mobilize international assistance
for the development and reconstruction of Liberia.

8

We call on all countries and intergovernmental
organizations to provide assistance to facilitate the
implementation of peace-building efforts in post-war
Liberia.
Like past resolutions, the draft resolution before
us is a consensus document. I ask that the General
Assembly adopt it without a vote.
That concludes my introduction of the four draft
resolutions submitted to General Assembly for
adoption without a vote.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/55/L.57.
Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As it did last year, the Russian Federation
has the honour once again this year to introduce to the
General Assembly the draft resolution on humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has undergone radical
changes in the last year. At the same time, however, the
humanitarian problems there are no less acute. As the
report of the Secretary-General on this issue
(A/55/416) rightly points out, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will face considerable humanitarian
problems in the near future, and they may yet be
magnified.
Yugoslavia continues to be a transit point for a
very large number of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Europe, comprising over 700,000 persons
whose socio-economic situation is deteriorating.
Democratic changes are taking place against the
backdrop of a catastrophic economic situation in the
country and the deterioration of its social
infrastructure. The situation with regard to energy, food
supplies and finances is especially dire. In other words,
the humanitarian situation in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia calls for continued — and in most cases
increased — humanitarian assistance, in particular
given the approach of winter.
It is for that reason that this draft resolution calls
for the international community to render emergency
humanitarian relief to the people of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, especially during the coming
winter months. The United Nations — which, along
with its specialized agencies and, in particular, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has a special role to play in this regard — is called

A/55/PV.85

upon to strengthen coordination in the granting of
humanitarian assistance, especially by improving the
consolidated inter-agency appeals mechanism. In that
connection, the draft resolution calls on the SecretaryGeneral to continue efforts to mobilize timely
humanitarian assistance to Yugoslavia.
An important element of the draft resolution is
the appeal it makes to the international community to
support the Government of Yugoslavia in its efforts to
ensure the transition from emergency humanitarian
assistance
to
the
long-term
rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of the country. The
role of the United Nations is also important in this
regard. The Organization is requested to continue its
efforts to evaluate the humanitarian needs of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in order to establish
effective links between emergency relief and longerterm assistance to Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution gives great attention to
seeking long-term solutions to the problems of
refugees, especially through voluntary repatriation and
reintegration. In this context, the draft resolution
stresses the importance of developing regional
cooperation to seek solutions in order to improve the
difficult situation of refugees.
The Russian Federation is introducing this draft
resolution on behalf of a large number of sponsors.
Draft resolution A/55/L.57 lists 31 States. In addition
to the Russian Federation and Yugoslavia, countries of
the European Union, of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and of South-East Europe, as well
as a host of other States that value the ideas contained
in the draft resolution, are also sponsors. I wish to note
with satisfaction that since the draft resolution was
issued as an official document, Austria, Cuba, India,
Japan and the United States of America have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution. We wish to
thank the sponsors for their support of our initiative,
and to express our gratitude to other delegations for
their cooperation and constructive contributions
towards agreement on the draft resolution.
We are confident that the General Assembly’s
adoption of this draft resolution will truly help
accelerate the coordination of humanitarian assistance
and the launching of broad international cooperation
for the recovery and development of the economy of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo
and the entire Balkan region.

The President: Before giving the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolutions
A/55/L.59 and A/55/L.60, I should like to make a few
remarks on the closure on the Chernobyl nuclear power
plant on 15 December 2000.
The tragedy at the Chernobyl nuclear power
plant, almost 15 years ago, affected almost the entire
territory of Europe — but most of all Ukraine and the
neighbouring areas of Belarus and the Russian
Federation — and caused long-lasting, complex
problems. The human suffering caused by the accident
cannot be measured, and its environmental impact was
partly irreversible. The Chernobyl accident was a
major global technological catastrophe, and an eyeopener in many respects.
We will soon take action on draft resolution
A/55/L.60, on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant. We all welcome the decision by the
Government of Ukraine to close the Chernobyl plant
tomorrow, 15 December 2000. By doing so, Ukraine is
acting pursuant to its commitments under the
Memorandum of Understanding signed in Ottawa in
1995.
The draft resolution before us invites the
international community to continue to provide support
to the Government and the people of Ukraine and other
affected States. It is my sincere hope that the adoption
of this draft resolution, in connection with the closure
of the plant, will give new impetus to the concerted
efforts by the United Nations system aimed at
mitigating and minimizing the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Ukraine to introduce draft resolutions A/55/L.59 and
A/55/L.60.
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
high assessment of the significance of the decision of
Ukraine to close the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
I have the honour to introduce to the General
Assembly the draft resolution entitled “Economic
assistance to the Eastern European States affected by
the developments in the Balkans”, contained in
document A/55/L.59. I am pleased to announce that
this draft resolution has been sponsored by the
following delegations: Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary,

9

A/55/PV.85

Romania, Slovakia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the United States of America and
Yugoslavia.

joined the list of sponsors of the draft: Japan,
Kyrgyzstan, Monaco, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Uzbekistan.

I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express our sincere gratitude to all the sponsors and to
all delegations whose constructive participation in the
informal consultations resulted in the consensus text of
this draft resolution.

Tomorrow the world will be witnessing an event
whose historical significance has won wide
international recognition. Its significance was
reaffirmed by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his
statement yesterday and by the President of the General
Assembly in today’s statement.

The purpose of the present draft, which is based
on the text of the consensus resolution of the fiftyfourth session of the General Assembly and updated to
reflect the new developments, is clear and apparent: to
help the Eastern European States affected by the
developments in the Balkan region to solve their
special economic problems, especially in the sphere of
regional trade and economic relations and particularly
as related to the navigation on the Danube river.
To create favourable conditions for solving these
problems, the draft resolution invites all States and
relevant international organizations to assist the
affected States in their efforts for economic recovery,
development and economic cooperation in the region
and beyond. It emphasizes the importance of a wellcoordinated and timely donor response to the external
funding requirements of the process of economic
reconstruction, reform and development in the Balkans,
as well as of financial support to other affected
countries of Eastern Europe.
The draft welcomes the democratic changes in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and their positive
effects on peace, stability and development in SouthEastern Europe.
Let me express my sincere hope that this draft
will gain the broadest possible support and will be
adopted by consensus.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
introduce another draft resolution, which has a special
meaning for my country. The draft resolution is entitled
“Closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant” and is
contained in the document A/55/L.60.
We would like to thank all delegations for the
cooperative approach they demonstrated in the course
of consultations, which allowed for the development of
a consensus draft resolution. We are particularly
grateful to the sponsors of the draft. I have the pleasure
to inform the General Assembly that since document
A/55/L.60 was issued, the following countries have

10

On 15 December Ukraine will close the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant. By taking this
important step, my country is fulfilling its
commitments
under
the
Memorandum
of
Understanding signed in Ottawa in 1995 and makes a
significant, substantial contribution towards achieving
global nuclear safety. It was a difficult decision for my
country, both in view of the condition of the national
economy, especially of the energy sector, and in view
of the social consequences of the power plant’s closure
for the personnel of the power plant and for people
whose lives are closely linked to the Chernobyl nuclear
power station. Against this background, it is
particularly important that the draft resolution sends a
strong message of the international community’s
support for Ukraine’s historic decision.
To address the problems arising from the closure
of the power plant, Ukraine needs substantial
resources, which, unfortunately, it is incapable of
mobilizing alone. The international community has
already done a great deal to assist Ukraine in
mitigating and minimizing the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster, and we sincerely appreciate its
assistance. At the same time, the present draft
underlines the importance of continued international
assistance to Ukraine to cope with the range of newly
emerging economic and social problems stemming
from the closure of the Chernobyl plant.
The problems associated with the nuclear plant’s
closure are not only a Ukrainian internal issue, or an
issue for the affected countries. We believe it is a
matter deserving global attention. Bearing the main
burden of these challenges, Ukraine relies on the
understanding and support of the international
community.
The closure of the power plant is not the
conclusion of the Chernobyl item on the global agenda;
it is, rather, the beginning of a qualitatively new stage
in addressing the Chernobyl-related problems. The

A/55/PV.85

draft resolution reflects the importance the
international community attaches to meeting this
challenge.
We share the view expressed by President Holkeri
in this morning’s statement that the adoption of the
draft resolution will give new impetus to the concerted
efforts of the United Nations system to mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.
Let me express my sincere hope that draft
resolution A/55/L.60 will gain the broadest possible
support and will be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Egypt to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.61.
Mr. Zaki (Egypt): The Egyptian delegation is
pleased to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.61,
entitled “Special emergency economic assistance to the
Comoros”, on behalf of its sponsors — Afghanistan,
Algeria, the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
the United Arab Emirates and Yemen — in addition to
Madagascar, Senegal and Burkina Faso.
In its preambular part, the draft resolution refers
to General Assembly resolutions 51/30 F of 13
December 1996 and 53/1 F of 16 November 1998 on
special emergency economic assistance to the Comoros
and to the report of the Secretary-General on that
subject, noting in particular the suggestion of the
Secretary-General that resolution 53/1 F should be
referred to the Economic and Social Council with a
view to initiating a reconstruction and rehabilitation
programme so as to lay the groundwork for national
economic recovery on a sound basis.
By the first operative paragraph, the General
Assembly would take note with satisfaction the report
of the Secretary-General on emergency economic
assistance to the Comoros. By the second operative
paragraph, the Assembly would request the Economic
and Social Council to consider General Assembly
resolution 53/1 F with a view to initiating a
reconstruction and rehabilitation programme so as to
lay the groundwork for national economic recovery on
a sound basis. By the third operative paragraph, the
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session on the implementation of the present resolution
in the Economic and Social Council.

The delegation of Egypt, on behalf of the
sponsors of draft resolution A/55/L.61, looks forward
to the support of all member States and to the adoption
by consensus of the draft, as was done for the previous
two resolutions on the same subject.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/55/L.65.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Assistance for
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and development for
East Timor”, on behalf of the 29 sponsors listed in
document A/55/L.65.
Allow me to announce that the delegations of
Angola, Argentina, Austria, Benin, Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Cape Verde, Colombia, Cyprus, Greece, Nauru, the
Republic of Korea, Slovenia and Uganda have also
expressed the wish to co-sponsor this draft resolution.
This draft resolution addresses the humanitarian
relief, rehabilitation and development needs of East
Timor. It calls for continued support by the
international community to alleviate the humanitarian
assistance requirements of East Timor and stresses the
urgent need for sustained and enhanced efforts to
effectively and comprehensively resolve the question
of East Timorese refugees.
The issue of humanitarian relief is seen in the
broader context of the development and reconstruction
needs of East Timor in its transition to independence.
This draft resolution puts strong emphasis on the need
for an enhanced ownership and participation of the
East Timorese in all sectors, as well as on capacitybuilding, and encourages international assistance in
such areas as agriculture, infrastructure, health and
education.
The preambular part contains references to
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions; to the establishment of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor and to its
mandate; to the timely international response to the
humanitarian crisis; and to progress achieved in
alleviating the humanitarian assistance needs of East
Timor. It welcomes the efforts made in this area,
recognizes the significant challenges to be faced and
emphasizes the need for continued support for the
implementation of resettlement and repatriation
programmes and for the transition from relief to

11

A/55/PV.85

rehabilitation and development in preparation for
independence.

public administration, security and law and
order;”.

In its operative part, this draft resolution contains
a general encouragement to the international
community and United Nations agencies to continue to
collaborate to address the remaining humanitarian
relief needs and to support the transition to
independence. It refers to the participation of the East
Timorese in all the phases of reconstruction and to the
Donor Meetings in Tokyo, Lisbon and Brussels. A
strong emphasis is placed on the need to respond to the
issues of food security and agriculture, infrastructure,
health services and primary schools in East Timor. It
also contains clear references to the need for sustained
and enhanced efforts to overcome the question of East
Timorese refugees, including their registration,
repatriation and resettlement, as well as to the need for
a safe and secure working environment in the refugee
camps.

In line 5 of operative paragraph 13, a comma
should be inserted after the words “those refugees” in
order for the phrase to read:

Finally, the draft resolution contains a
recommendation that the United Nations continue to
address
the
humanitarian,
rehabilitation
and
development needs of East Timor and requests that the
Secretary-General prepare a report on the issue for the
consideration of the General Assembly at its next
session.
I would like to request that the following
corrections be made in document A/55/L.65 to reflect
the agreed text that was submitted to the Secretariat.
In the second line of operative paragraph 5, after
the words “efforts aimed at” and before the words “in,
the social, economic and administrative infrastructure”,
the current language should be replaced by the
following phrase: “the enhanced ownership and
participation of the eastern Timorese, known as
‘Timorization’, in East Timor, in”. With this correction,
operative paragraph 5 will read as follows:
“Urges United Nations organizations, the
international community and non-governmental
organizations to continue their efforts aimed at
the enhanced ownership and participation of the
eastern Timorese, known as ‘Timorization’, in
East Timor, in the social, economic and
administrative infrastructure and, in this regard,
stresses the need for capacity-building, inter alia,
in such areas as education, health, agriculture and
rural development, the judiciary, governance and

12

“Stresses the urgent need for sustained and
enhanced efforts by the Government of Indonesia,
the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor and the international community to
effectively and comprehensively resolve the
question of the East Timorese refugees by the
repatriation or resettlement of all those refugees,
in conditions of safety and security at all stages,
and based on their voluntary decisions, through
the efforts of the Government of Indonesia to
guarantee effective security in the West Timor
camps, by the promotion of a credible and
internationally observed registration process, and
by the promotion and support of reconciliation
among all East Timorese;”.
It is our hope that, like last year, when this issue
was first taken up, the draft resolution entitled
“Assistance for humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
development for East Timor” will be adopted without a
vote by the General Assembly.
The President: I call on the representative of
France, on behalf of the European Union, to introduce
draft resolution A/55/L.63.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
have the honour, on behalf of the European Union and
the other sponsors, to introduce the draft resolution
entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”,
contained in document A/55/L.63. Since its
publication, the following States have joined as
sponsors of this draft resolution: Cyprus, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Togo.
In the current tragic circumstances, the sponsors
of this draft resolution would like to stress the
particular importance of providing assistance to the
Palestinian people.
Through this draft resolution, the General
Assembly expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen. The Assembly also expresses
its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations
bodies and intergovernmental, regional and non-

A/55/PV.85

governmental organizations for their continuous efforts
and assistance to the Palestinian people. This text
welcomes in particular the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee held at Lisbon in June 2000. Such
meetings allow for the coordination of international
assistance efforts to the Palestinian people.
This effort must continue. That is why the
General Assembly calls upon all parties to intensify
their assistance in order to meet the urgent needs of the
Palestinian people, in accordance with priorities set
forth by the Palestinian Authority and with an
emphasis on setting up institutions and on capacitybuilding. In this context, it also urges the international
donor community to expedite the delivery of pledged
assistance to the Palestinian people. This text also calls
upon Member States to open their markets to exports of
Palestinian products on the most favourable terms.
The text reiterates that, in order for assistance to
be effective, it is essential that it reach its destination
without obstacles. More generally, free movement of
persons and goods must be guaranteed. It is important
also that the bilateral Paris Protocol on Economic
Relations be implemented, so that, in particular, the tax
revenues of the Palestinian Authority can be fully and
promptly cleared. The Palestinian Authority must be in
position to fully benefit from its financial resources.
In spite of the tragic events in the region, it is the
hope of the sponsors that this draft resolution can be
adopted by consensus. I wish to thank all parties
concerned for the spirit of openness shown during the
sometimes difficult negotiation of this text led by the
European Union. The adoption without a vote of this
substantial draft resolution would represent a positive
gesture under the present circumstances. In our view,
this gesture would go along the lines of the shared wish
for a resumption of the dialogue between Israelis and
Palestinians.
The President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on 11 draft resolutions, under sub-items (a),
(b) and (c) of agenda item 20.
The Assembly will take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.38/Rev.1, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters from relief to development”.
Before proceeding to the action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since
publication the following countries have become

sponsors: Algeria, Argentina, Bulgaria, Cuba, Gambia,
Gabon, Guatemala, Indonesia, South Africa and Sudan.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.38/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/55/L.38/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/163).
The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.54 is
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations”.
Before proceeding to action, I should like to
announce that since the publication of the draft
resolution the following countries have become
sponsors: Belarus, Israel and Ukraine.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.54?
Draft resolution A/55/L.54
(resolution 55/164).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.35/Rev.1, entitled
“Emergency assistance to Belize”.
Before proceeding to action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction the following countries have become
sponsors of A/55/L.35/Rev.1: Colombia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Netherlands and Portugal.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.35/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/55/L.35/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/165).
The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.36 is
entitled “Special assistance for the economic recovery
and reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
Before proceeding to the action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
publication Zambia has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.36?
Draft resolution A/55/L.36
(resolution 55/166).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.53 is
entitled “Assistance to Mozambique”.

13

A/55/PV.85

Before proceeding to action, I should like to
announce that since the publication of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Austria, Botswana, Canada, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Netherlands, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.53?
Draft resolution A/55/L.53
(resolution 55/167).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.55/Rev.l
is entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief and the
economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”.

The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.60 is
entitled “Closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power
plant”.
Since its publication, Kazakhstan, Latvia and
Mongolia have become sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.60?
Draft resolution A/55/L.60
(resolution A/55/171).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.65 is
entitled
“Assistance
for
humanitarian
relief,
rehabilitation and development for East Timor”.

Before proceeding to the action on the draft
resolution I should like to announce that since its
publication Belgium and Djibouti have become
sponsors.

Since publication the following countries have
joined in sponsoring: Benin, Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Colombia, Cyprus, Nauru and Uganda.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.55/Rev.1?

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.65, as orally revised by the
representative of Brazil?

Draft resolution A/55/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/168).
The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.57 is
entitled “Humanitarian assistance to the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia”.
I should like to announce that since the
publication of the draft resolution Georgia has become
a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopted draft resolution A/55/L.57?
Draft resolution A/55/L.57
(resolution 55/169).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/55/L.59 is
entitled “Economic assistance to the Eastern European
States affected by the developments in the Balkans”.
Before proceeding to action on the draft
resolution I should like to announce that since
publication the Republic of Moldova has become a
sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopted draft resolution A/55/L.59?
Draft resolution A/55/L.59
(resolution A/55/170).

14

was

adopted

Draft resolution A/55/L.65, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution A/55/172).
The President: The General Assembly will take
a decision on draft resolution A/55/L.63, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
Since its publication Belarus, Guinea, Monaco,
Norway and Slovenia have become sponsors.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/55/L.63?
Draft resolution A/55/L.63
(resolution A/55/173).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I call on the representative of Israel.
Mr. Shacham (Israel): This year, as in years past,
Israel has joined the consensus on the resolution
entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”, and I
would like to explain our position in this regard.
Israel is committed to the goal of enhancing the
economic growth and welfare of the Palestinian people,
which we view as an investment in a better future for
the people of the region. This goal has translated to a

A/55/PV.85

primary component of Israeli policy, which includes
direct economic assistance to the Palestinians,
cooperation on development and a wide variety of
other projects that have yielded substantial results on
the ground.
We welcome the concerted efforts of Member
States, international financial institutions and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to aid in the development efforts. Israel has been fully
cooperating with the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency and the United Nations Children’s Fund, as
well as with other international organizations, in
implementing programmes aimed at improving the
living conditions of the Palestinians in the West Bank
and Gaza.
In this respect, it should be pointed out that Israel
shares the hope that the United Nations Special
Coordinator in these areas can assist in the crucial
sphere of economic growth, enrichment and investment
in the future. Israel is ready to cooperate with the
Special Coordinator in this sphere.
Israel’s participation in the consensus on the
resolution should not be construed as implying any
position regarding the present status of the areas
referred to as “occupied territories”. Additionally, our
support does not carry any implication regarding
Israel’s position on the permanent status of those
territories, which, in accordance with all PalestinianIsraeli agreements, is a matter to be negotiated between
Israel and the Palestinians in the framework of the
permanent status negotiations, to which we hope to
return as soon as possible.
This year, changes were made in the text of the
resolution, referring to the free passage of aid and the
free movement for persons and goods. I would like to
take this opportunity to stress that despite the recent
crisis, Israel has continued and even expanded the free
flow of humanitarian assistance and food to the areas
under Palestinian Authority administration. In addition,
the movement of goods and persons through Israel and
Israeli-administered areas is restricted only to the
extent that such movement impacts directly on security.
Also in this year’s text, reference was made in
paragraph 11 to the need to continue implementation of
the provisions of the interim agreements signed
between Israel and the Palestinians. We welcome this
addition to the text of the resolution. It reinforces our

conviction
that
the
Israel-Palestinian
interim
agreements continue to remain in force until the
achievement of the permanent status agreement
between ourselves and the Palestinians, which we hope
will occur in the near future. In this regard, I would
like to reiterate that Israel fully respects and complies
with these agreements, including the provisions on the
clearance of Palestinian tax revenues, which have
already been transferred in full by Israel to the
Palestinian Authority for the monthly periods of
January to November of this year.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote after adoption.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) under agenda item 20.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
under agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The President: It is expected that the Assembly
will take action on the other draft resolutions submitted
or to be submitted under agenda item 20 and its subitem (b) next week. Members are aware that sub-item
(d) will be taken up next Tuesday, 19 December, in the
morning together with item 46.
Agenda item 54
Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of States and
Government of the Organization of African Unity on
the aerial and naval military attack against the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the
present United States Administration in April 1986
The President: It is my understanding that, after
the necessary consultations, consideration of this item
may be deferred to the fifty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to defer consideration of the item and to
include it in the provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth
session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 54.

15

A/55/PV.85

Agenda item 55

Agenda item 58

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security

Launching of global negotiations on international
economic cooperation for development

The President: It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. May
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the
provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 55.
Agenda item 56
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. May
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the
provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 56.
Agenda item 57
Implementation of the resolutions of the United
Nations
The President: It is my understanding that there
is no request to consider this item at the present
session. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item to the
fifty-sixth session and to include this item in the
provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 57.

16

The President: May I take it that it is the
Assembly’s wish to defer consideration of this item and
to include it in the provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth
session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 58.
Programme of work
The President: I should like to inform members
of the following additions to the programme of work of
the General Assembly.
On Tuesday morning, 19 December 2000, the
General Assembly, in addition to agenda item 17 (h),
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences”, and agenda items 20 (d) and 46, relating
to Afghanistan, will also take up agenda item 49, “The
situation in East Timor during its transition to
independence”.
On Wednesday morning, 20 December, the
General Assembly will consider the reports of the
Second Committee.
I should now like to remind delegations that we
are fast approaching the end of this part of the fiftyfifth session. It is my hope that all outstanding matters
for this part of the session concerning plenary items
will be dealt with by the General Assembly before the
end of next week.
In this connection, there are still a number of
outstanding draft resolutions under several plenary
items. I would therefore strongly urge members to
submit those draft resolutions at the latest by
tomorrow, 15 December 2000. Draft resolutions
submitted later than tomorrow, especially those that
could have programme budget implications, may run
the risk of not being acted upon before the end of next
week.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
