l&l...

I

UNITEKiVATIONS

URITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

2096”

MEETING: 6 NOVEMBER 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2096)

. ... .,.. ,.......,,..,.......,.

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
(al Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) (S/l 2903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2906) . . . . . . _ . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplemerz ts of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Courtcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2096th MEETJNG
Add in New York

on Monday,

6 November

19715, at 3 p.m.

---Ptwident:

Mr. L&n N’DONG (Gabon).

i)rPsenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2096)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2, The situation in Namibia:
(ti) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/l 2903);
(1)) Letter dated 24 October I978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12906)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
/a) Report of tile Secretary-General submitted pursuant
to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/12903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2906)

(Zambia) took the placesreservedfor
the Councilchamber.

them

at the

side of

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jiwn French): I
shouldlike to inform membersof the Councilthat I have
received a letter from the representativeof Algeria, in
which he asksto be invited to participatein the discussion.
In accordancewith the usualpractice, I propose,with the
consentof the Council,to invite him to participate in the
discussionwithout the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisionsof the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisionalrulesof procedure.
At the invttation of the President,Mr, Bouayad-&ha
(Algeria) took the plucereservedfor him at the sideof the
Councilchamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
French): In
accordancewith the decisiontakenat the 2092ndmeeting,
I invite the Presidentof the United Nations Council for
Namibiaand the delegationof the Councilto be seatedat
the Counciltable.
At the invitation of the President,M&sKonir (Frerident
of the United NationsCouncilfor Namibia)and the other
membersof the delegationtook placesat the Counciltable.
4 The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frerzch):
In
accordancewith the decisiontakenat the 2092ndmeeting,
1invite Mr. Gurirabto take a placeat the Counciltable,
At the ilwitution of the President,Mr. Gurirab (Pesmanent Observerof’ the South !&St Africa People’sOrganiznriorl) took a pluce nt the Counciltub/e.

5. The PRESIDENT(interpretationfrom h?ndl):
?demhers of the Councilnow have before them the foliowing
1. The PRESIDENT (inrwprctatiurz
from Fr;ren~lt): 111 documents:S/12913,containingthe text of a letter dated 2
Novemberfrom the representative
of Czechoslovakia
to the
accordancewith the decisionstaken at the 2092nd, 2094th
President
of
the
Security
Council,
and
S/12914,
containing
and 2095th meetings, 1 invite the representativesof
the text of a letter dated 2 Novemberfrom the reprcsentaBangiadesh,Benin, Burundi, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana,GuYma,
tive
of Srj Lankato the Secretary-General.
Mozunbique, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Yugoslavia and
Zambh to take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof
6. Mr. BlSIlARA (Kuwait): Mr. President,the delegation
tht: council chamber.
of Kuwait expresses
its sincerecongratulationsto YOUUn
your
assumption
of
the
presidencyof the Council for this
At the invitntiun of t/w President.Mr. Hrq (Bangladesh),
month, Kuwait aIld (&bon are fellow membCrSOf &C
fi[r. /lwngavou (Benin), Mr. Sinlbarzan~8c’(Burundi),
Organczationof PetroleumExporting Countriesand our
Mc Kerr
Kcncri (Cuba), 1I4r.Ah&l Akgtrid (&pt),
bilateral
rclatjonshave grown enormouslyin the last few
Ms B~aterz (Ghana), or. Sinclair (Guyanal, Mr. Lob0
(Mozambique), Mr. Buroody [Saudi Arabia), Mr. Hussen years. We pledgeour co-operationwith you during your
presidency.
(SOlIlUlin), 126:~onuti~la (Yugoslataiu) and Miss Konie

7. I should like also to thank the outgoing President,
Ambassador Leprette of France, for the remarkable skill
which he coupled with his famous French style, a combination that contributed to the success of the Council’s
deliberations during the month of October,

That is exactly what happened.South Africa hasscoffedat
the plan of action and hasdisplayedprovocative defiancein
the face of the Council. It may be arguedthat the Western
Powers’efforts are an attempt to wean South Africa from
its inveterateintransigence.

8. The central issue of Namibia is the principle of
self-determination and genuine independence for the Namibian people. All United Nations efforts have revolved
around this basic issue. All special meetings and assemblies,
international gatherings, private meetings, bilateral and
multilateral contacts have been devoted to the attainment
of this principle. First and foremost, the struggle of the
Namibian people led by the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) has been waged with this goal. The
initiative of the Five Western members of the Council is
also an attempt to attain Namibian self-determination and
independence by peaceful means. The speakers who have so
far participated in this debate have defended this principle.
We meet here in order to examine ways and means to
achieve it. The confrontation between the international
community and South Africa on the question of Namibia
stems from South Africa’s refusal to accept the application
of this principle to Namibia. This cardinal principle
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is so sacred
that it makes it impossible to tolerate the behaviour of
South Africa in its defiance of the will of the world as
represented in the authority of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.

11, Almost all speakers,including the representative of
SWAPO, have called for the invocation of Chapter VI1 of
the Charter as a punitive measureto combat the blatant
defiance of the Security Council by South Africa. The
Governmentof Kuwait supportsthis policy. The fear is that
South Africa, whose capacity for doing an about-faceis
unlimited, may partition Namibia becauseit is confident
that the bogus elections to be held in December will
produce demandsfor the partition of the Territory. We
voice our fears in the light of the mission of the five
Western membersof the Council, which brought meagre
resultsthat arenot commensuratewith the efforts and the
prestigeof the five ForeignMinisters. The dangerlies in the
fact that South Africa is convincedthat its nomineeswill be
put in a position of clefacto power in Namibiabefore there
is any question of elections supervisedby the United
Nations. This fear is confirmed by the statement of South
Africa’s Prime Minister who wasquoted in The Guardianof
30 October assayingthat the electionssponsoredby South
Africa are “an internal processto elect leaders” and that
“the next step would be to consider ways of achieving
international recognition for the new rdgime”. In the light
of such a statement one cannot help but endorse the
suspicionof the African Group that the Five virtually
acquiescedin South Africa’s determination to get its own
way in Namibia.

9. There is unanimity on the inalienable right of the
Namibian people to self-determination and genuine independence. Yet there are differences on the approach and
on the methods to be used to wrest from South Africa this
unquestionable right. Self-interest and other considerations
are important factors in preventing unanimity in the
Council on the future course of action. It seems that we are
wedded to the cause of self-determination for the Namibian
people but not united on what should be done to confront
South Africa’s disdain for this sacred principle. The
problem with the Council is that it cannot act decisively
unless the majority, including the permanent members,
agree on the general guidelines for action. What is important at this stage is how to compel South Africa to accept
resolution 435 (1978), based on the proposals of the five
Western members of the Council,
lo. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, who spoke at the Council’s meeting on
29 September, after the adoption of resolution 435 (1978),
said:

12. There is a great deal of truth in the statementsof
previousspeakersthat the inability of the Council to act
decisivelyagainstSouth Africa hasencouragedthe Government of that country to go beyond limits in its defiance of
the United Nations.We think there is no extra time left in
which the Council may wait for somesignsof goodwill
from South Africa. South Africa has exhausted all the
“time outs” and the end of this unpleasantgame is long
overdue. There is no doubt that there is a set-back in
Namibia and that the hopes arousedby the adoption of
resolution 435 (1978) have been shattered. In this atmosphereof uncertainty, fear and disbelief, the Council hasto
do something.The questionthat haunts us is what is to be
done? One answer is that the struggleof the Namibian
peopleagainstforeign occupation must be intensified. This
does not await the approval of the Council as it is the
inherent right of the Namibian people to resist alien
domination. Therefore, bilateral assistanceto SWAP0 is
essentialfor the intensification of the struggle.

“We know that the approval of the report of the
Secretary-General is not sufficient to enable him to go
ahead with the plan of action just adopted. South Africa,
which is illegally in Namibia, has the physical power to
Prevent UNTAG f United Nations Transition Assistance
Group/ from reachingthe Territory or, evenif UNTAC is
admitted, has the samepower to prevent the freedomof
movement necessaryfor the dischargeof its functions.!t
is therefore important for the successof the plan of
action to compelSouth Africa to co-operatein the present
undertaking.” 12087th meeting,para. 122.1

13. The secondansweris that the Security Council must
play its role in taking measures
to assertits authority. We
know that the policy of South Africa is not to assistthe
people of Namibia to achieve self-determination, as its
spokesmenallege, but to undermine their right to the
application of this principle and to sponsor an obedient
bunch of people who are ready to comply with its design
for the partition of Namibia or, at best, acquiescein the
bantustanizationof the Territory. One may ask what are
the measuresthe Council may contemplate? Admittedly,
they are few if there isno agreementamongthe permanent

2

members, but they are many if there is agreement among
the overwhelming majority. So, amid the uncertaintiesof
the present,WC should not lose sightof this fact, The ghost
of the triple veto, SO much mentioned in this debate,has
not yet left this chamber.The difference amongmembers
of the Council is about approach and strategy but not
necessarilyabout the final goal. An independentNamibia
Jedby SWAP0 scaresSouth Africa and may scareothers,
but all, with the exception of South Africa, realize the
inevitability of an independent Namibialed by SWAPO. It
is immaterialwhether someof uslike this fact or not. What
isimportant is that all OF US are resignedto acceptingit.
14. My delegation is convinced that fair, free and unfettered elections will bring in SWAP0 at the headof the
electedgovernment. The question is what can the Council
do to bring about fair elections in Namibia? The farcical
electionswhich will take place in December, with the
sponsorshipof South Africa, should be contained, confronted and rejected. Nothing hasexposedthe true nature
of the internal settlement of Smith in Rhodesiamorethan
the international rejection of it. It will be the height of
irresponsibility if we allow the result of this debate to
remaininconclusive.We must not forget that it is advisable
sometimesto tame the desirablein order to bring it into
line with the obtainable. The distancebetween what we
want and what we can obtain is still unbridgeable,although
it is true that all of usare in earnestabout the achievement
of independencefor Namibia.

the majority in the GeneralAssemblyand the ruthless
approachof the Council.
18, There is alsoa demandthat the Council should call
upon South Africa to abandonthe phony electionsscheduled for Decemberin Namibia. The problem in this
connexionis not createdby the Councilbut arisesfrom the
fact that in their attemptto accommodate
South Africa the
Westernmembersacceptedthe holdingof thoseelections,
In paragraph5 of annexI of the letter of 21 October from
the Ambassadors
of the five Western countries to the
Presidentof the Security Council[S/12902/, those countriessay that “any suchunilateralmeasure
in relation to the
electoralprocesswill be regardedasnull andvoid”.
19. On the face of it, this commitmentsoundshonestand
promisingbut there is no commitmentthat suchinternal
settlementwill be dealtwith politically, economicallyand
by other meansif, after the elections,South Africa does
not agreeto electionssupervised
by the United Nations.
The paragraphin question containsan expressionof a
state of mind about the internal electionsbut doesnot
promiseany action thereafter.It is in many ways reminiscent of the vaguely worded documentsof the ambiguous
diplomacypursuedin the earlyyearsof this century.
20. My delegationis alsobaffled by paragraph4 of the
samedocument,which statesthat South Africa
“will thereafter use its best efforts to persuadethem
seriously to consider ways and meansof achieving
internationalrecognitionthrough the goodoffices of the
SpecialRepresentativeand the Administrator-General”.

15. My delegation views the present debate with the
seriousness
it deservesand warrants. It cannot accept an
inconclusivedebate or a debate that endsin makingmore
remote the attainment of genuine independenceby Namibia, On the question of Namibia, the international
community hasachievedsomeremarkablesuccess.
It would
not be forgivable to part company at this crucial hour.
16. In the course of the consultations,negotiationsand
exchangesof view, the African Group, and especially
SWAPO, has shown a senseof realism,,But we must not
forget that a continuousdisplay of realismcould undermine
credibility. We must be careful what we do lest we lose
credibility. The crucial issueishow to combinerealismwith
the preservation of that valuable credibility. The demand
by SWAP0 that the Deccrnberinternal electionsshouldbe
condemned,rejected and challengedis legitimateandin line
with the policy of my Government. This demandis not
over-ambitiousand no delegationis expected to balk at it.
The other demand-that South Africa should implement
resolution435 (1978)-does not constitute a departurefrom
what hasbeen accepted.That resolution wasadoptedon 29
Septemberin the presenceof an unusually distinguished
paradeof Foreign Ministers.
17. The other point raised in the courseof our contacts
relatesto the situation in Namibia as a threat to international peace and security. To us there is nothing new in
this proposition. On numetous occasionsthe General
Assembly has determined that the situation in Namibia
constitutesa threat to world peace and security and that
therefore the invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter is
valid and legitimate. Some of us may disagree,and such
disagreement
highlights the differencebetweenthe voice of
3

This paragraphconfirms the fears of the international
community that South Africa is not committed to fair
electionsin Namibia. It containsa promiseto persuade
their proteges,but not to compelthem.In otherwords,the
veto power will remain in the hands of the elected
henchmen of South Africa. What will happen if the
henchmenare not persuaded?The WesternPowershave
not given an answerregardingthis possibility. Will the
architects of this agreementaccept the imposition of
punitive measures
if sucha situationarises?And what will
be the situationif South Africa declaresthat its powersof
persuasion
havebeenexhaustedto no avail?
21. The presentsituation is extremely serious,and the
approachof the Councilshouldreflect thisseriousness.
It is
shockingthat the Council cannot stop the internal elections. It is also distressingfor us to realize that some
membershave acquiesced
in the holdingof thoseelections,
althoughthey arenot committedto the outcome.But the
dangeris that that outcomewill gathersufficient strength
to imposea fait accompli.A realisticapproachmight be to
addressa seriouswarning to South Africa expressingthe
determinationof the Council,in the eventof South Africa’s
failure to comply with resolution435 (1978) within a given
time-frame, collectively to invoke Chapter VII of the
Charter. My delegationbelievesthat we have reachedthe
hmit of our patience.There isno time for vacillation. This
is the hour of decision.We mustmakeSouth Africa realize
the inevitability of sanctionsif it continuesto behavein
this manner. Once South Africa realizesthat it has no

universally recognized representative, SWAPO, and carrying
out bloody acts of aggression against neighbouring in.
dependent African States. The list of such illegal aad
criminal acts by the racists is endless, and such acts are aII
designed to prepare the ground for the imposition on tI\e
Namibian people, at the right moment, of a SO-Called
internal settlement by means of the establishment of a
puppet rkghne in order to keep Namibia under aeo.
colonialist control.

choice and that the jig is up, as the Americans say, it will
reconsider its policy.
22. Nothing could be more damaging to the cause of the
Namibians than seeing the Council stalemated in a linguistic
scrimmage. My delegation is willing to support any draft
resolution that sets a time-frame for the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978), with sanctions to be imposed on
South Africa in the event of its failing to comply with the
suggested time-frame. Our main concern is the people of
Namibia, who are entitled to complete independencepolitically, territorially and in every other respect. My
delegation will earnestly seek the application of this
principle until that is achieved.

27. This goal of the racists of South Africa has once again
been clearly and visibly demonstrated in the decision ta
hold unilateral elections in Namibia in December this year,
and, in general, in their attitude towards the basic pro.
visions of the report of the Secretary-General contained Ia
document S/12827. The implementation of the results of
the most recent talks of the five Western countries with
South Africa, as submitted to the Council in documeat
S/12900, would lead to a situation in which it would be
impossible, even formally, to say that the process of a
political settlement of the Namibinn problem would be
taking place under the control and supervision of the
United Nations. The demands of the South Africra
authorities, even in the form in which they were accepted
by the five Western countries, as set out in documeat
S/12902, boil down to this: the process should take place,
in actual fact, under the total control of South Africa,
while the United Nations would have allotted to it only the
role of a passive onlooker. Can anyone therefore be
surprised, in view of this situation, that SWAPO, by a
telegram from its President dated 23 October [see
S/ZZI1.3/, rejected the results of the talks at Pretoria as
unacceptable, and asked the Security Council, in ac.
cordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, to impose
comprehensive, mandatory sanctions against the South
African racist rigime.

23. Mr.. HULINSKY? (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation porn
Russi&): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to express its
satisfaction that you,
the representative of an African
country, are conducting the proceedings of the Security
Council- in a month during which we are dealing with
questions of such vital importance for your continent, and
not for your continent alone. At the same time I should
like to take the opportunity to point out that relations
between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the
Republic of Gabon have been friendly ever since your
country attained independence in 1960. They have been
developing in a mutually advantageous and positive direction since 1976, when our countries established diplomatic
relations and exchanged diplomatic representatives.
24. I should also like to thank the representative of
France, Ambassador Lcprette, for the skilful and experienced way in which he conducted the proceedings of
the Council in October.
25. The many years of discussion of the Namibian
question in the Security Council and in other bodies of the
United Nations have repeatedly compelled US to reach the
same conclusion: Soutrh Africa will never voluntarily agree
to a settlement in Namibia in accordance with the
numerous decisions of the United Nations calling for the
immediate cessation of the illegal occupation of that rich
but sorely tried and long-suffering Territory. The tactics of
the South African authorities change, but their ultimate
goal clearly remains the same: the perpetuation in one form
or another of colonial and racist: domination of Namibia.

28. Czechoslovakia supports that position of SWAP0 and
also its demands, which enjoy the support of African anda
number of other countries. At the moment, the necessary
conditions do not exist for the proposed journey of the
Special Representative of the IJnited Nations to Namibia.
29. At the present lime it is not sufficient simply to
condemn the actions of South Africa or merely to tnakc
statements to the effect that its unilateral measures with
regard to the elecloral process will be viewed as devoid of
juridical validity. The duty of the United Nations, which
bears direct responsibility for Namibia until such tirue as
the Territory attains genuine self-determination and np
tional independence, is to bend every effort to thwart the
implementation of the Ireaclwrous
plans of tilt: Sdl
African r&ime.

26” In order to secure that objective, the representatives of
the South African authorities have recently even been
declaring their alleged readiness to react favourably to a
s&tlement in Namibia which would be in line with the just
demands of the international community, but the facts, the
concrete political administrative measures taken by the
SoL;lh African authorities in Namibia, simply demonstrate
t.hat the Pretoria regime has never even really considered
going along with the serious negotiations with regard to a
genuine settlement of the Namibian problem. As we all
know, even while the various kinds of diplomatic negotiations recently held were proceeding, South Africa was
constantly strengthening its military potential in the Territory, exp<anding its network of military bases, creating
various military and paramilitary formations and training
detachments of mercenaries, The racists have been stepping
up their repression of the Namibian people and its

30. The road to ensuring a just solution of the Nadiafl
problem has been indicated in numerous decisions of tile
Organization, as set out in the Declaration on Namibia aad
the Programme of Action in Support of Self-DetcrminatiO~l
and National Independence for Namibia adopted on 3 May
1978 by the General Assembly at its ninth special session
[resolution S-Y/Z/. At this stage of the discussion of this
item, we believe it indispensable to focus attention on the
fact that the General Assembly stated chat it rejcctcri
4

‘&the idea that South Africa, as the illegal occupier of
Namibia, has any legitimate interest in Namibia about
which the South West Africa People’s Organization
should be pressed to make concessions in any negotiated
acceptable settlement”
/ibid.,
and internationally
para. 181.
31. In accordance with the decisions of the United
Nations, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has always
favoured, and continues to favour, the immediate exercise
by the people of Namibia of its inalienable right to
self-determination and independence on the basis of the
preservation of the unity and territorial integrity of the
country, and we are in favour of the immediate and total
withdrawal of the forces and the administration of South
Africa and the transfer of power to SWAPO, which has
been recognized by the United Nations as the sole
legitimate and genuine representative of the people of
Namibia.

course with resolution 435 (1978), which followed a
number of resolutions that have been referred to many
times, and when we had placed our trust in the efforts of
the five Western countries and welcomed those efforts,
many difficulties have arisen and the Pretoria rEgime has
made mock of us.
38. There is nothing really to add to all that has already
been said. This is a subject that has been dealt wilh
exhaustively. None the less, it is a problem that is farther
than ever from solution, through the historical objective
stated in paragraph 2 of resolution 435 (1978), to wit:
“the withdrawal of South Africa’s illegal administration
from Namibia and the transfer of power to the people of
Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations”.
39. In order not to repeat everything that has already been
said and heard and end up, perhaps, by confusing the
Council, my delegation wishes to mention only two
preoccupations. The first relates to the responsibility that
we must assume for our own resolutions. The worst kind of
negation is that of oneself. We must be consistent with
what we have ourselves said. The second relates to the
many ways in which the authority of the Security Council
is being eroded,

32. The liberation of Namibia from colonialist, racist
occupaticn has become a task which brooks no further
delay, and until that task has been carried out and as long
as the South African authorities continue to maintain and
strengthen their domination in Namibia, all Members of the
United Nations must not only abide by the United Nations
decisions but also increase their efforts to produce effective
measures which will force the racists to bow to the will of
the international community. It is our belief that the policy
of the racists of South Africa with regard to Namibia, as has
repeatedly been stressed in United Nations resolutions,
represents a serious threat to peace and security in the
southern part of the African continent and beyond it.

40. We sincerely welcome, as a positive contribution,
every effort to achieve peace in different parts of the world,
because we are aware that world peace has to be objectively
affirmed by regional peace, Therefore, Bolivia is a resolute
advocate of the declaration of zones of peace, in the
regional sowing of seeds of partial peace, the fruitful
harvest of which will be world peace, the aim being the
ultimate humanization of our humanity, which is rather
doubtful at this stage because of colonialism and racism.
My delegation welcomes all initiatives aiming at peace and
has supported every effort to foster peace. But it now
expresses its disquiet, because those efforts are aimed not
only at making a contribution but at frustrating the
carrying out by the Security Council of its important
responsibilities under the Charter.

33. On the basis of what I have said, my delegation
believes that the Security Council must, and speedily, take
a decision which would actually and in practice force South
Africa finally to bow to the will of the United Nations and
the resolutions adopted by its organs,
34. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretatiwz jkm
Sparzisli): I wish to express to you, Sir, my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. We wish you every success in your difficult
task and assure you of our resolute co-operation. The
convergence of the national aims of Gabon and Bolivia lies
in their similarity of circumstance. As far as personal
relations are concerned, my delegation holds you in the
highest regard.

41, With these two preoccupations, my delegation believes
that we must act in accordance with our ineluctable powers
and our important responsibilities to recover the authority
that we can lose only at the cost of seriously frustrating the
United Nations, the establishment of which Bolivia SUPported and in whose defence Bolivia has always been and
will continue to be unswerving.

35. I must say again that Bolivia is firm and resolute,
together with all the dependent peoples of the world, not
only because of anti-colonialist and anti-racist principles
but because it has itself sufrered from every excess of
territorial and economic depredation. As a native people of
despoiled Latin America, we Bolivians suffered the most
from colonialist and even racist pillaging.

42. We must be resolutely co&tent with our own resolutions. We must make a final strong appeal for compliance
with resolution 435 (1978), and, after a stated period of
time, proceed to apply the sanctions provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter.
43. As regards practical action in the search for a specific
solution to this problem, the delegation of Bolivia considers
that it would not be right for a representative of the United
Nations to remain in Namibia because this ~0~1: bc
interpreted as an endorsement of unilateral illegal electIons,
which violate Security Council decisions, My delegation
reiterates that, because of our own decisions and in order to

36. I wish also to convey our appreciation of the excellent
and intelligent work carried out by Ambassador Leprette,
representatjve of that great nation, France, which is so
highly regarded by Bolivia.
37. Just when we thought that WChad finally managed to
set this long-standing problem of Namibia on the right
5

maintain the authority of the United Nations through the
Council, it agrees with sanctions and will vote for them.
However, our aim is not to apply sanctions, but to maintain
peace. Sanctions are a method of achieving this in extreme
instances of obdurate refusal, such as that which we are
confronting now.

50. We co-operated with the Western Five and gave support
to them so as to evolve a peaceful solution to the problem
of Namibia. We noted with appreciation that SWAP0 was
persuaded to lend its full co-operation in this process.
Resolution 385 (1976) was in effect modified to form the
general framework for the proposals of the Western Five,
Those proposals became the basis for resolution
43 1 (1978), of which resolution 435 (1978) sought the
implementation. This scenario led us to believe, I hope not
in mistaken euphoria, that we were at last about to
decolonize Namibia and rid that unfortunate people and
Territory of the racist usurpers, of victimization and
repression.

44. Coming back to the aim, I think it would be
appropriate, instead of sending a representative of the
Secretary-General, for the Secretary-General himself to go
to Namibia to serve notice on the illegal regime of South
Africa of its duty to comply with the Security Council’s
resolutions in one last attempt at a genuinely democratic 9
solution to the problem of the independence of Namibia, a
51. During this process, South Africa threatened to call
matter in which we have so long been involved and with
off the negotiations from time to time. The racists
such anguish. Once this final measure has been attempted,
double-talked about “acceptances” and they alleged that
if there is an equally definite refusal, sanctions should be
SWAP0 wanted power handed over directly to it. This we
applied. It could never then be said that the Council had
all know was not a correct reflection of the facts. The level
not made every effort, with the fullest consideration and
of their genocidal and offensive incursions deep into
prudence, but with firm authority, to achieve a peaceful
neighbouring independent territories during the period of
solution of the problem.
negotiations is well documented. They lied that those
incursions were a matter of “hot pursuit” into guerrilla
45. An initiative of this type would help us to achieve the
camps and bases. We have all the information depicted, in
objectives we are seeking. We are ready to embody it in a
this very building, on film and in photographs, to show that
draft resolution if there is agreement on this, particularly
almost invariably they actually massacred hundreds of
among the countries of the African Group, with which
women and children in refugee camps. All this was
Bolivia wishes to express once again its solidarity.
obviously in an attempt to derail the process of the
transition of Namibia to genuine independence. SWAP0
gallantly stood fast and firm, in the conviction of its
46. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): Mr. President, 1join others
responsibilities and obligations to ensure the aspirations and
before me in congratulating you on your assumption of the
long-term welfare of their people.
presidency of this Council for the month of November. It is
fitting that an African is in the Chair when the Council is
52. Let us again recall that the proposals of the West fell
continuing its deliberations on the situation in Namibia.
short of the letter and spirit of resolution 385 (1976).
SWAP0 made concessions on the number of South African
47. I also extend the gratitude of my delegation to
troops to be retained in Namibia during the transition
Ambassador Jacques Leprette of France for the exemplary
period. This went beyond the resolution, which called for
manner in which he conducted the business of the Council
the removal of all South African troops. SWAP0 has
during the month of October, when this debate comaccepted the presence of the South African paramilitary
menced.
police force in Namibia, although they are to be monitored
by the United Nations. The recent statements of the South
48. Permit me to utilize some of the most recent
Africans and the Western Five are not very succinct and
developments concerning Namibia in order to bring into
therefore not clear on this point. To crown it all, SWAP0
harp focus recent events in the Territory. Until early in
also agreed to a cease-fire, which I have always described as
1977 three principal elements or parties were involved in
a surrender, in order to participate in free and fair elections
this whole process: first, the international community as
which would also involve all those who had been against
represented at the United Nations; secondly, SWAPO,
them. It accepted in good faith resolution 432 (1978) and,
representing the aspirations of the Namibian people; and
most important, it proved that, given free and fair elections,
thirdly, South Africa, the usurpers of the Territory.
as the legitimate and authentic representative of the
Namibian people, not just because it is so described by the
49. In 1977 the five Western members of the Security
Security Council and the General Assembly but because it
Council came into the picture. We believed that they would
is so in fact on the ground, SWAP0 would triumPh. On the
use their special relationship with South Africa to facilitate
other hand, all action to date by South Africa is to block
the implementation of resolution 385 (1976) which they
such elections, which they know they will lose, and to do
had unanimously supported. Even at that stage I was
all they can to exclude SWAP0 from those elections.
perturbed personally, and my Committee, the Co.nmittee
against Apartheid, felt the same way, by the play on words
53 One is forced to ask: what concession has South
by certain Western delegations, which preferred imprecise
Africa made in all this process? If my memory sW.W me
right, I would say none. Perhaps the only concession was
language in resolution 385 (1976) like “supervisory control” in place of “supervision and control”. And 1 might
their condescension in sitting and negotiating on the
proposals of the Western Five, especially on the eve of the
remark in passing that even today this aspect of control is
being gradually left out of much of the rhetoric by certain
ninth special session of the General Assembly on Namibia,
of those same delegations. 1 hope this is an oversight.
believing that their acceptance of them would pre-empt the
6

Work of the special session and that SWAP0 would reject
the proposals; when in fact, 8S WC dl recall, SWAP0 did
stay behind to continue the dialogue with the Western Five
h New York.

Namibia will contim.le to intimidate SWAPO. This has been
their *Drincioal
nccllnntinn
in the past and will be even more
~~----=-.- ---TI”l-.L yI
so regarding SWAPO’S SUJ+~lnr+r~
._.”
during the election
campaigns.

54. The South Africans moved into Kassinga and caused
all the bloodshed which we saw on film, again in this
building. They hoped that this would be the final straw for
8WAPO and that they would reject the convening of
another meeting, thus giving the impression that South
Africa had the upper hand.

58. The role of monitoring and controlling South African
security forces must be a primary responsibility of
UNTAG, and the Western Five will no doubt be kind
enough at some point to explain to us what the formulation
of words used in their joint statement means when it talks
about the paramount role of the South African police in
civiIian control.

55. To follow this up, when
the Security Councilincluding the Five-accepted the report of the SecretaryGeneral which was to move the process forward to
elections, we thought we had seen the light at the end of
the tunnel; but in its psychogenically devious approach,
South Africa frustrated the process by deliberately disagreeing with the Secretary-General’s implementation of
the proposals. Our profound consternation petered out
when the five Western members pronounced that the
report, based on expert appraisal by the Secretary-General’s
team of experts, civilian and military, conformed with the
letter and spirit of the proposals of the Five. This made no
difference to the scheming South Africans, but we were
also glad to learn that, in spite of South Africa’s recalcitrance, the Foreign Ministers had gone to Pretoria to secure
acceptance by South Africa of the decision of the international community as reflected in resolution 43.5 (1978).
Obviously this was what we thought they had gone to do.
The results anticipated were very clear to all of us, The
actual outcome fell far short of our reasonable expectations, None of us-and I dare say not even the principal
actors among the Five-could have imagined that the Five,
represented at the level of Foreign Ministers, would go to
Pretoria for any other reason than to secure compliance by
South Africa with resolution 435 (1978). It would be
rather sadistic if 1 went further and described how they
spent the three days in South Africa, waiting in the corridor
for Botha to finish his consultations with his surrogates
from Namibia, before talking to them at all. The West was
comfortably placed for this, with its often-pronounced
commitment to solving the problems of southern Africa,
and the inherent leverage emanating from the might of the
Western Powers; furthermore their honour and prestige
were at stake, in particular in salvaging the situation in
Rhodesia and in Namibia and, in addition, they had the
complete and total support of the international cmmu&y.
56. But as I said earlier, the outcome of the Pretoria
meeting was disturbingly hazy and incoherent. In its main
thrust and substance, it was contradictory to resolution
435 (1978), for the following reasons.
57. First, the South Africans saw fit to give their own
interpretation o$ the United Nations plan. They asserted
the primary role of their own police force in the maintenance of law and order during the transitional period.
One is confused by the form of words used: nothing is said
about supervision and control and the role of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) in this
sector is rendered subject to contradictions which will he
to be cleared up. Clearly the South African police force in

59. Secondly, in the joint statement the Western Five
appear to have reneged on their original commitment to the
UNTAG figure of 7,500 men-“appear to”, I say. A
reduction of the military troop level of 7,500 would be
unrealistic, taking the size of Namibia into consideration.
Account has already been taken of the 2,600 men to be
deployed on logistic duties, thus further depleting the
actual number of men available for such vital duties as the
all-important role of monitoring the residual South African
forces supposedly confined to two locations in northern
Namibia.
60. Here again, my delegationhopes that our reading of this
is wrong, for it calls into question the earlier acceptance of
the Secretary-General’s report by the Security Council,
including the Western Five, and the good judgement of
General Philipp, all of whom consider this troop level th.e
barest minimum. It will also discourage SWAP0 and all
those ~110 join SWAP0 to allow South Africa to retain any
troops whatsoever in Namibia during the transitional
period. Unless the Council intends to assist South Africa in
its plans to sabotage one of our objectives, the creation of
conditions conducive to free and fair elections, we should
reject South Africa’s objections to the size of UNTAG, and
South Africa should be clearly so informed.
61. Finally, and most disturbingly, Pretoria has reaffirmed
its intention to proceed with internal elections in December
without guaranteeing elections supervised by the United
Nations next year, In spite of resolution 435 (1978), South
Africa merely agreed to make efforts, as many speakers
before me have underlined, to “persuade” its surrogates
who arc to be elected in the December “elections” to seek
internationaI acceptability. Indeed, this is true to the
tradition of that country. No one can believe that such
leaders will agree to their own self-dissolution four months
later in order to facilitate elections supervised and controlled by the United Nations, which they know they will
certainly lose.
62. The Western Five cannot now insist, in the terms of
their joint statement of 19 October [S/12900, annex Ig,
that resolution 435 (1978) is still the vehicle for the
genuineindependenceof Namibia,for in paragraph4 of
&at statement South Africa is allowed to reaffirm its
intention to hold internal electionsin Namibia.Attempts
by the WesternFive to balancethat paragraphwith their
own paragraph5 are superfluousand redundant, since
resolution 435 (1978) had already determinedthat any
electoralprocessoutsidethe United Nationsplan would be
null and void. Thereby the WesternFive have allowedan

the Western Five, who Will have read it , Will ügrec thü t thcre
is a basic problem with the South African leaders. But we
have not yet had any responsc from the Western Powers un
these issues which bave bcen set hefore the Courrcil, WC
should likc to know their attitude on this matler also. For
our part, we categorically denouncc the defamation of
SWAPO and of those African States that support SWAI’0.
The issue is the freeing of Namibia from the racist usurpcrs,
in line with the rcsolutions of the United Nations, and
nothing else.

impression to be created that interna1 clcctions could secure
Icgitimacy at some point in the future, especially by
allowing that paragraph 4 to be written into a joint
statemcnt. Again we hope that WC arc wrong, but that is
what paragraph 4 clearly indicates.
63. Having said dl that, it is reasonablc to conclude that
the outcome of the démarche with South Africa was
basically unsuccessful, even though that u’énrurcfrr in itself
wasver-y commendable. It is clear that the interna1 elections
arc in contradiction to ail United Nations resolutions
relevant thereto, culminating in 43.5 (1978). Such elections,
if they took place, would be a travesty of fret and fair
elections; they would bc on tribal and racial lines and
would seek to consolidate these. South Africa has no good
faith to offer, and we must treat with it accordingly. This
all accords with the track record of South Africa at home,
in particufar during the last few wecks. 1 hope you Will
allow me to go into this, Mr. President, although it is not
directty relevant, because it illustrates what I described
earlier as the psychogenic traurnata with which
we are
deallng and the.South African mental problem.

69. At this stage, thcrefore, it is logical that certain steps
should have to be tnkcn in relation to Namibia. If il were
my duty to dictate tbose ternis, 1 would say immcdiately
that WC should bring the full wcight of thc provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter to benr on South Africa to get it
to bow to the gcneral wish of thc international community
and suuthern Africa as a wholc, but ours is a dcmocrntic
group and 1 believe that the spcctrum of opinion in the
Security Council and in thc United Nations is vcry broad
indeed. 1 am certain that in making thcse rccommendations
1 an1 not cornpromising my own position, thc position of
niy Çovcrnment or that of Afriça.

64, The intentions of the apartheid rtgimc and its master
plan are obvious. Lt has made it clear that it seeks to
bantustanizc the wholc of southern Africn under South
African domination. A fcw weeks ago that rdgirne staged an
election in the South African bantustan of Vendaland. Its
puppets were totally routed in thc elections. Thereafter the
rt$irne detalned the newlyelected members and stacked the
socalled legislative assembly with puppet chiefs who would
accept the sharn so-called indepcndencc of Vendaland.
Think about this. Think about Namjbîa.

70. First, we must condemn thc intcrnal clcctions and, in
a vcry clear resolution, call for their rcnunciation by South
Africa. Sccondly, thcre rnusl be clcar and uncquivocal
acceptancc of rcsolution 435 (1978) by South Africü
bcforc any other action is takcn, exccpt that u~dx~ C%apter
VII of the Charter, in rcspccl of a thrcnt to thc peacc.
Thirdly, thc date for the arriva1 of UNTAG should bc fixed.
South Africa bas stalled on this müttcr for over ü month
now and no clear solution is in si&t. Thc date uf 29
September, when resolution 435 (1978) wns adopted, ~US,
WC undcrstood, D-Day for thc conunenccrnent of the
UNTAC; exercise in Namibia. Fourthly, thc date for the
clections to bc superviscd m.l coatrollccl by thc Unitcd
Nations should be fixed, That is also ovcrdue.

65. A few months ago so-called elections were staged in
Soweto. The rbgime detained all the genuine leaders of the
peoplc of Soweto before the elections, as it had donc in the
Transkei, using the local chiefs there. In spite of nll thcir
intimidation, only 6 per cent of the voters went to the
polis. The régime then declated the candidates rejected by
the people to be the leaders of Soweto.

71. WC should bc ablc to consider a dcadline for this
exercise by which time South Africu sh«uld givc a full
responsc to all thc preceding questions; that pcriod should
not exceed two wceks after a relevant resolution bas bcen
adoptcd.

66. It plans to enact the same farce in Namibia; 1 certainly
have no doubt about that. Thc socalled elections in
December are rejected by ail the poptdar organizations
allowed to speak in Namibia and by ail thc churches. But
the South African régime is proceeding with its plans in
order to foist the thoroughly discredited Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance on the people as the so-callcd leaders of
the Territory.

72. As 1 have said, this is only a proposa1 that WC might
considcr. 17ven though 1 bave nradc the proposa1 and atn
convinced that that is what shoultl bc done, 1 am grcatly
concerned about it.
73. Many delcgations recommend that the SccretaryGeneral should undertake the necessary dér~mrcircsduring
that period. Thnl possibility could he considcrcd, as long as
thereufter thc Council does not dump the problcni on the
Secretary-General, as it tends to do when it has fXlcd.
Should South Africa fail to comply witlr thc propos&
outlined, there should bc autornaticnlly a Council mec lin8
to consider the appropriate steps undet Chaptcr VII of the
Charter, and that would cal1 for a report by the SccretaryGeneral on these matters within the two-wcek deadline.

67. We arc not in the least surprised at the manoeuvres of
the racist régime, which hopes to scçureh acquie~enceof
the Western Powers by raising a scare about communism
and by propagatinp the myth that SWAPO is a Marxist
organization because it receives support from socialist
States, among others.
68. We were not surprised to read the statcment of the
racist Prime Minister P. W. Botha at the meeting with the
tive Western Ministers, which has been givcn sanction as a
document of the Sccurity Councif. That shameful distortion of the facts is ln .document S/l2900. It is very
interesting to read that document, and 1 am sure that evcn

74. The actions of’ Soulh Africa, whether they are its

defiance of the United Nations on the Namibian question,
its aggression against its neighbours in southcrn Africa,
8

committed either directly or indirectly through its agents in
Rhodesia and elsewhere, and its domestic policies, have
loIlg constituted a grave threat to international peace and
security. The Western Powers have always parried the
question of action under Chapter VII of the Charter and I
do not believe that the international community can
accommodate them in that any longer. I do not think that,
in the circumstances now prevailing in Namibia, we can give
South Africa any further opportunity or time to continue
to defy the world. We hope that the West on this occasion
will find no excuse not to co-operate with us.

effectively fulfil its pertinentresponsibilities
in relation to
the graveSituation
in Namibia,wemustnot be deludedinto
thinking that Namibiaandthe future of that international
Territory can be discussed
and analysedin isolation. For
the correlationof forceswhich continue to influence the
Pattern andthe courseof eventsin southernAfrica in itself
requiresthat Namibiabe viewedwithin the wider context
of the geopoliticalsituationthat at presentobtains in that
troubledregionof the world. It hasbeenobservedin several
forums-andmy delegationassociates
itself with the obseyvation-that central to the ongoingproblemsof southern
Africa is South Africa itself. The manoeuvrings
and the
consistentintransigence
of the South African racist regime
are reflected jn the anticsof the rebel Smith at Salisbury.
The international community, in its considerationof the
Presentstate of affairspertainingto Namibia,needsto be
cognizant of Smith’sanxiety to convincecertain influential sectorsof the globalcommunity that his vision of an
internal settlementmeritssupport, whereverthat support
might emerge.The most recent utterancesof the Botha
rdgimeindicate quite clearly that that racistis determined
that his regimewill continue in the coursecharted by his
predecessors
in an attempt to retain South Africa’s illegal
strangleholdon the Territory of Namibia,

75. The reason for that is the clear trend we see evolving in
Namibia. By now, the Council is only too aware of the
implications of attempts to legitimize the internal settlement in Rhodesia. It has rejected that. It should not allow
itself to be hoodwinked and led into a position at some
future date where it will have no option but to ask for
all-party conferences or other palliatives in Namibia similar
to those we have seen in Rhodesia. The stage is now clearly
set for free, fair, supervised and controlled elections in
Namibia. We must not and cannot afford to move
backwards.
76. For its part, Nigeria will continue unequivocally to
support SWAP0 and to provide it with moral and material
assistance to enable it to step up its armed struggle against
the illegal administration in Namibia. If the peaceful option
fails, we shall pursue the only option left with greater
vigour.

81. When the General Assembly convened in special
session
in 1967,we agreeduponmodalitiesandmechanisms
through
which the UnitedNationscould best dischargeits
responsibilities
with regardto Namibiasoasto expedite the
attainmentof genuineindependence
by the peopleof that
Territory. Today, 11 yearsafter that historicdecision,the
responsibilityand the preoccupationof the United Nations
remainthe same,andthis mustbe the pre-eminentareaof
our concern today, that is, to ensurethe early independenceof Namibiaunderthe auspices
of the United Nations.
We must not waver in fulfilling that solemnundertaking.
Yet the successfulexerciseof that responsibilityby the
United Nationswasbasedupona very importantpremise:a
willingnesson the part of the South African rCgimeto
comply with the prescriptions
of the GeneralAssemblyand
to co-operatein the transferof the administrationof the
Territory to the UnitedNationsCouncilfor Namibia,which
js the legalAdministeringAuthority of the Territory, until
the achievementof genuineindependence.

77. The PRESIDENT (itzterprctation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Guyana. 1 invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
78. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): It is appropriate for my
delegation first of all to extend to you, Mr. President, and
through you to the other members of,the Security Council
our sincere gratitude at having been accorded this opportunity to participate in the present deliberations. My
delegation would also like to extend its congratulations to
you on your assumption of this high office and to express
its firm hope that under your presidency the Council will
adopt such measures as will serve to accelerate the
realization of genuine independence and freedom for the
people of Namibia,

82. During the courseof the past 19 months, initiatives
have beenundertakenboth within and without the United
Nations jn an effort to expedite the grantingof genuine
independence
to the peopleof Namibia.Today we aremet
to consjderthe resultsof someof those initiatives.The
record of South Africa’sresponse
is clearandunambiguous,
and wel] known to all of us. That responsehas becrl
charactcrizedby nothing but defianceand intransigence.
There are.few indeedwho havb everbelieved that thCre Was
any genuine willingnesson the part of South Africa to
co.operatcwith the UnitedNationson Namibia.

79. The past 19 months in particular have witnessed a
flurry of diplomatic and other activity in relation to
southern Africa, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabweactivity occasioned by various and varying motives and
Perceptions. Colonialism in its globai context is on the
retreat, but the stratagems formulated and initiated in an
attempt to thwart the process of decolonization and the
onward march to genuine national liberation and indepcn,denceare nowhere Inore in evidence than in southern Africa
itself. The citadels of racism which yet stand at Pretoria and
Salisbury will, however, not survive the course of history,
for even they, embattled and increasinglyisolatedasthey
areby the ranks of progressiveforces the world over, have
beenforced to respond to tremors that will shakethem
from their very foundations.

83. The Security Council now hasat1OppOrtUnitY
ami
a
solemnobligation to decidethat the momenttm comefor
it to makethe fullest useof thosemeasures
at its disposal
that were designedduring the drafting of the Charterto bC
employedwhen the totality of the globalcommunity and,
indeed,

80. Although we have indeed convened here to consider
ways and meanswhereby the Security Council can most

tile

Council

itself,

deerllcd

that

all

0th’

~WV~S~I’es

had been exhausted. That decisionmust necessarilybc
9

confidence which the liberation movement has reposed in
the authority of the Organization and its capacity to take
appropriate action in a situation in which international
peace and security are manifestly imperilled. If the Council
should once again fail the people of Namibia and frustrate
their confidence in its ability to take action, then we should
be contributing in no small measure to the perpetuationof
illegality and institutionalized racism in a Territory con.
cerning which the United Nations has taken upon itself tile
responsibility for administration until the attainment of
genuine independence and freedom.

informed by our awareness not only of South Africa’s
continued defiance of the Organization, but also of the
nefarious activities carried out by the illegal rCgime in
Namibia, activities which the Council has already acknowledged constitute a threat to international peace and
security.
84. Most recently, in response to resolution 435 (1978),
the South African rkgime has indicated that it will not
comply with the provisions of that resolution and that it
intends to go ahead-might I say impudently-with
its plan
for the holding of illegal so-called elections during the
month of December of this year, that is, next month, This
resolve by the illegal South African rkgirne has been
communicated to the Security Council in terms that are
clear to us.

89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
90. Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA
(Algeria) (interpretation from
Frenclz): Mr. President, I would first of alI convey my most
sincere congratulations to you in your capacity as President
of the Security Council for the month of November andas
representative of a brotherly and friendly country whicll,
like mine, supports the advancement of the Africa11
peoples, particularly those still subjected to the colonial
yoke, racism and the apartheid rkghne. I hope that under
your presidency the work of the Council will be productive
and successful.

85. It was in fact this consistent defiance by the South
African rkgime that caused the General Assembly, the
Council for Namibia, the non-aligned movement and the
Organization of African Unity to call upon the Council to
adopt the most rigorous measures against South Africa,
including the sanctions provided for under Chapter VII of
the Charter, so as to compel South Africa to effect a change
in its conduct and comply with the United Nations
prescriptions on the situation in Namibia.

91 My delegation also wishes to congratulate Ambassador
Leprette, who conducted the business of the Council during
the month of October with great competence, thanks to his
personal qualities derived from the ancient diplomatic
traditions of France.

86. My delegation in reiterating that call, feels that the
Council now has no alternative but to invoke such
sanctions. This is a decisive stage, and decisive measures
must now be employed. The South African rdgime must
not be allowed the opportunity to buy more time for
manoeuvring, gimmickry and the formulation of stratagems
designed to confound the international community, while it
presses ahead with its own pet scheme. The future, indeed
the fate, of Namibia and of southern Africa must not be
sacrificed on the altar of political expediency. The need for
continuous and so-called exhaustive consultations with the
South African regime must not be invoked as a tactic to
stave off appropriate and timely action by the Council. The
adoption of resolution 435 (1978) signalled the cut-off
point. We agreed that time had run out for South Africa.
The Council cannot now afford to place its credibility
further in jeopardy by allowing itself to fall victim once
again to the manoeuvrings and the caprice of the South
African rggime, which has aheady contributed so much to
undermining the authority of this most important organ of
the United Nations.

92, Throughout this year the situation in the whole of
southern Africa has been characterized by a series of events
in which acts of aggression have alternated with periods of
calm which the racist rbgimcs of the subregion have used to
advantage to consolidate their alliance and to engagein a
great many manoeuvres of all kinds aimed at delaying the
liberation of the peoples.
93. The case of Namibia is a tragic example of the maw
variations noted in the consideration of this question by the
United Nations. In this connexion, my delegation would
like to point out that the time-wasting tactics of Seutll
Africa, like the hesitation that has characterized the action
of the international community, have unduly prolonged the
sufferings of the Namibian people, the victims of daily acts
of aggression by one of the most retrogressive regimesof
the world. It wishes once again to recall that the Organiza.
tion has had full responsibility for and duties vis-&vis tile
Namibia people ever since it adopted resolution
2145 (XXI), on 27 October 1966, thereby cornmitt@
itself to lead Namibia to independence in conditions in
conformity with the ideals of justice and progress.

87 There remains one final and important observation.
Throughout the period of negotiations, SWAP0 has consistently and steadfastly demonstrated its willingness to
negotiate and to make concessions. The compromises to
which that valiant organization has agreed cannot be called
in question. Jndeed, one is left wondering whether the
process of decolonization was intended to be implemented
by placing pressure on the people struggling for freedom
rather than on the alien occupier. This is but another
important consideration that must inform the decision to
be taken by the Security Council.

94. In the Algerian delegation’s opinion, the present
debate in the Security Council must strengthen and confirnl
the prime responsibility of the United Nations and be
viewed as the consolidation of its efforts to achieve the
decolonization of the Territory by the implementation of
the internationally acceptable plan, in accordance wit11
resolution 385 (1976) taken as a whole, and resolutions
431 (1978), 432 (1978) and 43.5 (1978), subseque]ltlY
adopted.

88. SWAPO’s willingness to make concessions and its
demonstrated sincerity during the course of the negotiations serve as an indication, among other things, of the
10

95. We dare to be firm in the hope that in this respect the
Council will not fail to face lip t0 its Ot~ligations
at a the
whig South Africa, in defiance 3F the African contir~nt,
the United Nations and the five Western countries themselves, has just taken initiatives of extreme gravity, which
undoubtedly constitute a threat
to international peace and
security.

CaniPaignpreceding the elections themselves. My delegation
wishes to stress here that the Algerian Government here and
now categorically rejects the results of the electoral
masquerade decided upon by Pretoria and refuses to grant
legitimacy to any group of puppets, the product of rigged
elections, traitors to their people and manipulated by the
illegal racist Pretoria rbgime, for it is true that the concerns
of that regime are not so much to promote or to prepare a
democratic tradition in the Territory but, on the contrary,
to perpetuate and consolidate its economic and strategic
advantagesin the country and, above all, to perpetuate the
policy of apartheicl, the system of slavery officially instituted in 1910. I should like in this respect to recall the
description of this ignoble manifestation by Frdntz
Fanon
it1 The Wretched of the Earth:

96, The illegal occupation of Namibia, as well as all the
forms of oppression and aggression perpetrated by the
illegal Pretoria rdgime, still continues because, unfortunately, this rCgime st,iIl receives from certain Western
countries unacknowledged
obliging help, if not open
support, which has had the effect of delaying specific
action by the international community against the South
African racists.

“A world divided into compartments, a motionless,
Manicheistic world, a world of statues: the statue of the
general who carried out the conquest, the statue of the
engineer who build the bridge; a world which is sure of
itself, which crushes with its stones the backs flayed by
whips: this is the colonial world. The native is a being
hemmed in; apartheid is simply one form of the division
into compn tments of the colonial world.“1

97. My country bclievcs that a healthy reaction to the
Fascist arrogance of I’rctoria is now more pressing than
ever, as is the imposition..--and not merely the contemplation of that imposition--of binding sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter. The African Group
has had in this
connexion an opportunity to prepare a draft resolution,
expressing all the apprehensions of the African continent as
a whole in the face of the threat which South Africa
represents for the indcpcndent African peoples and those
still colonized.

I should like to ask Mr. Leslie Harriman, the representative
of Nigeria, to accept the gratitude of the Algerian de]egation and of the whole African Group for having successful]y
organtied a day of commemoration in tribute to the late
Frantz Fanon for his contribution to the struggle against
racism in South Africa.

98. Thus far all the parties concerned have unequivocally
expressed their readiness to see the plan for a peaceful
settlement implemented, with the exception of South
Africa, which is an illegal occupier seeking to prolong its
domination over lhc Namibian people and the exploitation
of the natural resources of the Territory.

100. In conclusion, the Algerian delegation wishes to
reiterate its total solidarity with SWAPO, the sole genuine
representative of the struggling Namibian people, and to
assure it of Algeria’s total support until genuine independence in a united Namibia has been attained.

99, My delegation wishes to recall that the organization of
elections in Namibia, provided for by the settlement plan in
conformity with resolution 43 I (]978), must be undertaken under the supervision and control of the United
Nations, That implies both the drawing up of the electoral
rolls by the United Nations and the guaranteeing of security
and order throughout the period provided for the political

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
1 New

1

York,

Grove

Press,

Inc., 1966. p. 41.
