United Nations

S/PV.6647

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6647th meeting
Wednesday, 2 November 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Karev
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-57695 (E)

*1157695*

S/PV.6647

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. U. Joy Ogwu,
Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her service as
President of the Security Council during the month of
October. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Ogwu and her delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: It is my honour to brief
the Security Council on the activities of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court on
the situation in Libya in furtherance of resolution 1970
(2011).
In accordance with Office policy, the Prosecution
has been focusing its investigations on those bearing
the greatest responsibility for the most serious crimes
committed in Libya. Let me stress that the Security
Council consensus on the need to ensure justice for the
victims of crimes in Libya, as expressed through
resolution 1970 (2011) and reiterated at the meeting at
which I first briefed the Council on this matter two
months after its adoption (see S/PV.6528), has greatly
contributed to the cooperation received by my Office
and facilitated our investigations.

2

As I anticipated in my previous briefing, on
16 May the Office of the Prosecutor requested arrest
warrants against three individuals who, according to
the evidence, were most responsible for the attacks
against unarmed civilians on the streets and in their
homes in Benghazi, Tripoli and other cities in Libya
during the month of February.
After a thorough evaluation of the evidence
presented, on 27 June the Judges of Pre-Trial Chamber
I issued arrest warrants for Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, and Abdullah Al-Senussi for
murder and persecution as crimes against humanity
under articles 7(1)(a) and 7(1)(h) of the Rome Statute,
respectively.
The Chamber concluded that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi were jointly
responsible as principals in the crimes pursuant to
article 25(3)(a) of the Statute, as indirect
co-perpetrators of the crimes against humanity. The
Chamber found that Abdullah Al-Senussi was also
responsible as a direct perpetrator.
Allow me now to update the Council on the
current situation of the three indictees.
On 20 October, Muammar Al-Qadhafi died. The
Registry of the Court is following the formal
procedures required to obtain official documents from
the Libyan Government to certify his death. The
Pre-Trial Chamber, after reviewing the documents, may
decide to withdraw the warrant against Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and to end the case against him.
Concerning Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Office is galvanizing efforts
to ensure that they face justice. We have received
questions from individuals linked to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi about the legal conditions attaching to his
potential surrender to the Court, namely, what would
happen to him if he appeared before the judges,
whether he could be sent back to Libya, and what
would happen if he were to be convicted or acquitted.
We clarified that, in accordance with article 107 of the
Rome Statute, he may request the judges not to order
his return to Libya after his conviction or acquittal, but
that he be sent to a different country, provided that that
country has consented to receiving him. The judges can
also decide whether he may be extradited to another
State. I believe that it is a positive sign that the Court is
seen as a guarantor of the rights of the suspects.

11-57695

S/PV.6647

On the other hand, we are also receiving
information that a group of mercenaries may be
endeavouring to facilitate Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi’s
escape from Libya. We are calling upon States to do all
they can to disrupt any such operation. It is up to Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi to
decide if they will surrender, remain in hiding or try to
escape to another country. It is up to the Security
Council and States to ensure that they face justice for
the crimes for which they are charged.
We are grateful for the strong and essential
cooperation received from the Libyan authorities,
including a recent invitation to visit Libya. Over this
past weekend, the Office conducted its first assessment
mission in Libya in order to prepare for the collection
of further evidence in the territory where the alleged
crimes took place. The Office coordinated with local
authorities and local civil society. The Office met with
various local committees mandated to investigate
crimes committed by different parties in Libya.
The current focus of the investigations is twofold.
First, it continues the collection of evidence against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi in
preparation for their eventual trial. Secondly, the
Office is continuing its investigations into gender
crimes committed in Libya.
The Office will continue to search out the
personal assets of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi for the potential benefit of the
victims, through reparations awarded by the Court.
Since the opening of the investigation, the Office has
been in contact with the Sanctions Committee, which is
assisted by a Panel of Experts, and with INTERPOL to
coordinate its investigative efforts in relation to the
personal assets of the suspects. In late September, the
Court sent requests for assistance to Libya, States
parties and five Security Council non-State parties to
identify, trace, seize and freeze all the personal assets
of the suspects. The Office encourages the Security
Council and States to assist the Court in identifying
and freezing these assets.
With respect to the second aspect of the
investigation, the Prosecution is mindful that, in Libya,
rape is considered to be one of the most serious crimes,
affecting not just the victim, but also the family and the
community, and can trigger retaliation and honourbased violence. Accordingly, the Prosecution has
adopted a strategy that seeks to limit the exposure of

11-57695

victims. The Office is organizing its investigation by
focusing on obtaining alternate evidence and
identifying avenues of investigation that support
charges without the need for multiple victim
statements.
In this respect, the Prosecution has been in
contact with different sources reporting multiple
victims of sexual violence allegedly committed by
Al-Qadhafi security forces. While it is premature to
draw conclusions about specific numbers, the
information and evidence indicate at this stage that
hundreds of rapes occurred during the conflict. The
investigation will benefit from a reporting system that
has been set up by the Libyan authorities through the
Ministry of Women’s and Social Affairs, with the
purpose of affording rape victims the opportunity to
come forward.
The Office of the Prosecutor has also interviewed
a limited number of victims who were kidnapped and
raped in unknown, secret detention centres. The
information and evidence thus far collected do not yet
indicate who may be most responsible for such gender
crimes. We have some evidence showing that
commanders gave orders to commit rape in the Western
Mountains area and our screening of possible witnesses
indicates that Muammar Al-Qadhafi himself,
Al-Senussi and other high officials were discussing the
use of rape to persecute those considered dissidents or
rebels.
In conclusion, there are allegations of crimes
committed by NATO forces; allegations of crimes
committed by forces of the National Transitional
Council, including the alleged detention of civilians
suspected to be mercenaries and the alleged killing of
detained combatants; and allegations of additional
crimes committed by Al-Qadhafi forces. These
allegations will be examined impartially and
independently by the Office.
The Office has been informed that the new
Libyan authorities are in the process of preparing a
comprehensive strategy to address these allegations,
including the circumstances surrounding the death of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi. In accordance with the Rome
Statute, the International Criminal Court should not
intervene if there are genuine national proceedings.
Should the Libyan authorities decide to prosecute the
case we are investigating — that of Saif al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi — for the same

3

S/PV.6647

crimes, they should submit an admissibility challenge,
and it will be for the International Criminal Court’s
judges to decide.
In assessing the situation, the Office will benefit
from the work of the United Nations Commission of
Enquiry, which should present a report in March 2012.
The Office is coordinating with Commission
Chairperson Philippe Kirsch. At its third briefing to the
Security Council in May 2012, the Office will be
prepared to present to the Security Council a
comprehensive report on the crimes allegedly
committed by the different parties in Libya since
15 February 2011 and the existence of genuine national
proceedings.
In summary, the Office will continue
investigations into Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi and into rapes. As I have said, in
May we will present a comprehensive analysis of the
crimes allegedly committed and on the possibility for
further investigations. I should clarify that the
possibility of carrying out all of these investigations
will depend on the budget available to the Office. This
is a matter currently under discussion and will be
decided in December 2011 at the upcoming session of
the Assembly of States Parties.
The President: I thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
this, your first meeting as President of the Council, I
should like to welcome you, Sir, and to offer you our
full cooperation towards the success of your work. I
also extend special thanks to Ambassador Joy Ogwu
for her outstanding work and wisdom in leading the
Council last month.
I warmly thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his exhaustive second briefing on the implementation
of the relevant provisions of resolution 1970 (2011)
and for the additional information with which he has
provided the Council today. His account of his work
and his meticulous and conscientious attention to detail
demonstrate that the Court is acting in great earnest.
Clearly, both the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Pre-Trial Chamber have acted speedily and effectively
during the first stage of the procedures arising from the

4

Council’s referral of the case to the Court in resolution
1970 (2011). We note that three cases have been
opened charging murder and political persecution
committed, according to the Prosecution, in the course
of attacks on the civilian population in pursuit of State
policy. Those are therefore crimes against humanity for
which the individuals in question should be held
criminally
responsible,
and
the
international
community has shown a willingness to do so.
Investigations are continuing in other areas. In
particular, the Office of the Prosecutor is considering
the possibility of investigating accusations in
connection with gender-related crimes and war crimes,
which could give rise to new proceedings as a result of
the events that occurred in Libya. My delegation
believes that an essential part of this stage of the
process is the necessary cooperation with the
International Criminal Court of all actors involved,
especially the new authorities in Libya. The second
report of the Prosecutor contains important and
encouraging references to the positive attitude in this
regard on the part of both the States parties to the
Rome Statute and other international bodies such as
Interpol and United Nations commissions of inquiry.
We deem it of the utmost importance that those
Governments that are the recipients of specific requests
for cooperation with regard to goods and monies
obtained through illicit activities respond rapidly to
such requests. Such information could be vital to the
conclusion of open investigations and could have
serious ramifications in terms of the payment of
reparations to victims, as is provided for under the
Rome Statute.
We welcome the statements made by the new
Libyan authorities with regard to their willingness to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and their
involvement in the important task of preserving
evidence. It is now up to States to take the relevant
measures to ensure that those accused who remain at
large are apprehended.
As we stated at the meeting held last May, when
the first report of the Prosecutor’s Office with regard to
the situation in Libya was presented, the arrest of those
accused and their surrender to the ICC for trial is the
way to implement the decision taken by the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. Thus any
failure to implement those measures would negatively
affect the authority and credibility of the Council itself.

11-57695

S/PV.6647

Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me join
my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on taking
over the presidency of the Council. We look very much
forward to working with you and with your delegation
throughout the month. We have every confidence in
your able leadership. I also want to join others in
paying great tribute to Ambassador Ogwu and the
delegation of Nigeria for their exceptionally skilful and
wise management of the Council in the complex month
of October.
I should like to begin by thanking the Prosecutor
for his informative briefing and for his important
contributions to laying the foundation for seeking the
justice that Libyans so deserve. The Security Council’s
decision to refer the situation in Libya to the
Prosecutor reflected the importance that the
international community attaches to ensuring
accountability for the widespread and systematic
attacks against the Libyan people that began in the dark
days of February. Resolution 1970 (2011), adopted
even as atrocities were being perpetrated, represented a
historic milestone in the fight against impunity. Justice
and reconciliation efforts will be critical components of
a successful transition that allows all of Libyan society
to leave behind what has been in many, many respects
a tragic and bloody past.
An effective criminal justice system with a
competent judiciary and safeguards to guarantee
humane treatment and due process is crucial to the
future of Libya. The new Government must ensure that
the rule of law, treatment safeguards and due-process
protections are firmly in place. Helping the National
Transitional
Council
(NTC)
implement
its
commitments to respect human rights and to proper
detention procedures that meet Libya’s international
obligations must be a very high priority. We emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the human rights of all
in Libya, including former regime officials and
detainees, are fully respected during and after this
transition period.
The victims of Al-Qadhafi’s terrorism and their
families in Libya and in the United States now know
definitively that the era of Al-Qadhafi’s violence has
ended. Al-Qadhafi engaged in countless barbaric acts,
but this does not and cannot justify the apparently
brutal way in which he met his death. We welcome the
NTC’s announcement of an investigation into
Al-Qadhafi’s death and will look to it to follow through
by undertaking an effective inquiry.

11-57695

Independent and impartial investigations into
abuses committed in Libya on both sides are the first
step in fulfilling the NTC’s commitments to
accountability and laying a foundation for a transition
that embraces the rule of law. We remain deeply
troubled by reports, including those mentioned by the
Prosecutor, that sub-Saharan African migrants and
others detained in ad hoc jails are being abused.
Continued support by the international community,
including through the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, will be vital to helping the Libyan people
achieve the future they seek.
We must now move together to support the
creation of an inclusive and democratic State in which
Libyans of all backgrounds have a future and an
opportunity to participate in the rebuilding of their
country. We welcome the Prosecutor’s report that the
NTC is fully cooperating with his investigation, in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011), and we
encourage other States in which individuals subject to
International Criminal Court arrest warrants may be
found to ensure that they are brought to justice. We
encourage the Prosecutor to continue to consult with
the NTC.
We urge the speedy apprehension of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and of Abdullah Al-Senussi, who
remain at large in the region. They must be brought to
justice in a legitimate process governed by the rule of
law. Ensuring justice for those who have endured
unspeakable atrocities will be crucial to Libya’s ability
to emerge from the ashes of dictatorship to become a
country in which all of its citizens enjoy the full
protection of the rule of law.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I would also like
to take this opportunity to assure you and, through you,
your delegation of my delegation’s full cooperation in
the discharge of your duties during the course of the
month. I would like also to take this opportunity to
thank the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
Ambassador Joy Ogwu, and her delegation for her
successful stewardship of the work of the Council
during the month of October. In addition, I would like
to thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing today. We have also taken note of his
second report to the Security Council, submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1970 (2011).

5

S/PV.6647

Even at the risk of sounding repetitive, it is
necessary to reiterate that India is not a signatory to the
Rome Statute and not a member of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for reasons that are well known.
It is also important to note that of the 193 Members of
the United Nations, only 119 are States parties to the
Rome Statute of the ICC. Five of the 15 members of
the Council, including three permanent members, are
not parties to the Statute. We do, however, support the
rights and obligations of the States that are members of
the ICC.
The situation in Libya has significantly changed
since the Prosecutor’s last report and his briefing to the
Security Council. During the eight months of conflict
in Libya, there were a large number of deaths and
destruction on a massive scale. The proliferation of
weapons has emerged as a major problem, posing a
threat to the stability of Libya as well as to that of the
larger region.
The time has come for the new authorities in
Libya to exert their sovereignty and independence and
undertake an inclusive political process aimed at
achieving national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability in the country. The international community,
including the Security Council and the ICC, should
fully assist the Libyan authorities in that process. That
inclusive approach to national reconciliation, anchored
in State sovereignty, is the only way to overcome the
multitude of problems that Libya faces in the present
ostensible post-conflict scenario.
We have noted that the ICC Prosecutor’s
immediate goal is to complete the investigation into the
alleged crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Prosecutor’s Office is also making progress in the
investigations on gender crimes and is examining
information related to attacks on migrant workers. We
expect that the Prosecutor will carry out a thorough and
impartial investigation into all alleged crimes by all
parties to the conflict in Libya. The Prosecutor must
not be influenced by non-judicial considerations and
must focus his attention solely on prosecution, without
diversion due to extraneous considerations. All those
responsible for committing crimes covered under the
Rome Statute should be held accountable irrespective
of which side to the conflict they may belong to.
Political or other non-judicial considerations should
not exonerate anybody from prosecution for the crimes
committed.

6

Last but not least, it is also important to ensure
that all actions by the ICC Prosecutor should fall
strictly within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), in
particular paragraph 6, which concerns the States that
are not parties to the Rome Statute.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, like previous speakers, we would
like to congratulate you and your team, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. We wish you success,
especially given the very heavy agenda for the month
of November. We are prepared to do everything we can
to help you and your team to achieve success in the
Council’s work. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Permanent Representative of
Nigeria and her team for their very successful conduct
of the Council’s deliberations in the month of October.
We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing on the investigation of the situation in Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). As we understood
from his presentation, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) is carrying out phased work on the investigation
of actions committed by representatives of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. We therefore welcome contacts by
representatives of the ICC with some of the accused
with regard to their voluntary surrender to the
investigation. We regret the fact that Al-Qadhafi
himself, who was cruelly killed on 20 October, will not
be unable to say anything to ICC investigators. I
should like to make the following additional points.
During the last briefing by the ICC Prosecutor,
we said that the Court should carefully consider the
actions of all parties in the Libyan conflict. We recall
that, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council
transferred the entire Libyan situation to the Court —
not just the situation pertaining to the actions of the
Al-Qadhafi regime.
The number of civilian casualties and the scale of
the destruction of civilian sites as a result of the actions
of all parties to the conflict in Libya is very great.
Unfortunately, civilian casualties were also caused by
the actions of known NATO coalition forces.
We cannot but be alarmed about the most recent
information from Libya with regard to the uncovering
of mass graves, of both rebels and supporters of
Al-Qadhafi. It is our belief that all who are guilty of
the most serious crimes under international law
committed during the conflict in Libya will be

11-57695

S/PV.6647

punished. We therefore welcome the statement issued
by the National Transitional Council (NTC) in which it
expresses its intention to conduct an investigation of
the killing of Al-Qadhafi and his son Mutassim.
However, we would like to emphasize that this is not
an issue of just investigating those separate killings; it
is a matter of a full-scale investigation of all other
serious crimes. We hope that the NTC has enough
determination and, more important, the necessary
resources to impartially and conscientiously conduct
such an investigation.
At the same time, we have nagging doubts that
the conduct of such an investigation in an appropriate
fashion can be possible, at least in the near future, in a
country with a devastated State structure and in the
virtual absence of normally functioning judicial and
law enforcement bodies. It is in that regard that we see
a substantive role for the ICC. We believe that the
Court should carefully follow the pace of the
investigation in Libya and provide it with active
assistance. We believe that if, at some point, it becomes
obvious that the Libyan side is for some reason not in a
position to carry out such an investigation, then the
ICC should step in and do so.
For our part, we are prepared to support the
efforts of the ICC in undertaking a fair investigation of
the actions of all parties to the Libyan conflict, so as to
bring to justice individuals involved in potential crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian law in Libya.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to congratulate you, Sir, and to express
our best wishes for the success of your presidency. I
also wish to thank Ambassador Ogwu and her entire
team for their effective presidency in the month of
October. I would also like to thank Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his report and briefing today. I
should like to make three comments.
First, on resolution 1970 (2011), since
mid-February of this year, in the face of the outrages
committed by Libya’s leaders, the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the Secretary-General of
the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation
condemned the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
itself, on 26 February, responded swiftly by
unanimously adopting resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the

11-57695

International Criminal Court (ICC). When a
Government attacks its own citizens, rather than
protecting them, and when the crimes committed are an
affront to the conscience of humankind and affect the
stability of an entire region, the international
community has the responsibility to intervene to
protect civilians. That is what we did in Libya with
resolution 1970 (2011). The imperative of ensuring
justice, underscored in the resolution, continues to be
valid today. That is true in the case of Libya just as it is
for all countries in which civilians’ aspiration to
respect for their freedom and fundamental rights is met
with repression on the part of authorities who ignore
the calls of the international community. As the
violence in Syria and Yemen continues, the Council
must reiterate its message as to the primacy of law and
the need to combat impunity in all cases, just as it did
following the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire.
Secondly, with regard to the work of the
International Criminal Court, following the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), the Prosecutor mobilized his
entire team and was able to complete his investigation
in three months. On 16 May, he issued a request for
three arrest warrants — against Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. On
27 June, the Court’s judges decided to issue those
warrants for murder and persecution as crimes against
humanity. The warrants detail the systematic attacks
against civilians, the methods employed to crush any
form of opposition — forced disappearance, arbitrary
detention, torture — as well as the role of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and his circle in organizing the violence.
The International Criminal Court, the sole permanent
court of a universal character, was able to gather legal
evidence of those acts even as the violence was taking
place. It has therefore demonstrated its ability to react
swiftly, thereby putting pressure on those organizing
and carrying out the crimes. That is a message we
should bear in mind. When faced with the commission
of atrocities, the international community and the
Security Council can turn to an impartial and
independent judicial institution that can begin to work
immediately to identify those primarily responsible for
committing crimes. International justice henceforth has
a role to play in deterring crimes both during and after
a crisis. After the Libyan example, inaction is more
inexcusable and intolerable than ever.
Lastly, with regard to the process, the judicial
process is now under way and must follow its course.

7

S/PV.6647

Investigations must be carried out if necessary. I am
thinking in particular about investigations concerning
sexual violence, to which the Prosecutor referred. Also,
as he explained, the ICC will pursue only the
principals, those who organized and ordered crimes.
The first of those, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has been
killed and will not be able to answer to justice. But the
other two individuals who have been indicted, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, must
turn themselves in or be arrested.
We welcome the good cooperation and dialogue
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan
authorities. In the light of the scale of the crimes
committed and given the risk of violence still affecting
the country, and to meet the aspirations of the whole of
Libyan society for more law and justice,
complementarity between the actions of the ICC and
those of the new Libyan authorities will be essential.

Unfortunately, the present report is only one of
many that evidence serious and continued violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including systematic violence against the civilian
population in Libya. Findings of the Prosecutor’s
investigation, which was conducted in accordance with
his mandate under resolution 1970 (2011), are deeply
unsettling and have reinforced our conviction that the
referral of the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) was timely and true to our
commitments and obligations.
In that regard, my delegation welcomed the
issuance of arrest warrants for those suspected of
committing those crimes. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
always strongly believed that addressing crimes and
punishing those responsible is the main precondition
for reconciliation and for sustainable and long-lasting
peace and stability.

France welcomes the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), States and regional
organizations have offered the Prosecutor their full
cooperation, thus enabling his investigation to progress
rapidly. Today, two arrest warrants remain outstanding.
The Council must continue to track the implementation
of those warrants, and the entire international
community — including, if necessary, States in the
region — must assist the authorities and the Prosecutor
to ensure that the two individuals concerned finally
answer for their acts before the law.

Given the dramatic way in which things have
unfolded since the arrest warrants were issued, we
hope now to see the people of Libya and the
Transitional
National
Council
(TNC)
take
responsibility for their future and their country. We
therefore urge an independent and impartial
investigation into circumstances surrounding the death
of Muammar Al-Qadhafi and his son Mutassim. The
rule of law must become a cornerstone of the newly
rebuilt country. Justice must not become the privilege
of a few, but a right for all.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. At the same time, allow me to congratulate
Nigeria for its excellent work in the presidency in
October.

It is our hope that the revolution in Libya will
lead to fulfilment of the people’s fair demands: a
constitution that preserves the rights of all citizens and
establishes the foundation of a civil State. To achieve
that, it is crucial to address the grave atrocities and
crimes committed. My country strongly supports the
work of the Prosecutor and the ICC in ensuring justice
for Libya’s victims. In that context, we commend the
pledge of the TNC authorities to cooperate with and
support the Court.

I wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for
his briefing and to commend his continuous
commitment to the interest of justice. We believe that,
with our joint efforts, such determination can assist
Libya in finding its way to a better future for its
people.
At the same time, accounts from today’s briefing,
together with the report on the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor in the past six months, only
reconfirm the disturbing facts we have heard from
briefing to briefing.

8

Finally, I wish to underline Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s strong commitment to the ideas and
goals of the ICC. It is our firm belief that through its
work, the ICC can contribute greatly to peace and the
process of reconciliation in Libya.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation has confidence in your leadership abilities

11-57695

S/PV.6647

and expertise. I also take this opportunity to thank Her
Excellency Ambassador Ogwu and the Nigerian
delegation for their wise leadership of the Council’s
work during the past month. I also wish to thank
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing.
We appreciate his efforts and those of his Office to
promote the rule of law.
We would recall that, at its emergency meeting
convened in February, the Council of the League of
Arab States condemned all actions against Libyan
civilians as grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Subsequently, in
resolution 1970 (2011), the Security Council referred
the situation in Libya to the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC.
Lebanon therefore welcomes all measures taken
by the Office of the Prosecutor over the past few
months to address the serious crimes committed in
Libya that can be classified as crimes against humanity
following the outbreak of the revolution. We support
the continued efforts to shed light on the facts in order
to identify those criminally responsible, in particular
with respect to the numerous cases of rape referred to
in the report. We also support the efforts to arrest and
bring to justice the two fugitives — Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The task of the
International Criminal Court did not end with the
demise of Muammar Al-Qadhafi.
Tribute must be paid to the constructive
cooperation during the past few months by States,
international and regional organizations and the
National Transitional Council (NTC) with the Office of
the Prosecutor, as indicated in the report. That
cooperation has contributed to progress in the
investigations. My country stresses the need for
Libya’s neighbouring countries to cooperate fully with
the Court and with the Prosecutor pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) in order to prevent their
territories from becoming safe havens for anyone who
attempts to escape from justice.
Lebanon also commends the responsible call
made by the Chair of the National Transitional
Council, Mr. Mustafa Mohammed Abdul Jalil that the
revolutionaries refrain from acts of reprisal against
those who fought on the side of Al-Qadhafi. We
commend as well the calls for Libyan authorities to
provide impartial trials for those who have been

11-57695

detained. Justice alone will provide the proper terms of
reference to set the record straight and guarantee
accountability. The custodians of the revolution and the
guardians of its lofty values and image must ensure
that the practices of the former dictatorial regime
related to arbitrary detention, torture and summary
judgments are not repeated.
In conclusion, Lebanon believes that the Council
has referred the Libyan situation to the ICC in order to
prevent continued grave crimes against the Libyan
people, who seek freedom and democracy. Now that
liberty has been restored in Libya, Lebanon stresses the
need to move forward towards the trial of those who
have been responsible for grave violations.
Accountability is the way to guarantee justice for the
victims and to lessen their suffering and that of their
families. It serves as a key tool in turning the page on
an era of a culture of impunity. It also serves to deter
such actions from taking place in the future. Lebanon
congratulates sisterly Libya, which deserves a new
dawn after a long chapter of darkness, injustice and
impunity.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to wish you every success. I
would like also to express our great appreciation to
Ambassador Joy Ogwu of Nigeria, and to her team, for
the excellent conduct of our work in October.
Let me thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo
for his informative briefing and for the second report
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Brazil renews its
support for the Court and for the work of Mr. MorenoOcampo’s office.
The situation in Libya has entered a new phase
that is veering away from conflict and towards peace
and reconciliation among Libyans. In that new phase,
some of the principles that inspired the creation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), namely, justice,
accountability, non-discrimination and respect for the
rule of law, will be fundamental to Libya. The role of
the International Criminal Court will therefore be even
more important in assisting Libya to bring about a truly
democratic State that responds to the aspirations of the
Libyan people for respect for human rights, a greater
voice and representation for the people in their
country’s life, and enhanced opportunities.
Brazil welcomes the statements made by the
National Transitional Council that stress the

9

S/PV.6647

importance of ensuring human rights, as well as the
intent to avoid reprisals and acts of vengeance.

investigated and prosecuted if sufficient evidence is
found.

Tolerance and inclusiveness must mark the new
era in Libya. We expect the new Libyan authorities to
make every effort to bring the perpetrators of
violations of human rights, regardless of their
affiliation, to justice. Impunity must not be allowed to
taint the transition. In that vein, reports of the arbitrary
detention, torture and execution of Qadhafi loyalists
must be investigated. Likewise, we are concerned by
the circumstances that led to the death of Muammar
Qadhafi. Brazil supports the call by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for an
investigation into that case.

The protection of civilians, which inspired the
introduction of resolution 1970 (2011), should benefit
all Libyans caught in the crossfire of the conflict in
which that country found itself.

We are encouraged by the news that Prosecutor
Moreno-Ocampo has been in indirect contact with Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi concerning his surrender. Such
efforts must be continued in order to ensure that
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Gadhafi and Mr. Abdullah
Al-Senussi are brought to trial.
We encourage the Prosecutor to proceed on all
lines of investigation mentioned in the report, in
particular those related to possible war crimes by all
actors and the protection of vulnerable sectors of the
population, including African migrant workers. The
continuation of ICC investigations carried out with full
independence and impartiality will be crucial in the
post-conflict stage in order to ensure accountability
and justice. Those are essential elements for
reconciliation and the establishment of durable peace,
which should be the Council’s ultimate goal for Libya.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We join others in
expressing our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. You have our full support. We
also join in expressing our thanks to Ambassador
Ogwu for the skilful manner in which she directed our
affairs in the month of October. We also thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress report. We continue
to support the Court’s efforts to bring justice to the
victims of atrocities committed in Libya.
We supported the referral of the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court because of
our long-standing commitment to the fight against
impunity for serious crimes. When the Prosecutor
presented his first report to the Council, we reminded
him that justice is blind and requested that all atrocities
committed in Libya since 15 February 2011 should be

10

South Africa is concerned about reports from the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry on Libya into
arbitrary mass arrests and mistreatment, in particular of
black Africans suspected of being pro-Qadhafi
mercenaries. We hope that the possible targeting of
black Africans will receive due attention by the Office
of the Prosecutor.
We have also noted with concern several reports
by organizations, such as Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch, to the effect that atrocities have
been committed on both sides of the conflict. Just last
week, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Libya provided information to the Council with
respect to reports that killings among the duelling
camps were committed by both sides in the final battle
for Sirte. We are pleased that the National Transitional
Council (NTC) has distanced itself from those
atrocities and has expressed its intention to conduct
investigations.
That
will
be
important
for
complementarity, which is important for the Court. It
will, nonetheless, be necessary for the ICC
investigations to convene.
We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to
convene new investigations into cases of sexual
violence, including cases of gang rape. In that regard,
we have noted with the United Nations Commission of
Inquiry that, while the reports of rape could not be
verified, there was sufficient information to warrant
further investigations. We welcome the decision of the
Office of the Prosecutor to conduct on-site
investigations as well as the assurances of the NTC that
it will fully cooperate.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s progress
report, especially in terms of the following issues: first,
the contacts with Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi concerning
his surrender; secondly, the progress in on-the-ground
investigations that have been undertaken thus far;
thirdly, the willingness of the Office of the Prosecutor
to conduct investigations into the circumstances that
led to the death of Muammar Qadhafi; and fourth, the
need for comprehensive investigations into possible

11-57695

S/PV.6647

further crimes committed by NATO, the NTC and
pro-Qadhafi forces.
We look forward to your report in May, Sir.
Ms. Ogwu (Nigeria): Allow me, Mr. President, to
convey the very warm congratulations of my
delegation to you on your assumption of the Presidency
of the Council and to assure you of our unalloyed
support. We are also grateful to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
for his second report pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), which outlines the important progress made in
the ongoing investigations in Libya.
Nigeria remains firmly committed to the fight
against impunity and is supportive of the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) aimed at ensuring
that impunity is addressed decisively, wherever it
occurs. We believe that the fight against impunity is the
collective responsibility of States, the ICC and relevant
stakeholders. It is imperative, therefore, for States to
cooperate to ensure the realization of that objective. In
that connection, we welcome the ICC’s ongoing
contact with the Libyan authorities. Of equal
significance is the pledge by the National Transitional
Council to cooperate with the Court to ensure justice
for victims in Libya.
The work of the ICC is absolutely central to the
restoration of stability of Libya, a nation not only in
transition but one in search of healing. The systematic
and widespread violations of human rights orchestrated
by the former regime have no doubt left not only open
veins but also physical and emotional scars in Libya.
However, an objective, well managed investigation and
prosecution will not only restore confidence to
segments of Libya but should lead to national
reconciliation, a crucial ingredient in national healing.
We are deeply concerned that the escape of the
indictees from Libya could have significant security
and political implications for neighbouring States in
West Africa, especially Niger and Mali. Indeed, the
countries of the Sahel region have already expressed
great apprehension about the illegal movement of small
arms and light weapons within the region. We cannot
afford to see the Sahel region or neighbouring
countries turn into bases from which subversive
activities could be launched, maintained or sustained
against the people of Libya and the region.
We note with satisfaction the cooperation
extended to the ICC by States and regional and

11-57695

international organizations, pursuant to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1970(2011), which has contributed in no
small measure to the positive results achieved thus far
in the investigations of the cases in Libya. We stress
the need for continued cooperation with the Court, as
that will help expedite completion of the current
investigations. We encourage the ICC to be relentless
in its collaboration with the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry and the African Commission
for Human and People’s Rights in their work and to
ensure that gender crimes and attacks on foreign
nationals and black African migrants are appropriately
addressed in their investigations.
We believe that, in the light of recent and
evolving developments in Libya, the ICC and the
Libyan authorities must work closely to develop ways
and means of advancing the ongoing investigations
with a view to providing justice to Libya’s victims.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also
thank
Ambassador
Ogwu,
Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, for her excellent conduct of
the work of the Council as President during the month
of October.
I have listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo. Libya has now entered a new
historic stage. We hope that Libya will start an
inclusive process of political transition as soon as
possible, and that it will safeguard national unity and
integrity, take early steps to achieve social stability and
begin political and economic reconstruction. The
international community should continue its joint effort
in support of political transition and post-conflict
reconstruction in Libya.
China’s position on issues concerning
International Criminal Court remains unchanged.

the

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join others in
congratulating you and your team, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of November. We assure you of our firm
support. Let me also commend and very warmly thank
our colleague Ambassador Joy Ogwu for her able and
wise stewardship of the Council during the previous
month.
I would like to begin by expressing Germany’s
sincere appreciation for all the efforts undertaken by

11

S/PV.6647

the International Criminal Court (ICC), and personally
by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, to ensure the implementation
of resolution 1970 (2011), notably through the Court’s
issuance of arrest warrants against Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. The warrants testify to the determination
of the international community not to let the
commission of atrocities go unpunished, but to identify
those individuals that are responsible under
international criminal law.
Germany remains ready to support the ongoing
investigations following requests for cooperation. We
are also very encouraged by the current efforts of the
Prosecutor to ensure the transfer of the remaining two
indicted persons to The Hague. Just as the death of
Colonel Al-Qadhafi marks the beginning of a new era
for Libya, obtaining justice, respect for human rights
and the rule of law must be at the forefront of our
minds. Just last week, by adopting resolution 2016
(2011), the Council confirmed the importance of
cooperation to ensure that those responsible for
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law or those who are complicit in attacks
targeting the civilian population are held accountable.
We call on the National Transitional Council to
ensure independent and impartial investigations to
establish the facts of the alleged human rights abuses
and war crimes committed by both sides to the conflict.
Transitional justice will be an important issue for the
Libyan authorities. Dealing successfully with the issue
will pave the way for national reconciliation.
At this time, we should also recall that the
Council took a historic decision by unanimously
adopting resolution 1970 (2011) and referring the
situation in Libya to the ICC. The protection of
civilians being its central idea, or leitmotif, the core
message of the resolution is to remind the world of the
responsibility of each and every State to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. The significance of the
message goes far beyond the context of Libya. It
should be heard in other places where gross violations
of human rights occur.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I also join other speakers in thanking

12

Ambassador Ogwu and her team for their wise
stewardship of the Council last month. I would like to
thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his report
on the situation in Libya and the important information
that he has shared with the Security Council this
afternoon.
The conflict in Libya has ended. The National
Transitional Council has announced the country’s
liberation. The Libyan people led that effort. Their
sacrifice and determination brought about their
freedom. The international community has also played
its role, including by protecting civilians and
supporting humanitarian aid, in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council.
The Libyan people are now coming together to
build a peaceful, democratic and prosperous new
Libya. They now know that Al-Qadhafi will never
again be able to threaten and brutalize them and their
country. We hope that that will bring relief to the
Libyans who suffered under his rule and to the victims
of his actions abroad. To demonstrate their clear break
from the past, Libya’s authorities should continue to
speak out against reprisals and should hold those guilty
of abuses to account. In that regard, we welcome the
National Transitional Council’s investigation into the
circumstances of Al-Qadhafi’s death.
The developments in Libya should give all
Governments reason to pause before using violence
against their own people. The international community
will ensure that responsible individuals within such
Governments are held to account, either in their own
courts or in international courts such as the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Impunity is no
longer tolerable. In that context, the Government of
Syria ought to be aware that the eyes of the world are
upon it.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Court. It played a leading role in securing the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the Court. The
Council’s swift and decisive action in that resolution
was matched by the work of the Prosecutor and his
Office in paving the way for arrest warrants to be
issued within four months. Their conduct of the case so
far has set new standards for international criminal
justice. I would like to thank him and his staff for their
efforts to bring justice to the victims of atrocities in
Libya.

11-57695

S/PV.6647

Of course, the ICC’s investigation into the
situation in Libya does not end with the death of
Al-Qadhafi. Two arrest warrants for individuals
suspected of crimes against humanity are still
outstanding. As Mr. Moreno-Ocampo has explained
this afternoon, the ICC is conducting other
investigations, including into the circumstances of
Al-Qadhafi’s death. Saif Al-Islam and Abdullah
Al-Senussi remain at large and must be brought to face
justice before a court of law.
To accomplish that goal, the ICC needs the
cooperation of States. The authorities of the United
Kingdom have played a part in the ICC’s investigations
so far by providing the fullest support, as and when
requested, to the Prosecutor and his team of
investigators. We call on the Libyan authorities to
continue their full cooperation with the ICC as it
pursues its investigations. We would also encourage
Libya’s neighbours to do the same, including by
arresting and surrendering the two indictees, should
they be found on their territory.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We,
too, would like to express our satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, preside over the work of the Council for the
month of November. We also take this opportunity to
heartily congratulate Ambassador Joy Ogwu for the
remarkable way in which she led our efforts last
month.
We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his second
report under paragraph 7 of resolution 1970 (2011) and
for the additional information that he has just given us
following his recent visit to Libya. The Prosecutor’s
briefing demonstrates the commitment to shed light on
the crimes committed in Libya by the former regime.
We would recall that on 27 June arrest warrants were
issued against three individuals alleged to be guilty of
widespread and systematic attacks against the civilian
population.
We note and we welcome the independence and
impartiality with which the Court is conducting its
proceedings. It is important that the Court be perceived
as being the guarantor of the rights of everyone,
including suspects. Likewise, we note that the ongoing
investigations cover the issues of violence against
women, indemnification and victim protection. We also
note that the Office of the Prosecutor is dealing with
acts of violence committed by forces loyal to the

11-57695

National Transitional Council. Gabon, a country that
has always fought against impunity in all its forms,
hopes that the criminals in Libya will be prosecuted so
as to create the conditions necessary for peace, justice
and lasting reconciliation.
We note the commitment of the new authorities in
Libya to ensure justice with regard to crimes
committed in Libya, especially in Benghazi, Misrata
and Tripoli. Beyond specific ongoing procedures, the
efforts of the authorities and of the Security Council
must seek to shed light on serious crimes committed all
over Libya, including against foreign workers, in
particular migrant workers from sub-Saharan Africa. It
is important that the Office of the Prosecutor have all
that it needs to conduct its investigations.
We encourage the Prosecutor to work closely
with Libyan authorities and the International
Independent Commission of Inquiry set up by the
Human Rights Council, as well as to cooperate with
regional organizations and Libya’s neighbouring
States. The Court’s action could help improve security
in the region. We assure the Prosecutor that the
Gabonese Government is prepared to cooperate in its
efforts in Libya.
We would also like to recall the responsibility of
the new Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the
Court, in accordance with the obligations they have
undertaken. In conclusion, Libya is now undergoing a
historic transition. The Security Council and the
international community, which have supported the
significant changes that have taken place in the
country, should encourage the Libyan authorities to
base their new institutions on respect for the rule of
law and democratic values. In that respect, we very
much welcome the commitments undertaken by the
authorities to establish conditions favourable to the
emergence of a country committed to the rule of law.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Portugal.
I wish once again to express Portugal’s deep
appreciation to Ambassador Ogwu and her team for the
very skilful and efficient way she conducted the
Council’s business during the month of October. I
wish, of course, to thank my colleagues for their kind
words of support in connection with our tenure in the
presidency.

13

S/PV.6647

I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his report
and comprehensive briefing today. I also want to
commend him for the investigative work under way,
for the efforts that his Office is undertaking and for the
information provided on the recent mission to Libya
and its contacts with the National Transitional Council.

I would like to associate myself with the
statements made by previous speakers in welcoming
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). I thank him for his
valuable briefing and for the ongoing efforts by him
and his team to implement the mandate of the ICC as
set forth in resolution 1970 (2011).

We welcome Libya’s announcement to submit to
an Independent Commission of Inquiry into the
circumstances surrounding the death of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi. We are concerned by reports concerning
violent acts of retaliation, persecution and revenge in
recent days in different parts of the country. We
strongly believe that accountability for all violations of
human rights must be ensured. In that context, we must
stress the need to protect migrants, in particular from
the sub-Saharan region, from violence and persecution.

It has become evident to the Security Council and
to the entire international community that since
15 February thousands of Libyans have been the
victims of grave and horrible atrocities and crimes at
the hands of Al-Qadhafi’s forces and mercenaries.
According to the Rome Statute, such crimes should not
be allowed to go unpunished, their perpetrators should
not escape prosecution and impunity must be put to an
end.

We express our full support to the Office of the
Prosecutor for the continuation of the investigation
efforts, and we commend the support by States and
organizations in those endeavours to assist the
Prosecution.
Finally, we look forward to the report to be
presented early next year by the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council. We expect that the Office of
the Prosecutor will continue to closely liaise with the
Commission.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that under your
capable and wise leadership the Council will enjoy
success in its efforts. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Joy Ogwu, Permanent Representative of
Nigeria, for the excellent way in which she led the
work of the Council over that past month.
I also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me an opportunity to address the Council at this
meeting. Allow me also to reiterate my gratitude to the
Security Council and the international community for
their continued support to the Libyan people in their
struggle for freedom, democracy and a life of dignity.

14

In that context, I would like to reiterate yet again
that the new authorities in Libya, which have emerged
as a result of the revolution of the Libyan people
against injustice, will give the highest priority to the
achievement of justice, for there can be no security
without justice, and democracy, development and
prosperity cannot be achieved without security.
To that end, the national transitional Government
will take the appropriate legal measures to ensure that
all those involved in crimes not covered under the
jurisdiction of the ICC are subjected to transparent
investigations and given fair and just trials in Libyan
courts. That will also include any transgressions or
crimes that may have been committed against citizens
of other countries in Libya.
The National Transitional Council and the future
Government will continue to maintain consultations
and close cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC concerning the individuals against whom
the ICC has issued arrest warrants, especially in efforts
to gather and preserve evidence.
The second report of the Prosecutor, which has
today been submitted to the Security Council, contains
a summary of various important activities, including
the
issuance
of
arrest
warrants,
continued
investigations and other future judicial actions. Libya
greatly appreciates all those efforts, and calls on the
Security Council to continue supporting them. We also
ask for the cooperation of all States party and
non-party to the Rome Statute of the ICC, in
compliance with resolution 1970 (2011) and
specifically paragraph 5 of that resolution. The report

11-57695

S/PV.6647

mentions that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to
receive international assistance. All that my country
asks is that everyone, especially Libya’s neighbouring
States, continue to comply with the resolution and
refrain from providing safe haven for any fugitives
from Libya, whether they are wanted by the ICC or the
Libyan judiciary.
In his briefing to the Council in May (see
S/PV.6528), the Prosecutor emphasized the importance
of international cooperation in the conduct and
progress of judicial measures in Libya. Current judicial
procedures include orders for the arrest of those
involved in war crimes or crimes against humanity.
Every State has a duty to assist in arresting such
individuals and extraditing them for trial.
Libyan authorities have also found that other
serious crimes were committed by members of the
Al-Qadhafi family, high officials, mercenaries and
members of Al-Qadhafi’s security forces. Those crimes
include theft of public funds, rape and extra-judicial
killings and assassinations. Libyan judicial authorities
are gathering evidence concerning these crimes, and
will take the necessary legal steps against their
perpetrators.
The Libyan authorities are determined to
maintain the rule of law, fulfil all their obligations and
arrest those charged with crimes who are on Libyan
territory and bring them to justice. We are certain that
this can be done through Libyan efforts. Nonetheless,

as stated in the Prosecutor’s report, Libya’s efforts
must be supported with appropriate coordination and
information-sharing, as well as by efforts by every
State to support the ICC and Libyan authorities in
achieving that goal. I assure the Council that the new
Libyan authorities have nothing to hide. They believe
that achieving justice is a fundamental element in the
creation of a secure, stable and prosperous democratic
State. No one in the new Libya will have impunity for
any crimes they may have committed.
It has often been said in the Chamber that justice
cannot be separated from peace, and that peace,
security and social stability cannot be achieved without
subjecting those involved in grave crimes to
transparent investigations and fair trials, with all due
process and legal guarantees. We will work to achieve
that. The establishment of peace in Libya, and indeed
in the entire region, requires continued efforts on the
part of the Security Council and all States to support
efforts to achieve justice for the thousands of innocent
Libyan victims. Primary among those efforts are those
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. The Libyan
authorities will continue to cooperate with the
Prosecutor and provide him with all possible assistance
and support in fulfilling his mandate.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

11-57695

15
