114

General Assembly-Thirty-second Ses.,ion

international co-operation as well as the conceptual
and operational recommendations adopted by the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its eighteenth, 145 twenty-third 146 and
twenty-fourth 147 sessions,
Aware of the need to implement those recommendations of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme through specific projects and
programmes aimed at promoting technical co-operation
among developing countries with the support of the
participating and executing agencies of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind the need for Governments and
organs, organizations and other bodies within the
United Nations system to contribute effectively, on the
basis of experience gained in technical co-operation
among developing countries, to the preparations for
the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries,
Reaffirming its resolutions 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 and 3461 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
l. Endorses the recommendations of the Working
Group on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries, 148 as modified by the relevant decisions on
techncial co-operation among developing countries
adopted at the eighteenth, 145 twenty-third 146 and twentyfourth 147 sessions of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme;
2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the executive heads
of participating and executing agencies and regional
commissions to take all necessary measures, in the
light of paragraph 1 above, for the speedy implementation of all the recommendations contained in the report
of the Working Group on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries as modified by the relevant decisions of the Governing Council;
3. Also requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and the executive
heads of participating and executing agencies and regional commissions to assist the developing countries,
at their request, in identifying, designing and executing
development projects so as to promote technical cooperation among developing countries, particularly the
least developed among them;
4. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and the executive
heads of participating and executing agencies and regional commissions, in conformity with the abovementioned decisions of the Governing Council, to
formulate for approval, as appropriate, by the intergovernmental bodies concerned, suitable changes in
their rules, regulations, procedures and practices for
recruiting experts and consultants, placing fellows,
awarding subcontracts and procuring equipment and
supplies in order to utilize fully the capacity of and
?evelop _the potential existing in developing countries,
Irrespective of the economy and social system of the
individual developing country;
5. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to develop further,
145 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5543/Rev.l)'.
146 Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5940).
14 7 Ibid., Supplement No. 3A (E/6013/Rev.1).
148 DP /69, chap. II, sect. E.

according to its increasing needs, technical co-operation
among developing countries in connexion with the Information Referral System, to update rciularly and
revise its information, to cover new areas and to establish appropriate linkages with the information sources
of other organizations in the United Nations system, as
well as those of developing countries;
6. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and the executive
heads of participating and executing agencies and regional commissions to continue to report regularly on
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Working Group on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries as modified
by the above-mentioned decisions of the Governing
Council, as well as on other activities undertaken by
them for technical co-operation among developing countries, to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council and the Economic and Social Council, and, in
relation to the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, to the Preparatory Committee for the Conference at its third
session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/18.3.

United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolutions 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974, 3461 (XXX) of 11 December 1975 and
31/179 of 21 December 1976,
Recalling further its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting the recommendations made by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19
August 1976 1 rn and bv the Conference on Economic
Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at
Mexico City from 13 to 22 September 1976, 150
Noting the Kuwait Declaration on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries of 5 June 1977, 151
Noting also resolution CM/Res.560 (XXIX)
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary session and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its fourteenth ordinary session, held at Libreville
from 23 June to 5 July 1977, 152
Recalling the relevant decisions on the preparations
for the United Nations Conference on Technical Co149 See
150 See

A/31/197.
A/C.2/31/7.
151 See A/CONF.79/PC/!8.
152 See A/32/310, annex I.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committft'

operation among Developing Countries adopted by the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its twenty-second, 153 twenty-third154 and
twenty-fourth 155 sessions,
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries on its first
and second sessions 156 and of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its twenty-third session 154 and of its
special meeting held on 3 October 1977, m
Taking note further of the conclusions and recommendations of the regional intergovernmental meetings
on technical co-operation among developing countries,
held in Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, Africa
and Western Asia, 158
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General
of the Conference for the ongoing preparations for the
Conference,
Recognizing that the basic objectives of technical cooperation among developing countries are the furthering
of the national and collective self-reliance of developing countries and the enhancement of their creative
capacity to solve their development problems,
l. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries at Buenos Aires from 30 August to 12
September 1978;
2. Approves the programme of activities envisaged
in the recommendations on the budget for the Conference to be financed under the regular budget of the
United Nations as submitted in the report of the Secretary-General of the Conference; 159
3. Calls upon developing countries to continue to
participate actively in the preparations for the Conference and, to this end, to intensify the activities of
the Governments' focal points, to establish committees
for national preparations or other bodies, as appropriate, and to organize the participation of professional,
technical, voluntary and other organizations in all the
stages of the preparatory process and the Conference;
4. Calls upon developed countries to continue to
participate actively in the preparations for the Conference, particularly by identifying such measures in
their development aid and co-operation as would promote and strengthen programmes and projects for
technical co-operation among developing countries;
5. Urges all countries and relevant organizations
of the United Nations system to take the necessary
measures to strengthen their public information programmes relating to the Conference with a view to
creating an awareness of the importance of technical
co-operation among developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to transmit the present resolution to the Governments of Member States, with the request that they
provide information to the Preparatory Committee for
the Conference before its third session on the meas1 53 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev. l ).
1 54 /bid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5940).
11111 Ibid., Supplement No. 3A (E/6013/Rev.1).
1 5 6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/32/ 42 and Corr. I and 2).
157 DP /SR.592 and corrigendum.
111s See A/CONF.79/PC/ 10 and Corr. I.
159 A/CONF.79/PC/8 and Add.I.

ll5

ures adopted to strengthen or implement the recommendations contained in paragraphs 3 to 5 above;
7. Requests the participating and executing agencies, including the regional commissions. to continue
to give priority to their participation in the preparations
for the Conference and to use their wide experience of
technical co-operation in their contributions within the
inter-agency task force for the Conference toward~ the
preparation of the relevant documentation and of the
plan of action and to ensure that their pubiic information material includes items on the objectives and
current state of preparations for the Conference;
8. Requests all organizations of the United Nations
system actively to assist developing countries and the
representatives invited to the Conference referred to
in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) of its resolution 31 /179
in their preparations for the Conference.
107th plenary meetinR
19 December 1977
32/185.

Action programme in favour of developin~ island eountriei.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
dealing, inter alia, with efforts to meet the special problems of developing island countries,
Recalling resolution 98 (TV) of 31 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 100 in which a series of special measures and specific action, respectively, in favour of the least developed countries and in favour of the land-locked and
island developing countries were recommended,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976, in which it called upon the Secretary-General to
submit, through the Economic and Social Council, a
progress report on the implementation of specific action
in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2126 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session should give full consideration
to the progress report of the Secretary-General with a
view to the stimulation of further attention to the need
for specific action in favour of developing island countries,
Mindful that the particular impediments hampering
the economic development of many developing island
countries, especially their difficulties in respect of transport and communications, their distance from market
centres, the smallness of their economies and markets,
their low resource endowment and their heavy dependence on a few commodities for foreign exchange earnings, call for the continued attention of Governments
and of organizations in the United Nations system,
Convinced that specific action in favour of developing island countries, supplementary to the general measures applicable to all developing countries, is required
to meet these particular impediments,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on progress in the implementation of specific action in
160 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
