S/2012/772

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 October 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 16 October 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and to Security Council resolution 2062 (2012), in which the Council
decided to reduce the authorized military strength of UNOCI by 955 personnel as
soon as practical. Following the recent attacks on civilians, peacekeepers, security
forces and the political opposition, a team from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations visited Côte d’Ivoire from 17 to 22 September 2012 to reassess the
security situation on the ground and to develop recommendations on the timing of
implementing the reduction.
It was found that the security situation has deteriorated since the last
assessment was conducted in February 2012, and more recently since my report of
29 June 2012 on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/506), which informed the
consultations of the Council leading to the adoption of resolution 2062 (2012). Of
particular concern are the attacks targeting national security forces in and around
Abidjan and along the borders with Ghana and Liberia, resulting in the killing of
Ivorian security personnel and assailants. It has also been reported that persons and
networks affiliated with former President Gbagbo inside and outside the country are
behind a number of recent attacks aimed at destabilizing the Government of
President Ouattara. These attacks are no longer limited to south-western
Côte d’Ivoire, or to targeting civilians. This is an important change in the security
dynamic.
There have also been attacks on the headquarters of the former ruling Front
populaire ivoirien party in Abidjan and an affiliated printing house, which raised
security concerns among the political opposition. Since then, UNOCI has received
requests from a number of political opposition representatives for protection.
I should also point out that western Côte d’Ivoire, particularly along the border
with Liberia, remains the most volatile area. Cross-border attacks by armed Liberian
mercenaries and Ivorian militias residing in Liberia, targeting civilians,
peacekeepers or national security forces, cannot be ruled out. While some tens of
thousands of Ivorian refugees are still in Liberia, there is a reported influx of people
from the subregion to western Côte d’Ivoire which has further increased tensions
between communities.
Furthermore, the situation in eastern Côte d’Ivoire, especially along the
southern part of the border with Ghana, has deteriorated over the past months with
recent attacks and a risk of a growing threat of cross-border movements.
12-55269 (E) 181012

*1255269*

S/2012/772

In the light of the deterioration in the security situation in Côte d’Ivoire as
well as evolving threats, it is recommended to defer the reduction of the military
strength of UNOCI until after the assessment to be conducted early in 2013 to
prepare a special report to the Security Council, which will be issued by 31 March
2013.
I would be grateful if you could bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

12-55269
