Reeolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

against the independent African States adjoining
Southern Rhodesia;
13. Further drmt•s the attention of the Security
Council to the explosive situation in Southern Rhodesia
which threatens international peace and security, and
decides to transmit to the Council the records and resolutions of the twentieth session of the General Assemblv
on this question;
•
14. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia under urgent and continuing review.
1368th plenary meeting.
5 NovPmbfr 1965.

2023 (XX). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
J ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Aden, 4 which includes in
addition to Aden, the Eastern and Western Aden
Protectorates as well as the J slands of Perim. Knria
Muria, Kamaran and other off-shore islands,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and 1949 (XVJTI) of 11 December 1963, and
the resolutions adopted by the Special Committee on
9 April 1964,5 11 May 1964 6 and 17 May 1965, 7
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Having taken note of the declarations of the reprt>sentative of the administering Power,
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situation which is threatening peace and security in the
area, arising from the policies pursurd hy the administering Power in the Territory,
1. Approves the chapters of thr reports of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on thr Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Adrn :incl endorses the concl11sions
and recommendations of the Sub-Committee on Aden;
2. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 9 April 1964. 11 May 1964 and 17 May
1965;
3. Deplores the refusal of the administering Power
to implement the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Special Committee;
4. Further deplores the attempts of the administering
Power to set up an unrepresentative regime in the
Territory, with a view to granting it independence
contrary to General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 1949 (XVIII), and appeals to all States not to
recognize any independence whirh is not based on the
wishes of the people of thr Territory freely expressed
through elections held under universal adult suffrage ;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and to freedom from
colonial rule and recognizes the legitimacy of their
efforts to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter
4 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
( A/5800/Rev.1 ), chapter VI; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes,
addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter VI.
5 Ibid., Nineteenth Session. Annexes, annex No. 8 (part n
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter VI. para. 166.
6 Ibid., para. 202.
7 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), c-bapter VI, 'para. 300.

55

of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Consid<;rs that the maintenance of the military
bases in the Territory constitutes a major obstacle to
the liberation of the people of the Territory from
colonial domination and is prejudicial to the peace
and security of the region, and that the immediate and
,nmplete removal of these bases is therefore essential;
7. Notes with deep concern that military operations
;1ga inst the people of the Territory are sti11 being
carrird out by the ;1dministering Power;
8. Urges the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern J re land immediately to:
(a) Abolish the state of emergency;
( h) Repe:il all laws restricting public freedom;
( c) Cease all repressive actions against the people
of the Territory. in particular military oprrations;
( d) Release all political detainees and allow the
return of those people who have heen exiled or forhidden to reside in the Trrritory hec;i11se of political
aC'tivities;
9. Reaffirms paragraphs 6 to 11 of resolution 1949
1 XVTTJ) and urges the :idministrring Power to implc:ment them immediately;
10. A ppcals to all Member States to render all possible assistan,e to the people of the Territory in their
l'fforts to attain freedom and independence;
11. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the dangerous situation prevailing in the area as a result
of British military action against the peoplr of the
Territory;
12. Requests the 1.foited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. the specialized agencies and the
internationc1 I relief organizations to offer all possible
:issistance to the people who are suffering as :i result
nf the milit;-iry operations in the Trrritory:
13. R eqHPsfs the Secret:irv-General to take such
action :is he may deem expcd1ent to ens1tre the implemrntation of the present resolution. and to rrport
thereon to the Spccial Committee;
14. Requests the Special Committee to rxamine
again the situation in the Territory and to report
ther~on to the Grneral A!-sembly at its twenty-first
sess10n;
15. Dccidrs to maintain this item on its agenda.
1368th plenary meeting,
5 November 1965.

2024 (XX). Question of Southern Rhodesia
ThP General Assembly,

r onsidering the explosive situation created in Southern Rhodesia following the unilateral declaration of
independence,
·
Noting the measures taken by the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lreland,
1. Condemns the unilateral declaration of independence made bv the racialist minority in Southern
Rhodesia;
•
2. Invites the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to implement immediately the relevant
resolu~ions adopt~cl hy the General Assembly and the
Sernnty Council m order to put an end to the rebellion
by the 11nlawfnl authorities in Southern Rhodesia;
