United Nations

A/RES/68/186

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 108

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/457)]

68/186. Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
responses to protect cultural property, especially
with regard to its trafficking
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 66/180 of 19 December 2011, entitled “Strengthening
crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property,
especially with regard to its trafficking”,
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/25 of 15 November
2000, 1 as well as the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted by the
Assembly in its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003, 2
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted by
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on 14 November 1970, 3 the Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects, adopted by the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law on 24 June 1995, 4 and the Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, adopted at The Hague on 14 May 1954, 5
and the two Protocols thereto, adopted on 14 May 19545 and 26 March 1999, 6 and
other relevant conventions, and reaffirming the necessity for those States that have
not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to and, as States parties, implementing
those international instruments,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
3
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
4
Ibid., vol. 2421, No. 43718.
5
Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511.
6
Ibid., vol. 2253, No. 3511.
2

13-45061 (E)

*1345061*

Please recycle

Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect
cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking

A/RES/68/186

Alarmed at the growing involvement of organized criminal groups in all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences, and observing
that illicitly trafficked cultural property is increasingly being sold through markets,
including in auctions, in particular over the Internet, and that such property is being
unlawfully excavated and illicitly exported or imported, with the facilitation of
modern and sophisticated technologies,
Reiterating the need for credible and comparable data on different aspects of
trafficking in cultural property, including the links with transnational organized
crime and the involvement of illicit proceeds, as well as good practices and
challenges in this regard,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice
responses in combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and
related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner,
Welcoming the recommendations of the joint discussion on trafficking in
cultural property of the Working Group of Government Experts on Technical
Assistance and the Working Group on International Cooperation, held in Vienna on
18 October 2012, as endorsed by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime in its resolution 6/1 of
19 October 2012, 7
Taking note of the report of the Secretariat on technical assistance provided to
States in the application of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime to new forms and dimensions of transnational organized crime, 8
including trafficking in cultural property, and the report of the Secretariat on the
application of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime by States parties with respect to criminal offences against cultural property, 9
Taking note also of the publication by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime of a digest of organized crime cases, containing a compilation of cases with
commentaries and lessons learned, aimed at providing policymakers and criminal
justice practitioners with an analysis of concrete cases for the implementation of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, including with
regard to trafficking in cultural property,
Taking note further of the report of the Secretary-General, 10
Recalling that the theme of the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held in Qatar in 2015, will be “Integrating
crime prevention and criminal justice into the wider United Nations agenda to
address social and economic challenges and to promote the rule of law at the
national and international levels, and public participation”, and considering that one
of the workshops at the Congress will focus on comprehensive and balanced
approaches to prevent and adequately respond to new and emerging forms of
transnational crime, such as trafficking in cultural property,
Taking note of the report of the Secretariat on the potential utility of and
improvements to the model treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the
cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property, 11
_______________
7

See CTOC/COP/2012/15, sect. I.A.
CTOC/COP/2012/7.
9
CTOC/COP/WG.2/2012/3-CTOC/COP/WG.3/2012/4.
10
E/CN.15/2013/14.
11
UNODC/CCPCJ/EG.1/2012/2 and Add.1.
8

2/4

Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect
cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking

A/RES/68/186

1.
Requests Member States to continue their efforts to effectively strengthen
crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property,
especially with regard to its trafficking, including within the framework of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime1 and the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;
Recalls its invitation to Member States, in its resolution 66/180, to
2.
protect cultural property and prevent trafficking in such property by introducing
appropriate legislation, including, in particular, procedures for its seizure, recovery
and return, as well as by promoting education, launching awareness-raising
campaigns, locating and inventorying such property, adopting adequate security
measures, developing the capacities and human resources of monitoring institutions,
such as the police and customs services, and of the tourism sector, involving the
media and disseminating information on the theft and pillaging of cultural property;
Invites Member States to consider, as appropriate, reviewing their legal
3.
frameworks, with a view to providing the most extensive international cooperation
possible to fully address the issue of trafficking in cultural property, and also invites
Member States to make trafficking in cultural property, including stealing and
looting at archaeological and other cultural sites, a serious crime, as defined in
article 2 of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
with a view to fully utilizing that Convention for the purpose of extensive
international cooperation in fighting all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural
property and related offences;
Welcomes the recommendations of the second meeting of the open-ended
4.
intergovernmental expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural
property, held in Vienna from 27 to 29 June 2012;
Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to solicit from
5.
Member States and relevant international organizations information and statistical
data on trafficking in cultural property, in particular on trafficking that involves
organized criminal groups, to analyse that information and report on the findings to
the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third
session, and to develop in coordination with Member States an appropriate research
methodology to study trafficking in cultural property, in particular the participation
of organized criminal groups;
Invites Member States that have not yet done so to consider designating
6.
contact points to facilitate international cooperation within the application of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, for the purpose
of preventing and combating trafficking in cultural property, and to report such
information to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for inclusion in the
directory of competent national authorities;
Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to
7.
provide technical assistance to Member States in the area of protection against
trafficking in cultural property and related offences, upon request and in
coordination with relevant international organizations, such as the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), including legislative drafting assistance in order
to strengthen crime prevention and criminal justice responses in this field, and to
develop practical assistance tools for that purpose;
Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its
8.
mandate and in close cooperation with relevant international organizations, such as
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
3/4

Strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect
cultural property, especially with regard to its trafficking

A/RES/68/186

INTERPOL, to raise awareness of the issue of trafficking in cultural property and
related offences at the regional and international levels, including in the context of
its public service announcements on organized crime and through workshops,
seminars and similar events, thereby promoting synergies with the relevant entities
of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice network;
Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to create
9.
a portal on its website containing all documents, tools and relevant information
regarding trafficking in cultural property produced by the Office, including a link to
the Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the INTERPOL database on stolen works
of art;
10. Welcomes the progress made in exploring the development of guidelines
on crime prevention and criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in
cultural property, and stresses the need for their expeditious finalization, bearing in
mind the importance of the matter for all Member States;
11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to reconvene the
expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural property for Member States
to review and revise the draft guidelines, taking into account an updated
compendium from the Secretariat of comments made by Member States on the draft
guidelines, with a view to finalizing and submitting the draft guidelines to the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session;
12. Requests the Secretariat, pursuant to resolution 6/1 of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, entitled “Ensuring effective implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto”,7 to
bring the guidelines on crime prevention and criminal justice responses with respect
to trafficking in cultural property, after their adoption, to the attention of the
Conference of the Parties;
13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its
review of the model treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural
heritage of peoples in the form of movable property, 12 taking into account the views
and comments expressed by Member States,11 and requests Member States and
relevant international organizations that have not yet done so to submit to the
Secretariat their comments on the model treaty;
14. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
resources for the purposes described above, in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the United Nations;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

_______________
12

Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B, resolution 1, annex.

4/4
