I

General All1embl7 -

2. Suggests to the Governments of India, Pakistan
and the Union of South Africa that they should seek
a solution of the question by direct negotiations;
3. Suggests, moreover, that the parties concerned
should designate a Government, agency or person to
facilitate contacts between them and assist them in
settling the dispute ;
4. Decides that, if within the next six months following the date of the present resolution the parties
have not reached agreement on the suggestions made
in the foregoing paragraphs, the Secretary-General
shall designate a person for the purposes specified
above;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assemblv at its ·next regular session on the
results obtained. ·

497th plenary meeting,
4 November 1954.

817 (IX). AdmiHion of new Member• to the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the growing general feeling in favour of the
universality of the United Nations, membership in
which is open to all peace-loving States which accept
the obligations contained in the Charter and, in the
judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to
carry out those obligations,
Having considered the n;port' of the Committee of
Good Offices established by General Assembly resolution 718 (VIII) of 23 October 1953,
Noting that, notwithstanding the best endeavours of
the Committee of Good Offices, the problem remains
unresolved,
Further noting the views recorded by the Committee of Good Offices that possibilities of reaching an
understanding remain and that "different views may
eventually be harmonized within the spirit of the
Charter",
1. Expresses appreciation of the work and efforts of
the Committee of Good Offices ;

2. Decides to send back to the Security Council the
pending applications for membership, together with a
full record of the discussions at the present session
of the General Assembly, for further consideration and
positive recommendations ;
3. Suggests that the Security Council consider the
desirability of invoking the provisions of paragraph 2
of Article 28 of the Charter to help resolve the
problem;
4. Requests the Committee of Good Offices to continue its efforts;
5. Requests the Security Council and the Committee
of Good Offices to report to the General Assembly
during the present session if possible and in any event
during the tenth session.

501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

Ninth Se11ion

818 (IX). Report of the Director of the United
Nations Relief and Work• Agency for
Palestine Refugee• in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V)
of 2 December 1950, 513 (VI) of 26 Janvary 1952,
614 (VII) of 6 November 1952 and 720 (VIII) of
27 November 1953,
Noting the annual report5 of the Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency (or Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and the special report•
of the Director and the Advisory Commission of
UNRWA,
Noting that repatriation or compensation of the
refugees, as pPOvided for in paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III), has not been effected and that the
situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of
grave concern,
1. Decides, without prejudice to the rights of the
refugees to repatriation or compensation, to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
five years ending 30 June 1960;
2. Requests the Agency to continue its consultation
with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine in the best interest of their respective tasks,
with particular reference to paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) ;
3. Requests the Governments of the area to continue
to co-operate with the Director of the Agency in seeking and carrying out projects capable of supporting
substantial numbers of refugees;
4. Decides to maintain the rehabilitation fund of
$200 million, subject to reductions for expenditures
already made ;
5. Approves a reliefi budget of $25,100,000 and a
rehabilitation budget of $36,200,000 for the fiscal year
ending 30 June 1955;
6. Requests the Director, in consultation with the
Advisory Commission of UNRWA, to study and report upon the problem of assistance which should be
given to other claimants for relief, particularly children
and needy inhabitants of villages along the demarcation lines;
7. Authorizes the Director to prepare, in consultation with the Advisory Commission, the budgets for
relief and rehabilitation in advance of each fiscal year,
which budgets he shall transmit to the Negotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds, without prejudice to review each year by the General Assembly ;
8. Requests the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds, after receipt of surh budgets from
the Director of UNRWA, to seek such funds as may
be required by the Agency;
9. Appeals to the Governments of Member and nonmember States to make voluntary contributions to the
extent necessary to carry through to fulfilment the
Agency's programmes, and thanks the numerous religious, charitable and humanitarian organizations for
5

' Ibid., agenda item 21, document A/2720.

6

Ibid., Supplement No. 17.
Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/2717/Add.1.
