VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Notes with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women during its third132
and fourth 133 sessions;
2. Also notes with satisfaction the progress of the
regional commissions in the formulation and execution
of projects in the fields of national development, planning, rural development, training of trainers, appropriate technologies, small-scale business and industries,
and technical co-operation among developing countries, including research and information services;
3. Requests the regional commissions concerned
to proceed to the recruitment of the second women's
programme officer as recommended by the Consultative
Committee at its fourth session; 134
4. Urges the regional commissions to increase the
numbers of women employed in policy-making positions within their secretariats;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the relevant organizations and organs within the United Nations system
for their co-operation at the national and regional levels
in formulating and executing projects sponsored by
the Fund;
6. Expresses its appreciation to those countries
which have already contributed, to those which have
pledged contributions and to those which have expressed their intention of contributing· to the Fund;
1. Appeals to Member States to consider giving
support to the Fund in order to assure availability of
adequate resources for the long-term planning of its
activities;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General:

To continue to report annually on the management of the Fund as well as on the progress in
implementation of Fund activities;
(a)

(b) To continue to include the Fund, on an annual basis, as one of the programmes of the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities.

95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/189.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it decided to convene a world
conference in 1980, at the mid-term of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2062 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, in which the
Council decided to establish a preparatory committee
to make recommendations concerning the substantive
and organizational arrangements for the Conference,
132 A/33/198, sect. II.
133 A/33/198/ Add.2 and Corr. 1, sect. II.
134 Ibid., para. 8.

167

Recalling further all the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations on substantive and
administrative aspects of the preparatory work for the
Conference,

1. Decides that the provisional agenda for the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace shall be as
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Further decides on the following organization
of work for the Conference:
(a) Thirteen working days shall be allocated for
the Conference;
( b) In addition to the plenary, there shall be two
main committees, for which interpretation shall be
provided in six languages;

( c) The general debate, to be held in plenary,
shall be limited to fifteen minutes per speaker;
(d) The number of working groups required shall
be decided upon by the Conference, on the understanding that one working group will be provided with
interpretation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the documentation for the Conference will be made
available and distributed six weeks before the Conference is convened, in accordance with United Nations practice;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in preparing
the substantive documentation for the Conference, to
make use, as necessary, of the expertise of consultants;
5. Recommends to the executive heads of the
specialized agencies concerned and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system to prepare in a coordinated manner reports evaluating progress in substantive areas relating to the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
due account is taken of the recommendations on the
rationalization of methods in the preparation of the
questionnaire on the implementation of the World
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 1311 in compliance with Economic and Social Council resolution
2060 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, and of the findings
and conclusions emanating from all preparatory work
for the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the Conference will have at its disposal the documentation referred to in his note of 2 March 1978 on the
preparatory work for the Conference 136 as well as in
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
8.
(a)

Requests the Secretary-General to invite:

All States to participate in the Conference;

( b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of
all international conferences convened under its auspices in the capacity of observers to participate in
135 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, Mexico, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.1 ), chap. II, sect. A.
136 E/CN.6/610.

168

General As11eIDbly-Thirty-third Session

the Conference in that capacity in accordance with
Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November
1974;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation
movements recognized in its region by the Organization of African Unity to participate in the Conference
in the capacity of observers in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in its capacity as the
Administering Authority for Namibia;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs
of the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council to be represented by observers at the Conference who will have the right to submit written
statements, in which connexion the Secretary-General
of the Conference will provide a list of the non-governmental organizations which may address the Conference, for approval by the Preparatory Committee at
its second session, on the understanding that the number will be limited and the duration of the speeches
will be in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To appoint as soon as possible a SecretaryGeneral of the Conference, at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General;
( b) To appoint the Secretary-General from outside the United Nations system and from a developing
country;
(c) To ensure that the secretariat of the Conference, which shall be located at United Nations
Headquarters, will be composed of a full-time Secretary-General, as well as the appropriate members of
the Advancement of Women Branch of the Centre
for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of
the Secretariat and the necessary additional staff for
the preparation of the Conference, the secretariat to
work in close co-operation with the Centre as a whole,
which is the focal point of the activities of the Decade;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare
draft rules of procedure for the Conference for submission to the Preparatory Committee at its second
session, on the basis of the standard rules of procedure
for United Nations conferences, taking into account
the procedure adopted by the World Conference of
the International Women's Year, held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975, with respect to the
composition of the Bureau;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
regional commissions to convene as early as possible
in 1979 preparatory meetings and seminars in support
of the aims and objectives of the Conference;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to invite the specialized agencies and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system to convene sectoral
meetings, as appropriate, and to participate actively
in the preparation of the regional meetings;

13. Invites the regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the preparations for the regional meetings
and to participate in those meetings wherever possible;
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to
the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, to
enter into commitments which, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 31/93 of 14 December
1976, it has determined are of a pressing and unforeseeable nature, arising out of extraordinary expenses
for the Conference resulting from the decisions in
paragraphs 2 to 8 above and based on preliminary
estimates appearing in annex IV of the report of the
Preparatory Committee for the Conference; 137
15. Decides that adequate financial resources shall
be made available to ensure the successful preparation
of the Conference for the last part of the biennium
1978-1979 and for the first part of the biennium 19801981 in order to provide necessary resources as soon
as possible.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
ANNEX
Provisional agenda for the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for WoIDen: Equality, DevelopIDent and Peace

l.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Election of the President and members of the Bureau of
the Conference.

3.

Adoption of the rules of procedure.

4.

Adoption of the agenda.

5.

Establishment of main committees and organization of
work.

6.

CredentiaJs of representatives to the Conference:

7.

8.

(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

Effects of apartheid on women in southern Africa:
(a)

Review of the situation;

(b)

Special measures for assistance to women in southern Africa.

Review and evaluation of the progress made and obstacles
encountered in attaining the objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, at the national, regional and international levels.
from 1975 to 1980, in keeping with the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the
J.nternational Women's Year:
Review and evaluation of progress made and obstacles encountered at the national level in attaining
the minimum objectives set forth in parngraph 46
of the World Plan of Action;
(b) Review and evaluation of regional and global
programmes of the United Nations system of organizations aimed at promoting the objectives of the
Decade.
Programme of Action for the second half of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, 1981-1985, designed to implement the World Plan
of Action:
(a)

9.

137 A/CONF.94/PC/4.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

{a)

10.

National targets and strategies for women's integragration and participation in economic and social
deve.Jopment with special emphasis on the subtheme
"Employment, Health and Education":
(i) Planning and monitoring;
(ii) National machineries;
(b) Regional and international targets and strategies,
taking into account the subtheme "Employment,
Health and Education".
Adoption of the report of the 0:mference.

33/190.

Preparations for the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and
Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 5 of its resolution 31 / 194 of
22 December 1976,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Work of the Preparatory Committee for the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women during its first session" ,138
Conscious of the need to prepare fully for the
Conference,
Requests the Secretary-General, in proceeding with
the arrangements for the preparation of the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to bear in mind
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 31 / 194
and to so implement the move decided upon in that
resolution as to ensure the necessary preparations for
the Conference and the effective participation of the
Advancement of Women Branch of the Centre for
Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/191.

Venue of the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in paragraph 20 of which it decided to
convene at the mid-term of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace a world
conference to review and evaluate the progress made
in implementing the objectives of the International
Women's Year as recommended by the World Conference of the International Women's Year and, where
necessary, to readjust existing programmes in the light
of new data and research available,
Noting with appreciation that the Government of
Denmark has offered to act as host for the Conference, rnn
Noting also with appreciation the offer of the Government of Costa Rica to act as host to the Conference, 140
Decides, after being informed of the friendly and
cordial understanding between the two countries offering to act as host to the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace:
(a)
To accept, with thanks, the offer of the Government of Denmark to act as host to the Conference;

( b)

To hold the Conference in Copenhagen in

1980.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
1 39 A/C.3/33/5.

138 A/33/339 and Corr.I and Add. I.

169

140 A/C.3/33/4.
