S/2012/469

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 June 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 18 June 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2051 by the Security Council
on 12 June 2012, in which the Council reaffirmed the need for the full and timely
implementation of the Transition Agreement for a Yemeni-led political transition.
Resolution 2051 (2012) sends an important signal to all Yemeni sides to step up
efforts to move the transition process forward and demonstrates the strong
commitment of the Security Council to continue its support for a peaceful transition.
I take note that in its resolution 2051 (2012), the Security Council “requests
the Secretary-General to continue his good offices role, including through the efforts
of his Special Adviser, Jamal Benomar”, and in this regard “welcomes the political
engagement of the United Nations through a small presence in Yemen consisting of
a team of experts to support the implementation of the transition process”. In the
resolution the Council also “requests the Secretary-General to continue to
coordinate assistance from the international community in support of the National
Dialogue and transition”.
Since the uprisings in Yemen broke out in early 2011, I have been actively
engaged through my good offices in helping to find a peaceful solution. Within this
framework, my Special Adviser, Jamal Benomar, has continuously engaged with all
sides through 12 extensive missions thus far. In November, during his sixth mission,
he facilitated face-to-face negotiations between the Government and opposition at
their request. This mediation effort resulted in the Transition Agreement signed in
Riyadh on 23 November 2011. The Special Adviser has since remained actively
engaged with all Yemeni sides in facilitating and supporting its effective
implementation.
Since November, there has been progress in the implementation of the
Agreement. A Government of National Unity led by Prime Minister Mohamed
Basendwa was formed in December 2011. The election of President Hadi on
21 February secured the peaceful transfer of power and marked the successful
completion of the first phase of Yemen’s transition. The start of security sector
reform and the launch on 6 May of preparations for the National Dialogue
Conference indicate that the Yemeni sides are staying on course in implementing the
Agreement. However, the country’s peace remains fragile and the transition faces
formidable challenges.
The Security Council recognized these challenges in resolution 2051 (2012).
The convening of an all-inclusive National Dialogue in particular will be a crucial
12-38452 (E) 220612

*1238452*

S/2012/469

forum for shaping Yemen’s future and for creating a positive political dynamic
towards greater stability and security. Helping to ensure the success of this process
therefore is one of my top priorities. This will require stepped-up political
facilitation efforts to help support the next steps in transition, including the National
Dialogue, the constitutional review and new elections in early 2014.
To fully meet the expectations of resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012) and the
Transition Agreement, in which the Yemeni sides requested me to, inter alia,
“provide continuous assistance, in cooperation with other agencies, for the
implementation of this Agreement”, I intend to establish a small Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen for an initial period of
12 months to fulfil the following main functions:
(a) Exercise my good offices with a view to facilitating Yemen’s transition
and assisting in the implementation of the Agreement;
(b) Lead United Nations support to the National Dialogue Conference and
coordinate international assistance to the Conference;
(c) Provide support to other transition steps, including the constitutional
review, and new general elections in early 2014;
(d) Work closely with the members of the Security Council, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and other international partners;
(e) Support the Secretary-General’s ongoing reporting obligations to the
Security Council in the context of resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012).
The Office will be headed by my Special Adviser on Yemen at the level of
Assistant Secretary-General to exercise my good offices role, including through
regular and frequent visits to Yemen, and engage closely with all Yemeni sides. The
Special Adviser will be supported both at Headquarters and on the ground in Yemen
by a small team of five Professional staff. An advance team of two Professional staff
that was deployed to Sana’a in May will be incorporated into this Office. In
fulfilling its tasks, the Office will work closely with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and the United Nations country team in Yemen.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

12-38452
