S/2021/140

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 12 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director, CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, as well as the statements delivered by
the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the
Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts” convened on Wednesday,
10 February 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02060 (E) 160221 170321

*2102060*

S/2021/140

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov
Allow me to begin by expressing my sincere condolences to the Governments
and the people of Afghanistan, Austria, France, Iraq, Mozambique, the Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Somalia and all other Member States that recently suffered
terrorist attacks. My heartfelt thoughts and sympathy go to the survivors and to the
families of the victims.
I thank the Security Council for the opportunity to present the twelfth report
(S/2021/98)of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security, and the range of United
Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering this threat, as mandated
by resolution 2368 (2017).
I am pleased that Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx, Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), is joining me to
present this report, which our offices prepared jointly with the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, led by Mr. Edmund Fitton-Brown.
The threat posed by ISIL to international peace and security is on the rise
again. It is crucial that Member States remain focused and united to counter it,
despite the strains and competing priorities brought by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
While ISIL has not developed a purposeful strategy to exploit the pandemic,
its efforts to regroup and reinvigorate its activities gained further momentum in
the second half of 2020. Its core in Iraq and Syria and its affiliates in other conflict
zones have continued to take advantage of the disruption caused by the virus to
step up their operations, with a number of high-profile attacks. ISIL fighters have
maintained the ability to move and operate, including across unprotected borders.
As ISIL’s regional affiliates entrench themselves and gain in autonomy and
strength, they could provide the group new capabilities and options to conduct
external operations. Member States warn that ISIL could regain the capacity to
orchestrate attacks in different parts of the world in the course of 2021.
Outside conflict zones, the risk of exposure to ISIL propaganda and incitement
has continued to grow as people — especially the young — spend more time at
home and online. This could lead to a sudden rash of attacks in some countries
when COVID-19-related movement restrictions ease. Meanwhile, the socioeconomic
toll and political fallout of the pandemic could further aggravate the longer-term
threat posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups by widening the pool of individuals
receptive to radicalization and recruitment.
ISIL’s primary focus remains resurgence in Iraq and Syria, where the
international community continues to grapple with the legacies of the group’s socalled “caliphate”. Some 10,000 ISIL fighters, including foreign terrorist fighters in
the low thousands, remain active in the region, the majority of them in Iraq, pursuing
a protracted insurgency. These sizable remnants are assessed to pose a major, longterm and global threat. They are organized in small cells hiding in desert and rural
areas and moving across the border between the two countries, waging attacks.
More tragically, the international community has made hardly any progress in
addressing the situation of the thousands of individuals, mostly women and children,
suspected of having links with ISIL and held in precarious conditions in the region.
The already dire humanitarian and security situation in the detention facilities and
displacement camps is deteriorating even further, especially in Al-Hol. The most
2/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

basic of human rights are undermined, and many instances of terrorist radicalization,
fund-raising, training and incitement have been reported. Nearly two years after the
territorial defeat of ISIL, some 27,500 foreign children are still in harm’s way in the
camps in north-east Syria, including about 8,000 children from some 60 countries
other than Iraq, 90 per cent of whom are under 12 years of age.
The significant challenges faced by Member States in ensuring the protection
of vulnerable individuals, accountability for terrorist crimes and security are not
becoming any less urgent or complex with time, quite the contrary. These challenges
and risks are growing more serious with neglect and could have a long-term impact
not just in the region, but also globally.
In October last year, ISIL reiterated that orchestrating jailbreaks and assisting
escapees was a priority. The group is also aware of the propaganda value of any
potential outbreak of COVID-19 and associated unrest in holding facilities.
Beyond the humanitarian urgency, the moral imperative and the legal
obligations, taking action is a strategic security imperative. So, I would like
to reiterate the Secretary-General’s call upon Member States for the voluntary
repatriation of adults and children stranded in Iraq and Syria, with the consent of
relevant Governments and in line with international law.
The efforts of several Member States in that regard are commendable,
especially Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation and Uzbekistan, which have
repatriated hundreds of affected children from north-east Syria. A number of other
States, especially European countries, have conducted fewer repatriations. I hope
they will actively step up their efforts. I encourage them all to share data with the
United Nations and their experience with other Member States, so that collectively
we resolve this untenable situation.
Over the past six months, ISIL was particularly active in a number of African
States affected by conflict. Its affiliates in West Africa conducted numerous attacks
against the military and civilians at the end of 2020 in the tri-border area between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger and in the Lake Chad basin, demonstrating
determination and adaptability.
The Islamic State Central Africa Province is emerging as a strong regional
affiliate, employing sophisticated tactics and capabilities, emboldened by recent
operational successes in Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In Europe, a string of attacks in France, Germany, Austria and Switzerland,
partly inspired by ISIL, provided a stark reminder of the diffuse threat from
homegrown terrorist attacks by lone actors. The attacks also revived debates in
Europe on how to address terrorist radicalization in prisons and ensure effective
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes and the monitoring of terrorist offenders
upon release from prison.
Turning to Asia, ISIL’s affiliate in Afghanistan is assessed to still have
between 1,000 and 2,200 fighters spread across several provinces. Despite degraded
military capabilities, it has continued to exploit difficulties in the Afghan peace
process and claimed a number of high-profile attacks.
ISIL also remains resilient in South-East Asia, with a number of factions. The
involvement of women in suicide bombings has continued, with two such attacks in
the Philippines in August 2020.
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx will brief you on the continued support
provided by the United Nations system to Member States in addressing the threat
posed by ISIL during the COVID-19 pandemic.
21-020603/36

S/2021/140

My Office has continued to innovate and to work closely with all our partners
under the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact to ensure
business continuity, expanding our support toolbox.
I would like to briefly highlight a few key examples.
First, in August 2020, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in my
Office launched a new Global Framework to coordinate with UNICEF the provision
of support from 15 United Nations entities, including CTED, to requesting Member
States with regard to individuals returned from or remaining in north-east Syria
and Iraq.
United Nations entities have already developed a number of field-driven
project proposals to implement the Global Framework in Central Asia and Iraq,
which recent contributions from donor States are making possible.
In September 2020, the Centre also launched a Global Programme on
Prosecution, Rehabilitation and Reintegration, in close cooperation with CTED and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, under which we have developed
projects to assist Indonesia, Burkina Faso and Lake Chad basin States. If so requested,
we are also ready to support Mozambique in this area. These efforts fully conform
to the requirements of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid Guiding
Principles on Foreign Terrorist Fighters and the related addendum.
Secondly, we made significant progress in the implementation of the United
Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by my Office to support
Member States in implementing resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019).
The programme used an online assessment methodology developed with CTED to
conduct virtual deep-dive assessments to Botswana, Djibouti, the Gambia, Maldives
and Sierra Leone. We also delivered the programme’s first two online training
courses, in October 2020 for Botswana and in January 2021 for Sierra Leone.
Thirdly, we pushed ahead with the implementation of the Global CapacityBuilding Programme on Countering Terrorism Financing launched by the Centre
in June last year, in response to resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019). Virtual
training workshops on protecting the non-profit sector from terrorist misuse were
successfully organized for Bahrain and Tajikistan.
And, fourthly, last month we launched a new Global Programme on
Countering Terrorist Threats against Vulnerable Targets, including from unmanned
aerial systems, with our partners from CTED, INTERPOL, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and the Alliance of Civilizations.
This responds to resolution 2341 (2017). The programme will assist beneficiary
Member States in the development of national strategies and action plans to protect
vulnerable targets and provide operational training and mentoring services to
support their implementation.
In this year of milestones, including the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1373 (2001), the time could not be more relevant for Member States to recommit
themselves to multilateral action against terrorism, under the auspices of the United
Nations. The Security Council has already led the way. Presidential statement S/
PRST/2021/1, of 12 January, stresses the need “to further strengthen the unified and
coordinated international response” to the scourge of terrorism.
We must defeat ISIL in cyberspace. We must be prepared to disrupt new
attacks by ISIL in different parts of the world. We must tackle the threat posed by its
regional affiliates, especially in Africa. And we must urgently solve the protracted
issue of ISIL members, and especially associated women and children stranded in
Syria and Iraq, lest our failure enables the group’s resurgence.
4/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

The United Nations system, working through the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, will continue to stand by Member States as they rise to
these challenges.

21-020605/36

S/2021/140

Annex II
Briefing by Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, Michèle Coninsx
I thank you for the opportunity to brief the Council on the twelfth report
(S/2021/98) of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and the continued efforts of the United Nations and Member
States to counter the threat. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov for his overview of the report and to commend both the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, for their invaluable contributions to the report.
We continue to face a complex and volatile global security landscape.
Transnational terrorism is just one of several overlapping generational challenges
facing us — each of which requires a coordinated and multilateral response.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is the most urgent challenge.
It has also exacerbated or accelerated many of the underlying issues fuelling the other
challenges, leaving us in a precarious situation. As we have heard, in the short term
the pandemic does not appear to have increased the threat posed by ISIL or other
terrorist groups. Member States’ measures to contain the spread of the virus — such
as restrictions on movement and gatherings — continue to make it more difficult for
terrorists to travel, gather or access potential target sites outside conflict zones. In
areas of conflict, however, terrorists have typically maintained their ability to travel
and operate, despite the pandemic.
These conclusions echo the findings of the most recent update of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) on the impact of COVID-19 on
terrorism, counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism, which was issued
in December 2020.
The strength of ISIL’s affiliates in Africa remains a particular concern, as it
continues to exacerbate a worsening humanitarian situation in many regions.
In an effort to help address this situation, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and the 1267, 1989, 2253 ISIL/(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
are planning to hold a joint open briefing later this year on “ISIL in Africa: The
nature of the threat and responses”.
CTED’s analysis also indicates that COVID-19 has detracted attention or
redirected resources from several long-standing counter-terrorism policy challenges.
United Nations entities remain deeply concerned at the dire situation facing hundreds
of thousands of individuals — mostly children and women — stranded in camps
and prisons in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. These individuals are struggling
to meet their day-to-day basic needs because they lack access to food, medicine,
hygiene and shelter. COVID-19 has further restricted their access to humanitarian
assistance and led to the suspension of protection and support services.
However, Member States continue to face challenges in their efforts to
repatriate their nationals, including women and men, children and the elderly, from
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. States also continue to face significant obstacles
to their efforts to ensure accountability for the crimes committed by ISIL and to
secure justice and redress for ISIL’s countless victims.
COVID-19 has forced many States to delay hearings or extend proceedings,
prolonged pretrial detention and caused case backlogs. And this has also prevented
the victims of terrorism from gaining access to proceedings.
6/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Nonetheless, it is important to reflect on the progress made, both over the past
six months and indeed since the Secretary-General’s first report on ISIL (S/2016/92),
issued in 2016.
Although levels of terrorist violence have ebbed and flowed — and will no
doubt continue to do so — there has been a consistent and welcome downward trend
over the past five years.
As the terrorist threat has evolved, so too has the response of the United
Nations. That response has been driven by the Security Council’s adoption of a
number of resolutions that have consistently emphasized the need for enhanced
international cooperation and coordination, as well as the need to ensure a human
rights-compliant, gender-sensitive approach to counter-terrorism and countering
violent extremism.
CTED has played a unique role in supporting the efforts of Member States
to implement those resolutions through its engagement and dialogue with Member
States, United Nations agencies and other implementing partners — in recent months
primarily via online tools, of course.
The Secretary-General’s report makes clear that Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic remain ISIL’s primary focus. Under the guidance of the CTC, CTED plans
to conduct a hybrid follow-up assessment visit to Iraq and other neighbouring States.
That will allow us to identify challenges that still need to be addressed in order to
effectively counter the evolving threat in the region.
CTED also continues to prioritize the Committee’s recommendations to
Member States on dealing with returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters
formerly associated with ISIL.
We recently launched a joint initiative with the Government of Indonesia,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNOCT on strengthening
supervision and community-based treatment for the rehabilitation and reintegration
of terrorist and violent extremist defendants and offenders. That initiative, which is
supported by the Government of the United Kingdom and Japan, will identify good
practices to be disseminated throughout South and South-East Asia.
CTED’s ongoing efforts to help Member States review and update their
national legislation have strengthened their ability to bring terrorists to justice while
protecting and promoting international law, in particular international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
Working in cooperation with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and in consultation with other relevant stakeholders, CTED is also currently
preparing a thematic study of the links between counter-terrorism frameworks and
international humanitarian law with a view to raising awareness of the complexity
of this issue, as well as the urgent need to address it.
CTED has continued to strengthen its dialogue with 14 Member States
particularly impacted by the foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon in order to develop
their capacities in the areas of border management, law enforcement and firearms
control through its unique role in leading deep-dive assessment missions within
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact framework,
coordinated by UNOCT.
Our work with UNOCT to facilitate the delivery of technical assistance for
capacity-building, as a follow-up to CTC assessment visits, also includes playing a
key role in the One United Nations approach missions, which are conducted under
the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme to help States develop
advance passenger information and Passenger Name Record systems to prevent
terrorist movements.
21-020607/36

S/2021/140

CTED’s analysis indicates that the financial impact of COVID-19 may make
terrorist groups more reliant on criminal activities, including drug smuggling,
trafficking minerals and precious stones, fraud, cybercrime and the sale of
counterfeit medicines.
Starting this year, CTED will also produce annual assessments of gaps
identified and areas requiring more action in relation to States’ implementation
of the counter-terrorism financing provisions of the relevant Council resolutions.
Our aim is to assist UNOCT and other United Nations entities to design targeted
technical assistance and capacity-building efforts.
CTED also recently launched an initiative within the Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact framework to produce guidance for States on how
to counter the financing of terrorism in full compliance with international human
rights law. That will include inputs from all stakeholders concerned, especially our
civil society partners.
Recognizing that technology remains a significant force-multiplier for
terrorist groups — including their recruitment, propaganda, communication
and fundraising — CTED has also continued to deepen its engagement with the
technology sector. In November, the CTED-supported Tech Against Terrorism
initiative launched a beta version of its Terrorist Content Analytics Platform
(TCAP) — a centralized platform designed to help technology companies identify
the use of their services for terrorist purposes. TCAP alerts serve more than 60
small-to-large technology companies, representing the full ecosystem of companies
whose services have been misused by ISIL.
Despite the significant progress achieved in recent years, ISIL and its
affiliates remain a continuing threat. Extreme right-wing or racially and ethnically
motivated terrorism is also a cause of increasing concern in many parts of the
world and is characterized by increasing global interconnectedness, lethality and
transnational linkages.
The COVID-19 pandemic will likely continue to present the international
community with significant and multifaceted challenges, including in relation to
counter-terrorism. Even though international focus has rightly shifted to addressing
the virus, we must be careful not to jeopardize the success we have achieved in
countering terrorism.
We must continue to encourage the identification of shared, global priorities
based on universal values of justice, equality and human dignity. That can be
achieved only through a comprehensive, coordinated One United Nations approach
aimed at assisting Member States to develop and implement effective counterterrorism measures while also addressing conditions conducive to terrorism and
violent extremism.
CTED stands ready to continue to fulfil its unique and vital role in ensuring
that approach based on its assessments, dialogue with Member States, partnerships
and analysis and expertise.

8/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director
Coninsx for their briefings and welcomes the report submitted by Secretary-General
Guterres (S/2021/98).
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) has not given up its attempt to regroup in Iraq and Syria and may
increase its operational capacity worldwide this year, thus posing a greater threat to
international peace and security. Even during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, terrorists in the conflict zones of Africa, Afghanistan and other areas
are still moving around and orchestrating attacks. The international fight against
terrorism has a long way to go.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001) and the establishment of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, as well as the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Looking back at global counter-terrorism cooperation, we must recognize that
it is necessary to completely root out terrorist organizations, including ISIL, and that
all countries should adhere to multilateralism, strengthen international cooperation
and build the broadest possible united front against terrorism. Terrorism is the
common enemy of humankind, and there are no good or bad terrorists.
We must abandon double standards in the fight against terrorism. In order
to fully promote the central role of the United Nations, the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
should continue to support the efforts of Member States to protect civilians, combat
the financing of terrorism, monitor their borders, promote counter-terrorism and
deradicalization campaigns and assist them in fully implementing the relevant
Council resolutions, as well as the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and in the face of the
evolving terrorism challenge, the international community should have new, flexible
and effective tools. We must be highly vigilant against terrorist forces that incite and
advocate terrorist activities by taking advantage of the opportunities or loopholes
presented by the pandemic.
The Internet is an important battlefield in the fight against terrorism. Terrorist
organizations such as ISIL continue their illegal online activities unchecked, such
as spreading extremist ideologies, inciting terrorism, recruiting and funding for
terrorism. The international community must strengthen cooperation and not let the
Internet become a safe haven for terrorists.
The protracted issue of former ISIL associates poses a serious humanitarian
and security challenge. All parties should take up their responsibilities under
international law. The Council should develop a political stance and legal framework
for addressing the issue as soon as possible, so as to facilitate repatriation to the
countries of origin. In that regard, China welcomes the positive measures taken by
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, to assist countries affected in repatriating foreign
terrorist fighters and their families, especially women and children stranded in Iraq
and Syria. China supports countries in sharing useful experiences with the United
Nations and its Member States to promote best practices for addressing the problem
of foreign terrorist fighters and gradually build positive momentum.
21-020609/36

S/2021/140

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we must address both the symptoms
and root causes of terrorism and integrate political, economic, judicial, social and
other measures with a view to eradicating the root causes of terrorism and extremism.
The international community should pay more attention to the issue of development,
especially as it relates to youth, education and employment. Promoting the effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is essential to our
global counter-terrorism efforts.

10/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex IV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank the Secretary-General for his twelfth report on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security
(S/2021/98), as well as Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Coninsx for their insightful briefings.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has continued to affect
terrorism trends over the past six months. We note that the threat posed by ISIL
and its followers is constantly evolving, as the group can quickly exploit existing
and emerging vulnerabilities. In that context, terrorists and violent extremists have
increased their online activities, thus targeting people who are spending more time
in front of screens than ever before. Furthermore, terrorists have managed to forge
new alliances with organized criminal groups and raise funds via cryptocurrency
wallet addresses.
As the Secretary-General’s report outlines, violent extremists and terrorists
were able to increase their operations in the second part of 2020. These included highprofile attacks in Afghanistan, West Africa and Central Africa. Unfortunately, we
also witnessed a number of inspired attacks by lone individuals in Europe, suggesting
that online terrorist propaganda continues to lead to homegrown terrorism attacks
outside the conflict zones.
Estonia notes that, despite the territorial defeat of ISIL in 2019, its sizeable
remnants continue to be a cause for concern for Member States, and the threat is
constantly evolving. Estonia is a proud member of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh, and I reiterate Estonia’s determination to continue the fight against ISIL in
the framework of the international coalition.
There is no doubt that violent extremism and terrorism pose a threat to
global peace and security and that only through close cooperation on the global,
regional and national level can we successfully combat them. Estonia appreciates the
growing cooperation among the United Nations and the European Union, Europol
and Eurojust.
The United Nations has a central role to play in leading the global effort —
from setting the standards to delivering technical assistance. Better coordination
and cooperation should be continuously emphasized within the wide United Nations
system. A One United Nations approach should be pursued as a standard.
Furthermore, it is essential that we engage meaningfully with civil society
groups and the private sector. The voice of youth, women and religious and community
leaders should be heard. A whole-of-society approach and prevention are more critical
than ever in designing effective counter-terrorism policies, as well as in building
cohesive societies that are resilient in the face of terrorism and radicalization.
Estonia condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. My country
is convinced that States must ensure that all counter-terrorism measures comply
with State obligations under international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. Ignoring
those principles can undermine counter-terrorism activities and lead to increased
radicalization, fuelled by violence and a sense of impunity. We therefore also
condemn all attempts to misuse the counter-terrorism agenda as a pretext for human
rights violations.
21-0206011/36

S/2021/140

Estonia is deeply concerned about the increasing misuse of counter-terrorism
measures to silence human rights defenders, political opponents and members of
religious or ethnic minorities.
Ensuring accountability and denying impunity is an essential part of
countering terrorism. It is also vital in efforts to heal communities, restore trust
and create conditions for sustainable peace. We note that COVID-19 poses a
significant challenge to international legal cooperation. At the same time, it is
worth highlighting that, despite the difficulties encountered, United Nations entities
managed to continue many programmes, including supporting efforts by States to
develop and implement comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies.
Finally, despite the fragmentation of our efforts due to the pandemic, it is
essential that our cooperation in preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism continue and that we remain vigilant to adapt to new circumstances.
In that context, Estonia wishes to underline its appreciation of the work of United
Nations entities such as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL and the United Nations Children’s Fund — all
of which have managed to adapt and continue to fulfil their mandates in these
difficult times.

12/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle
Coninsx for their briefings and their essential and coordinated work. I would also
like to pay tribute today to the victims of terrorism.
The threat of Da’esh has not been extinguished. Quite the opposite has been
clearly illustrated by what my colleagues have said. The terrorist organization is
experiencing renewed activity in Syria, is trying to regain ground in Iraq and is
uniting new affiliates, particularly in Africa. To eliminate this threat, it is absolutely
necessary that we maintain our ability to put pressure on the military front. We are
determined to wage this fight on all fronts, alongside our regional and international
partners, through the Global Coalition against Da’esh and within the framework of
the International Coalition for the Sahel.
But, as the briefers stressed, our response cannot be simply a security response.
We need to address the root causes of conflict, extremism and terrorism. In Syria
that requires a political solution, in accordance with the terms of resolution 2254
(2015); in Iraq it requires stabilization and reconstruction; in the Sahel it requires
restoring the authority of the State, supporting local development and resolving
tensions between communities. These are all an integral part of the response to the
terrorist threat.
I would like to highlight several areas where we must intensify efforts.
First, as noted, we must dry up the resources of terrorist groups, in particular
the growing use of cryptocurrencies in online funds. We call on all States to
implement resolution 2462 (2019), and together we will explore new areas for action
at the upcoming joint meeting of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism.
Secondly, we need to counter terrorist propaganda on social networks, which
is a major echo chamber for jihadist groups. That development has only been
amplified under the effect of the coronavirus disease. It will require the unification
of a large coalition of actors — not only policymakers but also civil society and
Internet companies. We call on all States to join the Christchurch Call to eliminate
terrorist and violent extremist content online, which we launched with New Zealand.
In short, the protection of human rights is a sine qua non for effectively
fighting terrorism. France will ensure that respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights is fully taken into account in the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Regarding the humanitarian aspect, I would like to respond to the remarks
made against the White Helmets during one of the statements, because they do
absolutely essential work in the humanitarian field.
There can be no impunity for the crimes committed by Da’esh. All terrorists
must be tried as near as possible to where their crimes were committed. That is
where the evidence of their acts can be found and where victims can be granted
reparations for the harm done to them. In Mali, we welcome the fact that 142 people
have been tried since 2017, in particular thanks to the support provided by France,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and
21-0206013/36

S/2021/140

many others to the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and Transnational
Organized Crime.
With regard to repatriation, unlike their parents, children have not chosen to
join terrorism. That is why we repatriated orphaned and vulnerable unaccompanied
minors when conditions allowed, taking into account the best interests of the child. I
remind you that France does not have jurisdiction over the camps where those children
are located and does not have effective control over those areas. Repatriation could
therefore be carried out in a war zone only after extremely complex negotiations with
the local authorities. But our efforts on behalf of children do not change France’s
steadfast position with regard to adult foreign terrorist fighters.
Lastly, we must work to strengthen the capacities of States to counter terrorism
so that they can best take ownership of those challenges, which are central to their
own security. That objective will be the focus of the N’Djamena summit on 15 and
16 February. Concerning Mozambique, the support of international and regional
partners will be absolutely essential to help the authorities respond to the terrorist
threat in Cabo Delgado.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s continued support for the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, which we will reaffirm by fully engaging in
the discussions on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review.

14/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), and Ms.
Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), for their briefings on the twelfth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to
international peace and security (S/2021/98).
The Secretary-General’s periodic report on ISIL is an important tool for
Member States to reflect on the threat posed by ISIL and strategize a collective
approach towards global terrorism. We appreciate the activities undertaken by
various United Nations entities, including UNOCT and CTED, to help build the
capacity of Member States to counter that threat. We also acknowledge the important
role played by the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
under the chairmanship of Mr. Voronkov, in ensuring coordination and coherence
among all the implementing agencies through its thematic working groups.
It is an undeniable fact that terrorism continues to pose the gravest threat to
humankind. Terrorism not only grievously impacts human life but also uproots the
very foundation of humanity. Let me take this opportunity to convey our sincere
condolences to all countries, including our immediate neighbour, Afghanistan,
which continues to suffer from cross-border and international terrorism.
The current report of the Secretary-General on ISIL reiterates the necessity
for a forceful and decisive global fight against terrorism. The report makes it amply
clear that, despite its territorial defeat, ISIL (Da’esh) activities are on the rise, and
its presence and activities are affecting significant parts of Africa beyond its core
area of operations in Syria and Iraq. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further
resulted in terrorism getting a fillip across the world.
Easy access to new and emerging technologies, including drones, virtual
currencies, encrypted communications and artificial intelligence, has enabled ISIL
and other terrorist groups to adapt to the pandemic-affected world and exploit the
current conditions to their advantage. Social media networks have also contributed
to the radicalization and recruitment of young people. Those new methods have
resulted in greater freedom and tactical autonomy for ISIL affiliates.
As a result, ISIL is gaining strength not only in Syria and Iraq, but also in
Yemen, the Sahel, West Africa and the Central Africa region. Al-Qaida, the Haqqani
Network, Jaish-e-Mohammad and Lashkar-e-Taiba continue to flourish and operate
with impunity in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region. The modus operandi of ISIL
has also changed, as is evident from the lone-wolf attacks occurring in Europe.
That changed and reinvigorated ISIL poses a new set of challenges to our collective
efforts in our fight against ISIL and terrorism.
The Secretary-General’s report also provides an account of the activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K), including the appointment
of its new leader, Shahab al-Mujahir. He has close links with the proscribed Haqqani
Network and earlier operated in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region as an Al-Qaida
commander. It is essential that we do not lose sight of the ease with which the
proscribed Haqqani Network and its supporters, especially with support from the
Pakistani authorities, have worked with prominent terrorist organizations, such as
Al-Qaida, ISIL-K, et cetera, in South Asia.
21-0206015/36

S/2021/140

In our view, the Secretary-General’s report on ISIL should also cover activities
of the proscribed terrorist entities under the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions regime,
such as Lashkar-e-Taiba and other Pakistan-based terror groups, including Jaish-eMohammad, and front organizations that raise funds for their activities. The world
is fully aware that such groups also perpetrate terrorist activities from safe havens in
Pakistan, including through violent attacks in Afghanistan, which have disrupted the
peace process. We are also witnessing the relocation of terror groups to Afghanistan,
especially in Kunar and Nangarhar provinces, across the Durand Line. To not name
them in the report is doing a disservice, as it gives only a partial and biased view of
the situation in the region.
For the United Nations system to effectively address the threats posed by
terrorists, I would like to reiterate the urgent need to implement the eight-point
action plan that India’s External Affairs Minister, Mr. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar,
proposed to the Security Council on 12 January (see S/2021/48, annex V). First, we
must summon the political will, and should not allow terrorism to be justified or
terrorists to be glorified. Second, there must be no double standards. Terrorists are
terrorists. No distinction should be made as to whether they are good or bad. Third,
no blocks or holds should be placed on listing requests without any reason. Fourth,
we must discourage exclusivist thinking. Fifth, we must enlist and delist objectively,
not for political or religious considerations. Sixth, we must recognize the linkage
with organized crime. Seventh, we must support and strengthen the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF). Eighth, we must provide greater funding to the UNOCT.
It is therefore imperative to collectively build on those principles in ensuring
that we are able to defeat the scourge of terrorism for good. We welcome the global
programmes launched by UNOCT to assist Member States in building their capacities
to prevent and counter terrorism, and we acknowledge the direct utility of the United
Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme and the Global Programme against
Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism to prevent
and detect the travel of foreign terrorists and the funding of terrorist entities,
respectively. We also believe that enhanced United Nations coordination with the
FATF would go a long way towards effectively countering terrorism. However, we
ask UNOCT to tread carefully on efforts by countries to change the narrative on
terrorism to suit their narrow ends and undermine our collective efforts.
We also attach importance to the role played by UNOCT in building the
capacity of Member States both through its capacity-building arm, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and through its work with other United Nations agencies
in the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. India also contributed
to the United Nations trust fund for counter-terrorism in order for UNOCT to
implement capacity-building projects in East and Southern African countries on
border management and countering the financing of terrorism.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. India has been at the forefront of global
counter-terrorism efforts, has taken part in all major global initiatives against
international terrorism and is a party to all United Nations sectoral conventions
relating to terrorism.

16/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank our two briefers this morning, Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx, for their excellent briefings.
Acts of terrorism preoccupy and horrify all of us. We believe that it is absolutely
critical that the Security Council address threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. What should unite all of us here is our determination to
counter terrorism.
For Ireland, human rights must remain at the core of that response. Human
rights violations can drive radicalization and contribute to the growth of terrorism
and violent extremism. We believe all measures taken to combat terrorism
should comply with international law, including international humanitarian law,
international human rights law, international refugee law and the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly. We are vigilant that the introduction
of emergency measures by States to reduce the spread of the coronavirus disease
does not compromise human rights, and we would welcome further elaboration on
that specific issue in the next report of the Secretary-General.
We welcome the initiatives outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/98) to support and protect the rights of victims of terrorism by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including ensuring justice. However, prosecuting
terrorists for gender-based crimes, especially crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence, clearly remains particularly challenging. That is an area where frankly, we
clearly must do better.
Likewise, the trends that we see regarding female perpetrators of terrorist acts
underline the need to incorporate a gender perspective into counter-terrorism law.
Importantly, we also need to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in counter-terrorism processes.
I would also like to acknowledge the positive and, indeed, important role
that young people can play as agents of change. They can play a role in countering
terrorism and violent extremism.
We fully recognize the need to target the sources of terrorist funding. However,
there is also a responsibility on all Member States to ensure that the measures
adopted do not have a negative impact on the work of humanitarian and civil society
actors as they do their work on the ground to support and assist the most vulnerable.
We remain very concerned at the continued high numbers of attacks against
civilians by ISIL and affiliated groups, including across West Africa and the
Sahel. We would welcome further reporting and further analysis of those differing
and challenging environments, looking at the factors that underpin the growing
relationships and linkages between ISIL and affiliated groups.
The surge in online propaganda during the pandemic represents a very worrying
development. Terrorists, including ISIL, clearly and blatantly abuse the Internet
and social media platforms to radicalize and recruit. They use them to promote
hate, incite violence and finance their activities. A multi-stakeholder approach
that includes Government, industry and civil society partners is instrumental in
combating that abuse.
For its part, the European Union has made progress in the area of illegal
content, including with legislation to address the dissemination of terrorist content
online, which is now in the final stages of its adoption. In December 2020, the
21-0206017/36

S/2021/140

European Commission proposed the Digital Services Act, which constitutes a
comprehensive reform of the treatment of illegal content online. It includes measures
setting out a clear and uniform set of due diligence obligations for online service
providers, which will ensure the safety of users online. In addition to supporting
European Union initiatives, Ireland intends to legislate for a robust regulatory
framework to tackle the spread of illegal and harmful online content through a new
online safety commissioner.
The Secretary-General’s comprehensive report and the briefings that we
received this morning signal the challenges we face. Conf lict zones across Africa
and the Middle East have seen a concerning resurgence of terrorist activity and,
as our societies reopen after the pandemic, we will need greater vigilance to
counter terrorism.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001)
and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we believe that the most
effective way to commemorate the anniversary is for the Council to ensure a United
Nations counter-terrorism framework that is effective and grounded in human rights
and international law.

18/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
Kenya appreciates the leadership of the United Kingdom in organizing this
important open debate on threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, Assistant
Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx, for briefing the Security Council on the twelfth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace and security (S/2021/98) and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States to counter that threat.
Kenya takes this opportunity to note a few issues from the report that are of
concern with regard to the global threat posed by ISIL.
The impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the evolution of the
threat of terrorism, including increased activity by terrorist networks, especially
ISIL, so as to continue their online and offline propaganda machinery, will have
grave repercussions.
The economic crises caused by the pandemic are making economic conditions
tougher for the population and offering more opportunities for disenchantment and
division. We observe that terrorists can exploit such conditions to spread their toxic
ideology for recruitment and radicalization. In Africa, especially in conflict zones,
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham and their affiliates, splinter groups
and copycats are expanding recruitment and radicalization into violent extremism
conducive to terrorism.
We are concerned by a resurgent Al-Shabaab, which is adapting to the
COVID-19 crisis by establishing phony humanitarian facilities to recruit and
radicalize in the guise of distributing food and other aid items in Somalia. The
activities of terror groups like Al-Shabaab have surged due to increased avenues for
funding, including illegal taxation, extortion and criminal activity and remittances
from abroad. In the light of those and other challenges identified in the report, Kenya
would like to draw on its experience to propose the following.
We must address terrorism financing and radicalization networks regionally
and globally by tightening financial regulations and establishing strong public
financial management systems. We must also enhance national mechanisms for
freezing the assets of individuals accused of engaging in terrorist activities.
We must ensure that the Council’s efforts to support ceasefires, political
negotiations, elections and reconciliation must take steps — not only military —
to protect the process from those groups. The Council must understand that their
violence advances an ideological and political view that can spread and destroy
peace, sometimes by pretending to go along with a peace process.
Countries need to learn from one another, particularly countries that share
many features. South-South cooperation is critical and can be promoted by the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in Kenya, which we believe should
receive every support.
We must also increase counter-terrorism capacity-building and funding to
African States to address the spectre of expanding ISIL affiliates in the continent.
We must promote counter-narratives to curb the spread of terrorist ideology.
Amid the COVID-19 environment, security agencies need to stay alert to the
21-0206019/36

S/2021/140

continuing threat posed by ISIL and maintain constant monitoring of online and
offline chat rooms. We therefore call on more countries and companies to adopt the
Christchurch Call to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist content online.
Finally, Kenya urges the international community to remain vigilant against
terrorism inspired by Al-Qaida and ISIL. These groups are like an ominous shadow
looming over the entire world and over our collective aspiration to live under a rulesbased order. They intend nothing less than the destruction of that order. Their ability
to project their worldview and their operational ability to exploit national and local
rifts should never be underestimated.
Any attempt to treat them as normal political actors is a dangerous misperception
of their deep commitment to their cause and their embrace of temporary ceasefires to
advance their positions. Any such attempt, which Kenya considers very ill-advised,
should be attempted when counter-terrorism is ascendant. Even then, there should
be strict red lines that never cede ground on the equality and freedom of women,
freedom of speech and media and freedom of religion between and within religions.
Moreover, tough sanctions should be maintained until there is certainty that they
have ceased their military and ideological operations.
The Security Council led the world after 9/11 by insisting that all countries
adopt strict counter-terrorism approaches. It should stick by that mission, which
is nowhere near complete, instead of inadvertently creating dangerous grey areas
where doubt can be cast on the global stance against terrorism.

20/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, for their briefings.
Mexico takes this opportunity to make the following comments in the light
of the twelfth report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/98) on the threat posed by the
Islamic Stat in Iraq and the Levan (ISIL) to international peace and security, and will
focus its intervention on four aspects.
First, on the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic on efforts to address
terrorism, it is indeed worrisome that terrorist groups are taking advantage of the
crisis generated by the pandemic to reinforce the spread of their hate messages
online. We must ensure that counter-terrorism efforts do not encroach on or limit the
space that should be occupied by public health authorities. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern that the long-term economic and social effects of the pandemic
will undermine efforts to address terrorism and agree with his assessment that
strategies to prevent and address its structural causes must be strengthened.
Secondly, we must address the humanitarian situation in detention centres in
conflict zones, as well as the repatriation of foreign fighters. The situation in detention
centres where ISIL family members, including foreign fighters, are held is also of
concern. Those people there are being denied fundamental human rights, including
protection, access to health services, shelter, water, sanitation and education — a
situation that is exacerbated by the constraints on humanitarian assistance caused
by the pandemic. It is no small matter, for example, that 80 per cent of the people in
Al-Hol, in Syria, are women and children.
We join the call issued by United Nations experts, on 8 February, to 57 States
to speed up efforts to repatriate their nationals, in full compliance with international
human rights law, and to facilitate their full psychosocial reintegration, with special
attention to the gender-based trauma suffered by women and girls.
Thirdly, we need criminal justice and accountability for crimes and genderbased violence perpetrated by terrorists. We note with great concern that the
report indicates that such crimes, especially those of sexual violence, remain
unprosecuted and unpunished. Given the profound impact those criminal acts have
on individuals and on the social fabric, we believe this should be a priority in
counter-terrorism strategies.
This, in turn, reinforces the need for a comprehensive gender perspective. In
that regard, we congratulate UNESCO on the launch of the project on the prevention
of violent extremism through education, with a focus on the social constructs of
masculinity and femininity. We hope that this effort can be taken forward globally.
Finally, we must remain vigilant against terrorist financing. Preventing the
financing of terrorist groups remains key to curtailing their efforts. However, we
must ensure that measures taken to that end do not have a negative impact on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. There is an urgent need to deepen the dialogue
among Member States, the various entities of the United Nations system, civil
society and private actors, especially financial institutions, in order to find practical
solutions to the challenges on the ground. The twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) provides an opportunity to incorporate that dimension and
21-0206021/36

S/2021/140

to launch a new phase in the fight against the financing of terrorism. It should be
stressed that the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, as the main legal instrument in force in this field, which enjoys almost
universal participation, should be the cornerstone of our efforts.

22/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate. I would also like
to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle Coninsx for the thoroughness of
their briefings. I also thank the Secretariat for the preparation of the twelfth report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/98) on threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts and the support that the United Nations provides to Member
States to help them better address those threats.
My delegation welcomes the positive developments observed in 2020 in the
fight against terrorism, which have resulted in the neutralization of several senior
commanders of terrorist groups in Iraq, Syria and Africa. We owe those successes
both to the offensive strikes carried out by various international counter-terrorist
military coalitions and the softer actions of the relevant United Nations entities
aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to implement their strategies
for the prevention and suppression of terrorist acts, in accordance with international
law and conventions.
Despite those victories, we remain concerned about the resilience and
adaptability of the Islamic State organization, which increased its efforts throughout
2020 to make timely use of the vulnerabilities resulting from the global health
crisis of the coronavirus disease pandemic in order to reorganize and rebuild its
external operational capacity, lost since the defeat of its last stronghold in Syria, in
March 2019.
To achieve that, the organization relies on dormant cells and affiliated groups
in several parts of the world, including the African continent. In order to carry
out their dirty work, the terrorists take advantage of the weak defence systems of
African countries, the precariousness of their populations and the porous nature of
their borders. Intercommunal conflicts and political instability in these countries are
also aggravating factors.
In the Sahel, for example, in spite of offensive strikes carried out by the forces
of the region and their partners, the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara continues
to threaten the peace of the populations living in proximity to the shared borders of
the three countries — Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso. As for the Boko Haram and
Islamic State West Africa Province groups, they still maintain a disruptive capacity
and represent the main threats in the Lake Chad basin region.
In the eastern part of the continent, Al-Shabaab, the Islamic State subsidiary
in Somalia, maintains a connection with affiliates of the terrorist group the Islamic
State Central Africa Province, which continues to carry out deadly attacks against
civilians and military personnel in Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and, most recently, on 14 October, in Tanzania.
Furthermore, we note that the socioeconomic impact of the coronavirus
pandemic in African countries could, in the medium- or long-term, aggravate the
existing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorist ideologies and widen their
recruitment ground. It is therefore important that the international community take
all the necessary measures to support the efforts of African States to prevent terrorists
from taking advantage of social fractures and other vulnerabilities exacerbated by
the pandemic.
21-0206023/36

S/2021/140

The fight against terrorism is not only a matter for the military. It also requires
States to take into account other equally important measures. Those measures may
target, for example, behaviour and activities that may facilitate the financing of
terrorism, such as corruption and money laundering, the freezing of terrorist assets,
the development of deradicalization programmes and projects for the rehabilitation
or social reintegration of former terrorist detainees and the control of the Internet to
prevent its use for terrorist purposes.
I would like to commend the outstanding commitment of all relevant United
Nations entities, particularly the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
which have been able to find the necessary alternative mechanisms despite these
difficult times, thereby enabling them to ensure the continuity of United Nations
support for the efforts of Member States through innovative procedures, distance
evaluation, online training and the organization of virtual events.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country’s conviction that the fight
against terrorism requires the commitment of all. The international community has
a duty to keep its commitment and solidarity alive in the face of this global threat.
States must preserve the momentum that made it possible to defeat the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, because only in this way can the same victory be won in the
various regions of the world that have been hard hit by this terrible scourge.

24/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
Let me start by thanking the briefers for their presentations, and the SecretaryGeneral for his highly informative report (S/2021/98). Norway remains determined
to continue the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) with
our international partners in the Global Coalition against Da’esh. We also continue
to support the Organization’s leading role on preventing and countering all forms
of terrorism.
We remain concerned about ISIL’s continued foothold in Syria and Iraq
and its capacity to recruit followers and plan and conduct terrorist attacks. We
strongly condemn the suicide attack in Baghdad on 21 January, for which ISIL
claimed responsibility.
We are equally concerned to see that ISIL and affiliated groups — or groups
driven by the same ideology — continue to spread around the world, including in
the Sahel, West Africa, and the Lake Chad region. These groups also maintain a
presence in and around Afghanistan, which poses a threat to regional peace and
stability. Experience has repeatedly shown that ISIL and affiliated groups exploit
existing conflicts and vulnerabilities in States and within populations, thereby
causing a vicious cycle of further destabilization. Going forward, we need to work
preventively and in a comprehensive manner. I wish to highlight the following points.
First, we need to address the root causes of radicalization, including factors
leading to grievances, marginalization, exclusion and injustice. Secondly, we must
address the conflicts and complex vulnerable security situations that allow terrorist
organizations to establish a presence. Thirdly, as an underlying driver for instability
and conflict, climate change is an area of growing concern in many parts of the
world and should be factored into our responses.
The increasing trend of online radicalization to all forms of violent extremism
is highly worrisome. It has likely been exacerbated by a surge in online propaganda
during the pandemic. Action is urgently needed, including through a whole-ofsociety approach. The inclusion and support of private technology companies will be
key. We need to prevent ISIL and other terrorist groups from raising funds, including
through new methods such as crowdfunding and the use of cryptocurrencies or
virtual assets.
Our approaches to counter-terrorism must be comprehensive. Women’s efforts
to promote prevention, stabilization and deradicalization at all levels of society
needs to be at the forefront of our action plans. Counter-terrorism efforts cannot be
an excuse to reduce civic space or humanitarian access. We cannot overemphasize
that States’ national security practices must comply with international law, including
respecting and protecting human rights. Furthermore, sexual and gender-based
violence is too often used as a weapon of war and a tactic of terrorism. It is essential
to provide health services to survivors, including sexual and reproductive services
and psychosocial support.
Evidence frequently shows that torture leads to false confessions, which result
in false information. It is therefore of the utmost importance that the gathering of
counter-terrorism intelligence take place in a non-coercive, human rights-compliant
manner. Norway is a long-standing supporter of developing manuals and training on
that method, including equipping practitioners in the security sector with the best
tools to ensure they can effectively do their jobs. The sharing of information through
21-0206025/36

S/2021/140

international police and security cooperation, such as INTERPOL’s databases, is
also important.
In conclusion, I wish to refer to the burials that took place this week of
the 103 members of the Yazidi community killed by ISIL. The images of lines of
coffins and grieving families, including Nadia Murad, stand as a very real reminder
of what is at stake in our international fight against terror, of the importance of
accountability and of the weight of our words and the commitments we have made
in this forum today.

26/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex XII
Statement by Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
Today, on 10 February, Russia marks Diplomats’ Day — our professional
holiday. This is not an invitation to congratulate ourselves, however. On the contrary,
I would like to congratulate Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. Before assuming
his office, he was a prominent Russian diplomat, and I would extend my warmest
wishes to him.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Coninsx for their effective leadership of their respective entities in
monitoring terrorists and providing counter-terrorism assistance to States in the
complicated context of today’s world. Terrorists make use of the global pandemic
and its related socioeconomic perturbations to win new adherents. They actively
use the Internet for these purposes. The leaders of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) are using web resources to manage ISIL cells and combat units and
promote their narrative.
We agree with Secretary-General’s assessments of the threat posed by ISIL.
The report before us (S/2021/98) clearly demonstrates that this terrorist organization
is retaining its positions in several of the world’s regions. The ISIL threat is gaining
momentum in the Sahelo-Saharan-Saharan zone: in the south-east of Mali, the
northern areas of Burkina Faso and the western regions of the Niger. The so-called
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara proceeds with the goal of creating an Islamic
“caliphate”. With militants gaining strongholds in Central Africa, there remains a
threat that they might penetrate countries of the Southern African region. A rather
complicated situation is unfolding in Mozambique, where militia leaders seek to
seize gas fields to ensure a source of sustainable financing.
ISIL suffered a considerable defeat in Syria. However, the terrorist threat
remains in the country, owing, first of all, to the presence of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
a group that counts among its members approximately 15,000 militants, and its main
forces are concentrated in Idlib, western Aleppo and north-east Latakia. Hurras AlDin, a group that counts among its adherents about 9,000 militants, at least half of
whom are foreign terrorist fighters from the Middle East and North Africa, also
poses a serious threat to Syria.
Speaking of Syria, the problem of repatriating foreign terrorist fighters and
their family members, especially minor children, has grown to its fullest expression.
Unfortunately, a number of these fighters’ countries of origin prefer to turn a blind
eye to the issue. A vivid example of this is the problem of Al-Hol camp, which for
several years now has been mentioned in one report of the Secretary-General after
another. In order to solve the problem of Al-Hol camp, States whose nationals are in
the camp must establish stable interaction with Syria’s legitimate authorities.
Russia is closely cooperating with the authorities of Syria and Iraq to establish
the whereabouts of Russian minors there and ensure that they get back home. At the
end of December 2020, a humanitarian operation repatriated 19 children, whose ages
ranged from 3 to 15. Since December 2018, 274 children have returned to Russia
from conflict zones: 122 from Iraq and 152 from Syria. At present, documents have
been prepared for another 96 children now living in refugee camps in Syria. We call
on States to make every effort to save the children from involvement in the cycle of
violence perpetrated by terrorists.
21-0206027/36

S/2021/140

It is no less important for there to be full-fledged cooperation in holding
foreign terrorist fighters accountable. In the first instance, there must be cooperation
with the States on whose territory terrorist crimes have been committed. Instead,
we are witnessing attempts by some States to create quasi-legal mechanisms to
cooperate with individuals and entities that are not authorized to administer justice.
We cannot fail to mention the problem of pseudo-humanitarian organizations
created by Western special services. Instead of pursuing their proclaimed noble goals,
they are used for provocation and the incitement of conflicts. The White Helmets,
who are closely linked to terrorists, mainly those from Jabhat Al-Nusra, are a sad
example of this phenomenon. The financing of that organization has not stopped.
Remarkably, after the defeat of ISIL in Syria, members of the White Helmets were
transferred to neighbouring countries, with Western sponsors promising to transport
them. But apparently things got bogged down. Now there is some concern that these
so-called humanitarians are inspiring terrorist activity in their new locations.
ISIL positions in Afghanistan are still strong, which is why the terrorist and
drug threats are spreading from Afghanistan to other countries in the region and
beyond. Despite the efforts of national enforcement authorities, which have been
taken with the help and direct participation of a foreign military contingent, there
are no signs of stabilization of the situation at this time.
Speaking of countering terrorism in Afghanistan, we should recall the crimes
committed there by foreign military contingents and the personnel of private military
entities. Those crimes must be investigated and the guilty held accountable.
In conclusion, we would like to say that the fight against ISIL is yielding
results. While today we cannot honestly speak of ISIL creating a terrorist
caliphate, the group is still striving to adapt to the changing environment and
poses a real threat. Terrorists benefit from a lack of unity among States, and from
those States’ contradictions. We should not forget that ISIL evolved from the
illegitimate use of force on a territory of a foreign State and illegal cross-border
arms deliveries. States must stay united, cooperate under the coordination of the
United Nations and cast aside their disagreements if they are to counter ISIL in
accordance with their obligations set forth in resolutions of the Security Council and
international conventions.
Furthermore, United Nations mechanisms and related technical assistance
programmes must share tasks to consolidate progress in countering ISIL. Accordingly,
the report of the Secretary-General highlights the importance of human rights and
gender aspects in United Nations programmes and initiatives. While these aspects
are indeed important, the balanced approaches set forth in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy needs to be preserved.

28/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex XIII
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah
DeShong
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General
Coninsx for their informative briefings. Their ongoing endeavours to ensure a
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council are critical to our efforts aimed
at maintaining international peace and security.
The transnational threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and other terrorist groups demands urgent attention. In order to mitigate
and counter this looming threat, States Members of the United Nations and the
international community must enhance coordination and adapt tools to properly
confront the challenges of today.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply concerned about the
ever-evolving threat of ISIL’s activities in different regions of the world, from the
Middle East and Africa to Europe and Asia. In that regard, effective international
cooperation in gathering and sharing information and intelligence with respect to
emerging threats is required to better anticipate changes and prepare responses. To
that end, we commend the joint efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in facilitating the delivery of
counter-terrorism-related technical assistance to Member States, in accordance with
resolution 2395 (2017).
It is of paramount importance for Member States to collectively address
the ongoing challenges presented by foreign terrorist fighters. In addressing the
complex issues related to these fighters, Member States must coordinate and build
on efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international level, in accordance
with international law, particularly human rights, humanitarian and refugee law.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/98) reflects, a significant
number of children affiliated with ISIL have been detained in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic and in Iraq. We reaffirm our support for those Member States
involved in the rehabilitation and reintegration of repatriated children and urge
States to share good practices and lessons learned from the successful repatriation
of their nationals from core conflict zones.
More remains to be done to better address terrorist financing. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has compounded persistent difficulties faced by Member States
in countering the financing of terrorism, bringing new challenges relating, inter
alia, to increased reliance on online transactions and reduced direct contact with
customers. It is our firm belief that compliance with counter-terrorism provisions
can be addressed through better regulation. Equally, initiatives to combat the
financing of terrorism must be designed in such a way as to bolster, rather than
undermine, legitimate socioeconomic activity. De-risking in the financial sector
should be grounded in mutual collaborative agreements that effectively address
terrorist financing, while at the same time protecting the banking industries in
affected countries against negative economic pressures.
Let me conclude by reiterating the obligation of the Security Council as the
global body charged with maintaining international peace and security. Our mission
should be to counter ISIL and the broader threat of terrorism by working closely with
partners to keep the world safe, blocking ISIL funds in a sensible and targeted way
and mitigating the effects of terrorist propaganda on people around the globe. We
must remain united and effective in our efforts aimed at combating the scourge of
violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
21-0206029/36

S/2021/140

Annex XIV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Head of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, for their comprehensive briefings.
Today, as we discuss a new report (S/2021/98) on the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), the global situation remains dire as a result of the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19)pandemic, which has swept every country and
overshadowed various aspects of international peace and security, including the
issue of terrorism.
As the repercussions of the pandemic persist, the terrorist threat has grown
around the world, particularly in conflict zones. ISIL, despite its military defeat in
Iraq and Syria, is still trying to exploit the security and health situations to reorganize
its ranks, restore its capabilities on the ground and spread terrorist propaganda,
especially online.
There is no doubt that the impact of the pandemic will extend to areas not
stricken by conflict as well, given the medium- and long-term economic and social
implications of COVID-19, which, if not addressed, will help to exacerbate the
conditions that fuel terrorism and violent extremism.
The financing of terrorism remains a major concern, as stated in the report
of the Secretary-General. ISIL and Al-Qaida possess significant cash resources,
especially since terrorist organizations have come to rely on organized criminal
activity, including trafficking in persons and drugs, illegal trafficking in oil
resources, weapons, kidnappings, extortion and other criminal acts.
In that regard, the Security Council, acting in particular through the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015,) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), AlQaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, should devote
more attention to, and follow up on, this issue, as well as continue to help States
resolve the problems they face in combating the financing of terrorism, particularly
with respect to the use of modern technologies by terrorists, the remittance system,
digital and encrypted currencies and informal financial services providers.
Tunisia is deeply concerned about the growth of terrorism and violent
extremism in Africa, particularly in West Africa and the Sahel region, where terrorist
groups are taking advantage of conflicts and fragile social, economic and security
conditions to expand their activities in the region. Sending terrorists and mercenaries
into conflict zones has helped to ignite and prolong conflicts, complicating the
peacebuilding process.
In that context, Tunisia follows with grave concern reports that there are
numerous terrorist fighters in Libya, which will pose an additional threat to the
security of neighbouring countries and the Sahel region. Tunisia welcomes the road
map adopted by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis. We hope that the
road map will help end the conflict, thereby restoring security and stability and
eradicating terrorism in the region. We also look forward to the implementation of
the ceasefire agreement. That includes ensuring the departure of all foreign fighters
and mercenaries from Libya.
30/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Tunisia is equally concerned about the growth of terrorism perpetrated by
far-right groups, whose threats are increasing more rapidly than ever before. Those
groups, in turn, seek to exploit the pandemic to spread conspiracy theories and racist
ideology based on xenophobia and hatred of minorities.
Throughout its democratic transition, Tunisia has worked to bring its national
legislation into line with the international legal framework, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in order to ensure that the fight against terrorism is
effective and fully compliant with the principles of human rights and that fundamental
freedoms are protected. Moreover, my country attaches the utmost importance to
promoting international and multilateral cooperation, partnering with civil society
and strengthening the role of youth and women. Tunisia sought to make those
priorities the focus of the high-level meeting that the Security Council convened in
January (see S/2021/48) to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
In that context, I welcome the adoption by the Council of the presidential
statement (S/2021/PRST/1) in which it reaffirmed its steadfast engagement in
strengthening the unified and coordinated international response to the scourge of
terrorism, particularly by building the capacity of States, addressing the underlying
conditions conducive to violent extremism and terrorism, adopting a participatory
approach and respecting international human rights standards, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
Lastly, Tunisia stands ready to continue working this year, on during which
counter-terrorism will take centre stage, with all relevant States, United Nations
entities and various influential actors in important upcoming activities, such as the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the renewal
of the mandates of both the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. We hope that will
contribute to strengthening multilateral cooperation and achieving our collective
goal of a world free of terrorism.

21-0206031/36

S/2021/140

Annex XV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I join others in condemning this morning’s attack on the 26 United
Nations peacekeepers from Togo serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We wish all those injured a swift and
complete recovery.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/98) underscores, Da’esh continues
to pose a global threat. Despite territorial losses, the group remains able to inflict
deadly harm in Syria and Iraq. We are concerned particularly by the camps for
internally displaced persons highlighted in the report. The United Kingdom
facilitates the return of unaccompanied or orphaned children on a case-by-case basis
and subject to national security concerns. But those who have fought for or supported
Da’esh should face justice for their crimes in the most appropriate jurisdiction, often
where those crimes were committed.
Further afield, we are concerned about Da’esh’s presence worldwide,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Its online recruitment and incitement must also
be tackled. The United Kingdom remains an active member of the Global Coalition
against Daesh. We co-lead coalition efforts to tackle the propaganda threat.
At the United Nations level, the United Kingdom will continue to advocate
for increasing focus on preventing terrorists’ misuse of the Internet and aviation
security, as well as emerging threats beyond Da’esh such as right-wing terrorism.
We will also emphasize the need to protect and promote human rights and the rule
of law while countering terrorism, and we will prioritize prevention and whole-ofsociety approaches.
I want to conclude by associating myself with the comments made by the
representative of France in defence of the White Helmets. We are used to hearing
these slurs in our Syria debates and have responded in those meetings. It is rather sad
to hear it raised in a serious debate on counter-terrorism.

32/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex XVI
Statement by the Acting Alternate Representative for Special
Political Affairs of the Permanent Mission of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Jeffrey DeLaurentis
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant-Secretary-General
Coninsx for their briefings and thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities for
their efforts on the report (S/2021/98).
Under President Biden, the United States is committed to working with the
Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) to ensure
that that terrorist group is defeated on a lasting and comprehensive basis.
ISIS remains a serious threat. The group exploits instability in Iraq and Syria,
demonstrates intent to execute attacks abroad and continues to inspire terrorist
attacks from sub-Saharan Africa to the Asia-Pacific theatre. Preventing a resurgence
of ISIS in Iraq and Syria, as well as by its affiliates and networks beyond the Middle
East, remains a priority of the United States Government along with our partners and
allies in the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS.
Since the fall of the physical caliphate in Iraq and Syria, the threat posed by
ISIS and its affiliates has continued to evolve, and as an international community we
must continually adapt our understanding of the threat and our efforts to combat it.
The Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS remains focused on eradicating ISIS
through four main, non-military lines of effort: counter-financing; countermessaging; detention, repatriation and accountability for crimes and abuses of
foreign terrorist fighters; and stabilization of areas liberated from ISIS.
We continue to monitor the alarming situation of the tens of thousands of
suspected foreign terrorist fighters remaining in conflict zones. We watch with
concern as women and children languish in camps in dire conditions with little
access to education, increasing the potential for their radicalization. The global
threat from ISIS will grow if the international community does not repatriate their
citizens. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the 1267 Monitoring Team to closely monitor that threat and to continue to
guide the United Nations Office of Counter-terrorism’s prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration initiative.
Beyond being the best option from a security standpoint, repatriation is also
simply the right thing to do. It is estimated that 90 per cent of children in the camps
are under 12 and 50 per cent under 5. They have limited access to food, medical care,
clean water and other basic services. Education is almost non-existent. They cannot
possibly live up to their potential under those conditions.
Beyond conflict zones, there is a surge in the threat posed by ISIS affiliates
around the world, especially on the African continent. It is alarming but not
unexpected to see those affiliates across Africa working together. That poses a
danger to us all.
We look forward to working with our partners in the 1267 Committee to
continue tackling that changing threat. The Committee has already designated six
ISIS affiliates operating in Africa, the Middle East and Central and East Asia. We
hope to see further affiliates, including more African affiliates, designated in the
coming months.
21-0206033/36

S/2021/140

While the world rallies to respond to the serious challenges posed by
the coronavirus disease, terrorists are exploiting the pandemic to disseminate
disinformation to garner support for their causes and advance their agendas.
Terror groups such as ISIS are adapting their messages to undermine confidence in
Government, threaten legitimate governance and provoke violence.
We must continue to work together to fight against those threats and defeat
ISIS and its affiliates once and for all.

34/36

21-02060

S/2021/140

Annex XVII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and AssistantSecretary-General Coninsx for their informative briefings.
We highly appreciate the Secretary-General’s twelfth strategic report on
the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) to
international peace and security (S/2021/98), which presents new findings in the
development of the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh).
We take note of some positive developments in the past six months. However,
it is concerning that the threats posed by ISIL have increased and are on the rise. In
conflict zones, the socioeconomic fallout of the pandemic could exacerbate conditions
conducive to terrorism, including inequality, inequity, marginalization and tension.
These can be exploited by ISIL and its affiliates, which count on a resurgence.
We call on the international community to remain vigilant at all times. We
must use every means to prevent terrorists from exploiting the vulnerabilities
resulting from the global health crisis such as by colluding with organized crime
or raising funds through use of cryptocurrency. Terrorists’ use of the Internet for
propaganda and radicalization remains an acute challenge that must be fully tackled,
particularly as people are spending more time at home and online and experiencing
tremendous hardship as a result of the pandemic.
Terrorism is the common scourge of all humankind. Solidarity and cooperation
are our most effective response. The Council must remain firmly committed
to detecting and averting new threats of international terrorism. International
cooperation and technical assistance are crucial in enhancing national capacity to
monitor terrorists’ movements, detect and respond to imminent attacks, prevent their
recruitment and financing, and counter terrorist narratives.
We commend the efforts of the relevant United Nations entities to maintain
business continuity and conduct regular dialogue with Member States. We welcome
initiatives by CTED and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism to assist
Member States in countering terrorism financing in full compliance with international
law, keeping up with the increased reliance globally on online transactions.
Thousands of ISIL fighters, including foreign terrorist fighters, and their
family members remain in detention facilities in Iraq and Syria. We take note of
the alarm at and urgency regarding their unsustainable situation and the potential
security threats. The risks of escape from those facilities or disorder in the midst of
the coronavirus disease outbreak deserve prompt and effective action.
Our response and treatment of ISIL fighters and their family members must
be based on the common standards of international law and in accordance with
domestic laws. We encourage Member States and international organizations to
enhance the sharing of best practices in the prosecution, repatriation, reintegration
and rehabilitation of foreign terrorist fighters and their dependants, as appropriate,
while ensuring the best interests of the child wherever children are concerned.
Last but not least, terrorism can be rooted out only when dealt with holistically.
Comprehensive strategies to address its underlying causes, build balanced and
cohesive societies that are resilient to terrorism and radicalization, promote
sustainable socioeconomic development and a culture of peace and tolerance, and
promote national reconciliation should be advanced. A whole-of-society approach
involving all actors, including non-governmental organizations, private actors and
technology companies continues to be relevant.
21-0206035/36

S/2021/140

In conclusion, Viet Nam maintains its firm position of rejecting terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. We will continue to actively engage in advancing
the global fight against terrorism on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and our common values.

36/36

21-02060
