S/2020/1144

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 27 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefing provided by
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “The
situation concerning Iraq” convened on Tuesday, 24 November 2020. A statement
was also delivered by the representative of Iraq.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to permanent representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-16105 (E) 301120 110121

*2016105*

S/2020/1144

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Iraq, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
In my previous briefing to the Security Council (S/2020/845, annex 1), I stated
that the Government of Iraq is operating in the eye of multiple storms at once. From
the outset, I would like to emphasize that this very much remains the case.
Concerning the pandemic and its impact, several distinct, yet interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, crises — on the political, security, economic, financial, social
and, of course, sanitary fronts — continue to force the hand of the Government,
pressing it into a reactive, crisis-management mode. And, while all of us hope for the
beginning of a global recovery from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
it is clear that its devastating effects can unfortunately be expected to last.
The financial and economic situation in Iraq remains troubling, to say the
least. The economy is projected to contract by nearly 10 per cent this year. The impact
of the pandemic has wreaked further havoc on already extremely weak private sector
activity, and oil prices continue their extended slump, exerting downward pressure
on the gross domestic product and domestic revenue.
In mid-October, a long-awaited economic white paper was released. That
important document provides a very useful overview of the structural imbalances
that characterize the Iraqi economy. It also describes a variety of much-needed reform
measures and acknowledges numerous opportunities that have been squandered
since 2003. But while very few would dispute the urgency of steering Iraq towards
economic recovery and resilience, we are left wanting on how and when that may be
achieved. To put it a bit more bluntly, we are left wanting on the political game plan.
One thing is clear: without broad political consensus to transform the white
paper into reality, it risks remaining just words on a page. But let me emphasize
that serious, resolute measures to address the ongoing financial and economic crisis
cannot wait, not for a day. The Government, Parliament, political parties and others
will have to step up to the plate collectively.
With elections looming, I can only hope that urgently needed reforms,
including some very painful ones, will not be swept under the carpet. That would
only worsen Iraq’s situation, and thereby sooner or later fuel social unrest. In other
words, I very much hope that political leaders will resist the temptation to use the
electoral calendar as a reason not to deliver.
In the meantime, the Iraqi Government has seen it necessary to resort to
borrowing in order to meet its obligations for the remainder of 2020, including for
the payment of public-sector salaries. The original borrowing law, as proposed by
the Minister of Finance, had a clear objective, which was to create fiscal space to
implement reforms — the reforms needed to diversify Iraq’s economy and reduce
its dependence on oil; the reforms needed to boost economic opportunities while
advancing sustainable development; and the reforms needed to meet the aspirations
of the many Iraqis who took to the streets. However, the law, as actually amended and
adopted by Parliament, significantly limits the Government’s room for manoeuvre.
One therefore must ask whether the ends justify the means.
In addition, we must constantly be reminded of the fundamental importance
of fighting corruption, while preserving fundamental rights in the process. In other
words, any effort to reform Iraq’s economy must be accompanied by improved
governance and transparency. The prevalence of muhassassa, patronage and
clientelism also continues to hinder progress in Iraq. That too must urgently be
2/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

tackled. Otherwise public resources — indeed the hopes and aspirations of the
people of Iraq — will continue to be looted.
Moreover, the fight against the scourge of corruption and the quest for more
sustainable, inclusive forms of economic development and growth and for dignified
employment are not just economic necessities. As I have said before, they are
ultimately the best devices in any peace and security toolkit, as they provide lasting
solutions to unrest and conflict, building domestic resilience to replace constant
crisis management. At the end of the day, domestic resilience is the best defence
against any form of external interference.
Iraqis recently marked the one-year anniversary of the protests that began
in October 2019, which were a powerful expression of solidarity and patriotism by
Iraqis who demand justice and wish to build a more stable, prosperous homeland
and a moment to remember the brave souls lost. I truly hope that their shared
determination to achieve a better future continues to inspire and guide Iraq’s leaders.
As I have done many times before, I also wish to emphasize that the right
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly must be defended at every turn
throughout Iraq. The current drastically reduced levels of violence are indeed
encouraging, but Iraq’s reality remains harsh, with enforced disappearances and
assassinations continuing to play a part in that reality. In this context, I would like to
underline once again the pressing need for justice and accountability. A fact-finding
committee has now been activated. However, it has not yet resulted in a swift end to
perceived impunity.
With regard to the June 2021 elections, I would like to recall the wise
words of Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani. In my meeting with him in mid-September,
His Eminence made it clear that the early elections, if properly conducted, could
provide a peaceful path out of the ongoing suffering of the country. His Eminence
emphasized the importance of voting freely, without any pressure, and underlined
the need for integrity, transparency and observation.
I am pleased to report that Parliament recently finalized necessary electoral
legislation, and, in line with mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), we are now ramping up our technical assistance.
Iraq’s electoral institutional capacity can and must be strengthened. We
therefore ask and expect the relevant authorities to step up and think in terms of
solutions instead of obstacles. Late last week, the Iraqi Government sent a letter to
the Security Council with a request
“to obtain more support, technical assistance and electoral observation within
the framework of UNAMI support to Iraq”.
In a press conference, the Minister for Foreign Affairs explained the request and
emphasized the need to rebuild public trust and to promote participation.
I wish to underline yet once again that under all circumstances the elections
will be Iraqi-owned and Iraqi-led. Indeed, the responsibility for credible elections
lies not only with the Iraqi authorities, but with all Iraqi electoral stakeholders, all
political actors and all Iraqi citizens, who are called upon to play a greater role in
the public sphere. Animated by a patriotic desire to better their country, the people
of Iraq, in particular women and the youth, can seize this opportunity to make their
voices heard, as voters or as candidates.
Let me also use today’s briefing to reaffirm in the clearest of terms that
electoral preparations must remain free from political interference at all stages.

20-161053/33

S/2020/1144

With regard to domestic and external armed groups and spoilers, while
we welcome the decrease in attacks on diplomatic missions in recent weeks,
the deplorable rocket attacks on 17 November are another stark reminder
of the fact that much work remains to be done, including the hard work of
broad, meaningful dialogue.
For a variety of reasons, the coming months will be a delicate and crucial
period. It should be understood that any form of misinformation — all kinds of
conspiracies and/or a perceived lack of transparency or commitment — could lead
to regrettable and most counterproductive miscalculations.
Meanwhile, Iraq’s leadership continues to assert its independence and
sovereignty, seeking to maintain all channels of communication open, as it builds a
foreign policy that serves Iraq’s national interests. The centrality of Iraq in building
regional stability is a fact. It also bears repeating that Iraq must be shielded from
foreign power rivalries and that Iraqis must be given room to focus on their strength
at home.
With regard to the relations between Baghdad and Erbil, all of us will
agree that a positive and constructive relationship between federal Iraq and the
Kurdistan region is key to the stability of the whole country. However, the recent
vote in Parliament on the borrowing law has shown us once again how brittle the
relationship is.
Let us be reminded that it takes two to tango. We expect both parties to keep
their side of the bargain. We expect both parties to demonstrate transparency — be
it on revenue management or on countless other contentious issues. It should be
clear, however, that a Kurdish region public servant is not only a Kurdish region
public servant, but also an Iraqi citizen. The payment of public civil servants should
be shielded from political disputes. They cannot and should not be collectively
victimized. A solution is urgent, and political will to find a way out will once again
prove essential.
As I emphasized during my most recent briefing, constructive negotiations
between Baghdad and Erbil are hampered by unclear constitutional guidance, and
unfortunately that ambiguity is taking a daily toll on the numerous outstanding
issues. In the past 15 years, many opportunities to arrive at a clear set of principles,
rules and guidelines have been wasted, but agreement must now urgently be found
on how to enhance the federal system.
It is true that, with many other pressing issues on their plate, Iraq’s leaders
and politicians may be tempted to ignore that issue, which would be the easy way
out. However, the bitter truth is that, as long as no lasting solutions are found, the
relationship will not get any better. The opposite will be the case.
The desire of the Iraqi Government to rapidly resolve internal displacement
is both understandable and justified. However, in the absence of sufficient durable
solutions, serious concerns around the planning and implementation of camp closures
and consolidation have come to the fore in recent weeks. While we fully understand
that the Iraqi authorities are working under tremendous time pressure, it must be
clear that camp closures should not lead to another crisis — for instance, in the form
of secondary displacement, which is already occurring.
In coordination with the Iraqi authorities, we continue our work on
a joint durable solutions plan, while at the same time extending life-saving
services to internally displaced persons, who are unable to find safe and
affordable accommodation.

4/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

With regard to Sinjar, a hard-won agreement was signed between Baghdad
and Erbil in early October. It is an important agreement, as it could pave the way
for a new chapter for Sinjar and all Sinjaris. It represents a chapter in which the
interests of the Sinjari people will come first, reconstruction will be accelerated,
public service delivery will be improved and displaced Sinjaris will be able to
return home.
Admittedly, signing off on such an agreement is just a very first step. As I
emphasized to all stakeholders and Sinjari representatives during a joint meeting
in Mosul last week, swift, decisive and well-coordinated implementation will now
prove essential. Stable security structures are the number-one priority, followed by
a unified administration.
I will now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti, third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Despite the difficult
circumstances imposed by the pandemic, I am pleased to report that, under the aegis
of the International Committee of the Red Cross with the assistance of UNAMI,
on 16 September the Government of Iraq handed over to Kuwait the remains of
20 persons exhumed from a mass grave site in southern Iraq last January. That step
marks Iraq’s continuous commitment to bring the humanitarian file to a close.
Another important development took place two days ago. The Kuwaiti
authorities publicly confirmed the identification of the human remains of seven
persons as Kuwaiti missing nationals, thereby hopefully bringing some closure to
their families.
In conclusion, I would like to call for continued solidarity with the people
of Iraq. Of course, with the ongoing global pandemic, the many challenges faced
by all nations are well understood, and it may be easy to lose sight of Iraqis’ hopes
and dreams at this critical juncture in their modern history. But if the pandemic
has taught us anything, it is that local problems hardly ever remain local, and that
domestic trouble rapidly translates into trouble abroad. In other words, the continued
support of the Council is vital and much appreciated.

20-161055/33

S/2020/1144

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
First of all, I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
The new Iraqi Government has made the holding of early elections one of its
top priorities. We welcome all efforts by political actors to ensure that the 6 June
elections will be credible, fair, free and inclusive. We take note of the progress made
in recent months, in particular the recent signing of the electoral framework by
President Salih.
We welcome UNAMI’s commitment to provide electoral assistance to the
Government of Iraq and, in accordance with its mandate, further develop its electoral
assistance with the Independent High Electoral Commission. The holding of fair,
free and inclusive elections can pave the way towards achieving a more stable and
democratic Iraq. In that regard, Belgium once again stresses the importance of the
full, active and meaningful participation of women in this context.
When Belgium joined the Security Council two years ago, Iraq was already
at a crossroads. The political, economic and security challenges remain enormous.
There is an urgent need to make tangible progress in those areas. Continued strong
political leadership is required. As a State member of the European Union, Belgium
remains committed to helping overcome those multiple challenges.
First, the Iraqi economy remains highly dependent on oil exports. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated an already
disastrous economic situation. We support the Iraqi Government in its efforts to
diversify and support economic development, increase private-sector engagement,
implement administrative reforms and fight corruption. We welcome the recent
adoption of the white paper by the Council of Ministers.
Secondly, human rights and fundamental freedoms must be respected at all
times. The Government’s progress on compensating the victims of the violence
committed during the demonstrations that began in October 2019 is a positive step.
However, we call on the Government to continue to support the most vulnerable
people, including internally displaced persons. All camp closures must be preceded
by, and carried out with, sufficient notice and in full consultation with the
representatives of the displaced persons and humanitarian agencies.
The return of displaced persons should be safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable. We call on the Iraqi Government to work closely with international
partners, including the relevant United Nations agencies. The distribution
of humanitarian aid should always be carried out in full compliance with
humanitarian principles.
Thirdly, my country encourages the parties to implement the Sinjar agreement,
which was facilitated by UNAMI. Although many questions remain, this will be
an important test for building mutual trust. We call on the parties to capitalize on
this momentum to resolve other outstanding issues, including the discussions under
way on oil revenues. The Iraqi people deserve a political consensus to resolve the
economic impact of COVID-19.

6/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Fourthly, we note with concern that, despite the military defeat of Da’esh in
Iraq, the group continues to operate as a clandestine network and to carry out attacks.
We renew our commitment to combating terrorism as part of the international
coalition against Da’esh in collaboration with the Iraqi Government.
We are concerned about the continued violence, including the rocket attacks on
the Green Zone last week, for which the Ashab Al-Kahf militia claimed responsibility.
We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue security sector reform. Armed
non-State actors should not be allowed to operate outside of State control.
Furthermore, as Iraq opens up to neighbouring countries, with a view to
strengthening bilateral and regional relations, the fundamental principles of respect
for sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity must be respected.
Lastly, Iraqi children deserve a future. They deserve to live in security and
prosperity. My country once again underscores its support for the Government of
Iraq in addressing its many remaining challenges.

20-161057/33

S/2020/1144

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
China thanks Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and
welcomes the Permanent Representative of Iraq at today’s meeting.
Since the new Iraqi Government took office, it has achieved positive results in
promoting political transition, preparing for early elections, meeting economic and
social challenges and developing peaceful and friendly foreign relations. At the same
time, it should be noted that the persistent turbulence in the region, the rampage
unleashed by terrorist remnants and the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
have combined to raise severe challenges to the stability and development of Iraq.
In connection with relevant reports of the Secretary-General and the briefing by the
Special Representative, I wish to state the following.
First, with regard to supporting Iraq in advancing autonomously its domestic
political processes, Iraq has set a goal of holding early elections in 2021, which is
an important political agenda in Iraq. We are pleased with the steady progress of
elections preparations and the entry into force of the new electoral law. We hope
that the elections will be held without incident, thereby realizing the vision of the
Iraqi people. The international community should create a favourable environment
for this purpose, fully heed the views of Iraq and respect its ownership when
providing assistance.
China welcomes the interim arrangement reached between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government on resource and revenue
sharing and the agreement on the situation in Sinjar. It is hoped that the two sides will
strengthen dialogue and cooperation and inject new momentum into consolidating
national unity and accelerating integrated development.
Secondly, with regard to safeguarding the hard-won peace and stability,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1099), terrorist
remnants have launched numerous attacks in Iraq, causing civilian casualties. The
international community should continue to support the Iraqi side in carrying out
counter-terrorism operations, combating terrorism, dealing with the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters, bringing terrorists to justice in accordance with domestic laws and
preventing the return and spread of terrorist forces and activities.
Peace and development cannot be achieved in Iraq in the absence of a stable
neighbourhood. China commends Iraqi efforts to develop friendly and mutually
beneficial relations with countries in the region. We hope that all parties concerned
will respond to the Secretary-General’s appeal and resolve their differences
through such peaceful means as dialogue and consultations so as to continuously
enhance mutual trust and avoid the escalation of tensions. Any military actions on
Iraqi territory must be subject to the consent of the Iraqi Government, and Iraq’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity should be fully respected.
We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1089) on
the implementation of resolution 2107 (2013). We welcome the progress made both
in the search for missing Kuwaiti nationals and in terms of Iraqi compensation.
We encourage Iraq and Kuwait to further deepen cooperation pertaining to missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the national archives.
Thirdly, with regard to taking a people-centred approach to promoting
sustainable economic and social development, the important tasks for Iraq are to
8/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

deal with the COVID-19 pandemic, speed up national reconstruction and improve
the economic and humanitarian situation. The new Iraqi Government has responded
positively to people’s demands by prioritizing economic reform, improving people’s
livelihoods, addressing the pandemic and combating corruption, which we appreciate.
The international community should encourage Iraq to explore a development
path suited to its national conditions, help it fight the pandemic, rebuild key
infrastructure, achieve economic diversification, strengthen capacity-building,
protect vulnerable groups, such as women and children, and promote peace
through development.
As always, China firmly supports Iraq in safeguarding its national sovereignty,
security and stability and is helping with Iraq’s economic and social development
through practical cooperation, exemplified by the Belt and Road Initiative. In the
face of the COVID-19 pandemic, we lost no time in dispatching medical experts
and donating medical supplies to Iraq to combat the epidemic. China will continue
to work with the international community to contribute to achieving lasting peace,
prosperity and development in Iraq.

20-161059/33

S/2020/1144

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and
the commendable work she is doing with her team as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
First, we welcome the steps taken by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to move
forward the political process and hold elections in June 2021, as well as his
determination to ensure that they will be free, credible and fair. To that end, the
electoral assistance provided by UNAMI is imperative.
We hope that the House of Representatives will soon reach consensus on the
finalization of the electoral law and that the corresponding budget will be set up in a
manner that facilitates the work of the Independent High Electoral Commission and
allows for the development of the logistics for organizing early elections.
We welcome the Government’s plans to adopt a national development plan to
encourage women to hold high-level decision-making positions. We also welcome
the fact that the Government intends to adopt a law against domestic violence, given
the considerable increase in the number of related cases during the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We applaud the advocacy initiative between United Nations agencies and
Iraqi Ministries to ensure that school-age children have access to education, without
restrictions, given the high percentage of them who have met with myriad challenges
in enrolling or advancing to the next level due to the lack of documentation.
With regard to security, we are particularly concerned about escalating
regional tensions with a direct impact on Iraq. We reiterate our call on the parties to
show restraint and resolve differences through dialogue. At the same time, all States
must respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and airspace of Iraq and refrain
from using Iraqi territory as a stage for confrontation.
With respect to human rights, we strongly condemn the targeted killings
of human rights defenders during the month of August, the violence against
activists and protesters and the arbitrary arrests of journalists. We therefore
continue to call on the authorities to respect freedom of expression and the right to
peaceful demonstration.
Despite the initial steps taken by the Government, which we support, there
is a need for greater efforts by the population to ensure accountability. Impunity
significantly undermines efforts to achieve peace and restore public confidence in the
authorities. Therefore, the demand that cases of violence be thoroughly investigated
so that the perpetrators are brought to justice cannot fall on deaf ears.
We also deplore the increase in the number of terrorist attacks perpetrated
by the Islamic State in various parts of the country, as well as the various attacks
on diplomatic missions. Efforts to combat terrorism cannot be allowed to wane. We
continue to encourage the international community to strengthen cooperation in
this regard.
With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and property, we
welcome the recent progress made by the members of the Tripartite Mechanism
that led to the formal handover by Iraqi authorities of the human remains of alleged
Kuwaiti nationals. We acknowledge the commitment of the Iraqi Government and
10/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

encourage the parties to continue to strengthen collaboration and cooperation until
this issue — one of great importance to the people of Kuwait and the families of the
missing — is resolved.
In conclusion, we welcome the commitment of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi
to addressing Iraq’s economic, social and political challenges and the measures
taken to combat corruption, terrorism and the health crisis. We hope that, with the
assistance of UNAMI, the strengthening of relations at the regional and international
levels and, above all, national reconciliation among political actors, Iraq will open
the door to the development, peace and security sought by its people.

20-1610511/33

S/2020/1144

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
Estonia supports the Iraqi Government in addressing the political, security
and economic challenges that the country is facing. We also stress the need to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and call on all actors to refrain from
military action, which would threaten the stability of Iraq.
We welcomed the announcement of early parliamentary elections to take
place in June 2021. The recent ratification of the new electoral law was an important
development in the preparations and is a precondition for conducting free and fair
elections. The continued support and technical assistance of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq is of critical importance.
We acknowledge the multiple steps the Iraqi Government has already taken
towards the implementation of structural reforms. We also call the Government
to implement urgently needed economic reforms, including those proposed in the
Government’s white paper.
The establishment of a permanent committee to investigate corruption is an
essential step in countering corruption and enforcing the rule of law. Furthermore,
additional measures to bring all armed forces under State control are necessary to
increase stability in Iraq.
We commend the Iraqi Government’s announcement of its intention to
adopt a national development plan for women, as it exhibits the commitment of the
Government to advancing women’s political, economic and social empowerment
and participation.
The Government’s efforts to combat the coronavirus disease are welcome
and we, the international community, have to support these efforts where that
support is most needed. However, more attention should be paid to the impact of the
crisis on vulnerable people, including women and children, who continue to be the
most affected.
It is a positive development that the number of attacks on demonstrators
has decreased. However, it is worrisome that targeted killings of protesters have
continued, as well as violations of freedom of expression, enforced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detentions of journalists and civil society activists. We urge the
Iraqi Government to ensure the protection of human rights, including freedom of
expression and assembly, and to take concrete steps to hold perpetrators to account.
The continued support to Iraq in its fight to counter terrorism is of the utmost
importance. However, we would like to urge the Iraqi Government to halt the
execution of prisoners under the anti-terrorism law.
Finally, we commend the Iraqi Government’s efforts in preventing missile
attacks on diplomatic missions and personnel. However, we remain concerned about
the continued attacks by Shia militias.

12/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing.
The Special Representative has the full support of France. I would like to commend
the outstanding work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
under her leadership, as well as that of the entire United Nations family in Iraq.
Today I would like to address three points.
First of all, I would like to express France’s support for the Government of
Iraq, led by Mr. Al-Kadhimi, as the President of the French Republic did during his
visit to Iraq in September and again during the Iraqi Prime Minister’s visit to Paris
in October. Together with the Iraqi Government, we will continue our efforts to
mobilize the country’s regional and international partners in support of an initiative
to strengthen its stability and security.
The Iraqi authorities conduct very ambitious reforms in a context made even
more difficult by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As the Special
Representative said, these reforms are essential to meeting the legitimate aspirations
of Iraqis by modernizing the economy, reforming the Administration, strengthening
the protection of human rights and remaining steadfast in the fight against corruption.
We welcome the announcement of early elections in June 2021. UNAMI’s
support to the Iraqi authorities and the Independent High Electoral Commission
in the organization of these elections is extremely valuable in ensuring free and
transparent elections. The participation of all groups in society, in particular
young people and women, will be crucial in building the democratic future of the
country. France will contribute €1 million to fund UNAMI activities in this area. We
encourage the entire international community to work to ensure smooth elections
and full confidence in the electoral process.
We also welcome progress in the dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. The
Sinjar agreement is very promising in this regard. The health projects we endorse in
the region will also foster support for this movement to the benefit of the population.
Despite the promising announcements and progress on the ground, we remain
concerned about the attacks targeting demonstrators, members of civil society,
human rights defenders and journalists. It is imperative that the perpetrators be
prosecuted, as trust cannot be built without justice.
My second point concerns security challenges in Iraq. Terrorism ranks first
and is our common challenge. The fight against Da’esh is not over. The international
coalition’s military contribution in support of the Iraqi authorities remains crucial,
and its operational modalities can be adapted to the changing threat. The work of the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is essential in combating impunity.
It is also crucial that the Iraqi State maintains its monopoly on use of force in
the country. The action of certain armed groups is very worrisome, in particular the
unacceptable attacks on diplomatic missions. We welcome the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to stop them.
In that context, it is all the more crucial to ensure that Iraq remain unaffected
by regional tensions and that its sovereignty and territorial integrity be respected.
We therefore welcome the Iraqi Government’s strong commitment to balanced
20-1610513/33

S/2020/1144

and good-neighbourly diplomacy. The recent progress in the return of remains of
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals is a testament to that. It is important that those
actions continue.
Lastly, and this is my third point, I would like to say a word about the
humanitarian situation. Every effort must be made to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those in need of assistance in Iraq. I refer in particular
of the hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons, who must be able
to continue receiving assistance when they leave the camps. Camp closures must
be implemented in a coordinated manner and accompanied by a concrete plan to
support the return of people. This is all the more crucial as the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to spread in the country at an extremely worrisome rate.
Vaccination campaigns must scale up, given that the pandemic has led
to a 20 per cent to 30 per cent decrease in vaccination rates in the country. We
have a collective responsibility in this regard to prevent avoidable outbreaks of
polio or measles.
As mentioned by the Special Representative, there are many challenges. But
France is determined to stand with Iraq at this important time in its history.

14/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
Germany reiterates its support for the Government of Prime Minister Mustafa
Al-Kadhimi. Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi and his Government have the right
intentions and are seeking to address the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people. We
acknowledge the measures that have been undertaken so far and call upon the Iraqi
Government to continue along the path of substantial reforms. Together with the
European Union, Germany stands ready to support the Iraqi-led economic reform
process as co-Chair of the Iraqi Economic Contact Group over the course of the next
six months.
We have taken note of the request of the Iraqi Government to strengthen the
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) with regard to
the upcoming early elections. We welcome UNAMI’s support, advice and technical
assistance to Iraq in the field of electoral preparations. Germany will contribute a
total of €6 million to UNAMI’s effort, including to strengthen the capacity of the
Independent High Electoral Commission. In addition, we would welcome UNAMI
or United Nations engagement to conduct electoral observation. It is essential that
elections be held in a free, fair, inclusive and transparent manner in order to ensure
their integrity, credibility and legitimacy.
We remain deeply concerned about reports of ongoing arrests, forced
disappearances and acts of violence and intimidation against protesters, civil society
activists, human rights defenders and journalists. We urge the Iraqi Government to
ensure the protection of all peaceful protesters, civil society activists and human
rights defenders and their fundamental rights and reiterate the importance of concrete
steps to provide accountability for violence, crimes and human rights violations.
We are concerned about the short-notice consolidation and closure of camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), which precluded necessary consultations
with key stakeholders and risks leading to secondary displacement. We are
committed to working with the Government of Iraq to ensure durable solutions for
IDPs. We stand ready to work with the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
towards facilitating returns and ensuring the safe, dignified, voluntary, informed
and sustainable movement of all IDPs.
We support the call of the Secretary-General with regard to Baghdad and
Erbil to step up mutual dialogue efforts in order to reach a long-term sustainable
agreement on all outstanding issues, including natural resources, revenue-sharing
and security arrangements.
We remain concerned about the impact of regional tensions on Iraq and call
for continued de-escalation and restraint by all regional and international actors.
All differences must be resolved through diplomatic means. Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity must be respected by all its neighbours, as well as by regional
and international partners. Iraq should neither be dragged into nor become an area
for regional confrontation.
At the same time, it is essential that the continued attacks against diplomatic
missions and personnel cease immediately and that the State strengthen its control
over all weapons in the country.
As the fight against terrorism, namely, the so-called Islamic State, is not over,
cooperation between the Government of Iraq and its international partners must
continue. Otherwise, both Iraq and the international community will face a higher
risk of a resurgence of the so-called Islamic State.
20-1610515/33

S/2020/1144

In this context, we are alarmed by reports of renewed mass executions of
individuals convicted of terrorism-related crimes. While we condemn in the strongest
terms the criminal actions for which these individuals were sentenced and express
our sincere condolences to all victims and their families, we oppose the use of capital
punishment under any circumstances. We call on Iraqi authorities to refrain from any
future executions, declare a de facto moratorium on the use of capital punishment
and pursue a consistent policy towards the abolition of the death penalty.
In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait
in the search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, which enabled the
most recent progress. We encourage the Government of Iraq to continue its efforts to
resolve all outstanding issues.

16/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations, Muhsin Syihab
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her update.
My delegation recognizes that challenges persist on the journey to stability
and prosperity in Iraq, but with the determination of all stakeholders and the support
of the international community, including the United Nations, Iraq is on the right
path. I would now like to underscore the following points.
First, free, fair and credible elections, along with reform efforts, are
non-negotiable. Indonesia welcomes the serious preparations to hold credible
elections and the affirmation of that prospect by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi.
This must be a collective effort by all stakeholders, including the Government, the
Independent High Electoral Commission, the judiciary, parliamentarians and the
technical assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We further underline the continuation of the Government’s reform agenda, in
the determination to fulfil the demands and expectations of the people and improve
basic services. However, we recognize that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
impinges on the Government’s efforts on many fronts. We hope that the support of
UNAMI will make a difference in the days ahead.
Secondly, maintaining stability and security is a prerequisite for sustainable
development. We are concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continues
to launch violent attacks against civilians and diplomatic premises. It must be clear
to all that investment and sustainable development will flourish only in a stable and
secure country.
Another critical element in the pursuit of a stable and secure Iraq is the support
of all countries, regionally and globally. In this regard, Indonesia calls for greater
cooperation in countering terrorism, in accordance with international law and with
full respect for Iraqi sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Indonesia reaffirms its support to the Government in reforming the security
sector and establishing stronger ties with its regional and strategic partners. Iraq’s
spirit of good neighbourliness should be reciprocated by its neighbours, as another
hotspot in the Middle East will benefit no one.
Thirdly, progress on the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and archives should
continue. We are delighted that, despite the challenge to the Tripartite Mechanism
posed by COVID-19, progress has been made, as the repatriation of human remains
by the Government of Iraq to the Government of Kuwait on 16 September attests.
Indonesia commends the efforts made by the Government of Iraq and continued
cooperation between both countries on this issue.
The roles of UNAMI and International Committee of the Red Cross are also
significant and should be commended. We hope that the Kuwaiti forensic team can
complete the identification of human remains to bring closure to the families of the
missing. We are confident that, with the determination of all, greater progress will
be achieved.
In conclusion, the Security Council is united in supporting the people of Iraq
and all stakeholders in achieving their long-awaited dream of a stable, secure and
prosperous Iraq. This will be of advantage not only to Iraq, but to the region and rest
of the world.
20-1610517/33

S/2020/1144

Today is Indonesia’s last meeting in the Security Council on the situation in
Iraq. I therefore take this opportunity to encourage greater efforts and success on this
issue in future. I pledge Indonesia’s unwavering support to Iraqi unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and to the Iraqi people, Government
and UNAMI.

18/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her excellent briefing
and her team’s hard work in a complex environment. I would also like to welcome
the representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
Iraq is attempting to rebuild after years of conflict in a very complex
environment that has led to many internal crises, including the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, whose spread is increasing at an alarming rate. My delegation
acknowledges the efforts of the Iraqi Government to meet these challenges and
implement reforms, including in the fight against corruption, in order to steer the
country towards a brighter future.
With respect to the protection of human rights, the Niger welcomes the
progress made by the Iraqi Government in this area, although much remains to be
done. We welcome the decision to compensate demonstrators who have been injured.
However, the increase in the number of killings and attacks on human rights activists
and defenders by unidentified armed assailants remains a cause for concern.
My delegation therefore calls on the Government to take concrete steps to
honour its commitment by making operational the institution responsible for
investigating the killings of activists and other human rights defenders and bringing
perpetrators to justice. We believe that this will help ease tensions in the country and
build trust between the Government and the people.
With regard to the electoral process, the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the Independent High Electoral Commission remains
paramount, in particular with regard to strengthening the operational and logistical
capacities of the Commission. The same applies to the support of the international
community and all of Iraq’s regional and bilateral partners, with a view to ensuring
free, fair and credible elections next year.
The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must include Iraqi
women and young people. We therefore welcome the announcement made on
1 October by the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs concerning Government plans
to adopt a national development plan that would complement existing legislation on
increasing the number of women in high-level decision-making positions.
With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the
return of missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, my delegation
commends the action of the Iraqi Government on 16 September to repatriate human
remains believed to be those of Kuwaiti citizens, despite the restrictions imposed by
the COVID-19 pandemic. We commend UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their determined efforts to move this
issue forward and for their logistical support.
In conclusion, I would like to recall here that, as Iraq attempts to recover from
the deep crisis it has endured in recent years, we must not lose sight of the fact that
a victory over the Islamic State in Iraq in the Levant is not synonymous with its
elimination from the region. It is therefore ever more crucial for the global coalition
against Da’esh and the United Nations to remain vigilant and continue to support
Iraq in combating the terrorist hydra so as to thwart its hopes of re-emerging.

20-1610519/33

S/2020/1144

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federations to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing.
We closely monitor the situation in Iraq. We welcome the Government’s
intention to hold free, equitable and fair elections on 6 June 2021. We hope that the
Iraqi authorities will reach an agreement on the details of the electoral law in the
near future. Ensuring consensus among the leading political forces on the matter
remains an important part of the process.
Demonstrations demanding political and socioeconomic change are ongoing
in Iraq. We commend the efforts of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi aimed at
overcoming existing challenges, including the mobilization of resources to find a
solution to the economic crisis, countering corruption, conducting administrative
reforms, launching national dialogue at all levels and combating the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We are convinced that inclusive dialogue will help render it possible to find
solutions to the remaining internal problems. In our contacts with all of Iraq’s
political forces, we have encouraged the search for compromise solutions. Against
that backdrop, we urge all external players with interests in stabilizing the domestic
situation in Iraq to refrain from taking steps that could negatively impact that process.
Countering terrorism is key to stabilizing the situation in the country. Despite
Iraq’s progress on the counter-terrorist front, the security situation in the country
remains fragile. It is vital that all those involved in the fight against terrorism in Iraq
remain committed to respecting the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate
their actions with Baghdad.
We firmly believe that, if Baghdad and Erbil further improve their relations,
Iraq will be better able to strengthen security and effectively harness its economic
potential in the interests of the entire nation.
We support the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Its
activities can have a positive impact on the reconciliation processes while supporting
and respecting Iraq’s sovereignty.
The efforts of Baghdad and Kuwait City to promptly resolve all outstanding
issues in relation to the Iraqi-Kuwaiti file deserve our comprehensive support. Their
commitment has been demonstrated by recent progress on both sides regarding the
search and repatriation of the remains of Kuwaiti citizens.
We reiterate our coherent approach, according to which Iraq must not become
an arena for regional confrontation. The country has the right to develop mutually
beneficial relations with its neighbours. We commend Baghdad’s fundamental
position in favour of building good-neighbourly relations and its readiness to promote
de-escalation in the region, which was clearly articulated during the Council meeting
on the situation in the Persian Gulf region on 20 October (see S/2020/1037).
We call on the international community to engage in constructive cooperation
in the interest of promoting peace and stability in the entire Middle East region,
including on the basis of resolution 598 (1987). We believe that the Russian concept
for security in the Persian Gulf, which proposes a collective approach to resolving
issues in the region, remains pertinent.
20/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We extend our gratitude to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her insightful
briefing this morning.
First, we wish to join other Council members in condemning the attack that
took place just north of Baghdad over the weekend. We offer our condolences to the
Government and the people of Iraq for the lives lost.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses its support for the Government of
Iraq as it prepares for early elections next year, and recognizes the supportive role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard.
We also welcome the Government’s commitment to the empowerment of women and
the advancement of their political, economic and social participation, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1099).
The challenges of 2020 have left no one unscathed, but as leaders we
have a responsibility to assist those more vulnerable than us, wherever we can,
and assuage their suffering. In the context of Iraq, the plight of its citizens must
remain a priority. That means that the perpetrators of attacks on civilians must
be held accountable, including those responsible for attacks by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, which have resulted in numerous deaths and injuries. The
targeted killings of members of civil society, including political and human rights
activists, is unacceptable and must not be allowed to continue with impunity. It
cannot be overstated that accountability is a critical tenet of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic demands from us a
coordinated response. It is not a threat that we can successfully tackle independently.
In that regard, we recognize the role of the World Health Organization in assisting
the Iraqi Government, including their donation of ambulances to ensure that persons
in remote locations receive support.
We express concern over the impact that the virus has had on the people of
Iraq, as well as on the economy and delivery of basic services. To that end, we
recognize the United Nations country team’s efforts, which led to the completion of
the socioeconomic response plan for Iraq to bridge the gap between humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding efforts. However, it is disheartening to read in the
report of the Secretary-General that the humanitarian response plan and the COVID-19
fund remain insufficiently financed. We appeal to the international community to
step up its efforts to assist the people of Iraq during these extraordinary times.
We conclude by welcoming the continued cooperation that has taken place
between Iraq and Kuwait on the search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, particularly in the light of COVID-19-related challenges. We recognize
the roles played by UNAMI and the International Committee of the Red Cross
in supporting that process and encourage further endeavours towards resolving
the issue.

20-1610521/33

S/2020/1144

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations, Xolisa Mabhongo
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, for her briefing. South Africa supports and continues to have confidence
in her efforts.
South Africa supports UNAMI’s mandate to promote the strengthening of
the Government of Iraq and its electoral processes. We look forward to the adoption
of the election law by the House of Representatives ahead of the much-anticipated
elections on 6 June 2021.
We support the drive for an inclusive Government that will bring together all
diverse aspects of Iraqi society into its governance structures. National reconciliation
and unity remain vital in avoiding future challenges stemming from shifting
Government policies and actions. Domestic unity, cohesion and determination
are urgently needed to build resilience against narrow partisan interests, foreign
interference and criminal elements actively seeking to impede Iraq’s stability.
South Africa is pleased to witness a significant breakthrough following the
formation of the new Government headed by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi,
which pays special attention to improving public services and meeting the promises
made to the people of Iraq.
South Africa continues to call for increased and improved cooperation between
the national Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, including
the finalization of resource- and revenue-sharing agreements.
South Africa supports UNAMI and the Government of Iraq in its post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts, which provide much-needed humanitarian
assistance throughout the country, particularly during the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The spread of the pandemic in Iraq has strained an already fragile healthcare system.
Peace and security remain fundamental for Iraq to develop its infrastructure,
grow its economy and provide basic services to all its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the consolidation of the Iraqi army’s control over the entire territory
and welcomes continued support for the efforts of the Government to eradicate the
threat posed by Da’esh.
South Africa remains concerned that an increase in assaults signals a
worrisome trend that Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is steadily
re-emerging, which is a cause for both regional and global concern. We are pleased
to learn that the Iraqi security authorities have launched a campaign to control
unlicensed weapons in Baghdad and across the country’s provinces. Iraqis should
not have to live in an atmosphere of terror and intimidation.
South Africa is pleased to note that a number of leaders of the ISIL terrorist
entity have been arrested. We are also pleased by the commendable efforts of the
Government of Iraq to prevent missile attacks on diplomatic missions and the
subsequent arrests of suspects, thereby holding them accountable by way of fair
legal procedures. It is paramount to uphold standards of justice, accountability,
integrity and transparency.
We are encouraged by the collaborative effort of both the Governments of
Kuwait and Iraq to locate missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, as well as
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. We urge both countries
22/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

to work together with the relevant United Nations institutions to resolve outstanding
issues. We commend UNAMI for facilitating the transfer of the human remains
exhumed from the Shaykhiyah site in the Iraqi Samawah desert to Kuwait by making
available its air assets.
In conclusion, Iraq simply cannot and should not be an arena for conflict or a
base point for any other country’s strategy towards any of its neighbouring countries,
as Iraq aims to be an active player on the path to peacebuilding, achieving stability
and improving security opportunities. South Africa reiterates its support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq in line with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and continues to support UNAMI in the implementation of
its mandate.
We also continue to urge the United Nations and the Government of Iraq to
consider utilizing the Peacebuilding Commission in order to make greater strides in
rebuilding the country.

20-1610523/33

S/2020/1144

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her valuable briefing and her ongoing
efforts in support of Iraq.
Tunisia is closely following the positive developments in the political situation
in Iraq, in particular the Government’s continued efforts to enact reforms that meet
the demands and fulfil the aspirations of the Iraqi people, as well as the progress
made by the Government in preparing for the early elections that will take place on
6 June 2021.
While we acknowledge the importance Iraq attaches to completing the relevant
legislation and to the enactment by the Council of Representatives of the electoral
law, with a view to organizing free, fair, transparent and credible elections, we hope
that the Security Council will respond to the Iraqi Government’s desire to strengthen
the role of UNAMI so that it may provide additional support and technical assistance
and help to monitor the elections.
Tunisia welcomes the Iraqi Government’s efforts to strengthen the role and
participation of women in decision-making by adopting the National Development
Plan for the Empowerment of Women, which will have a positive impact and make a
valuable contribution to promoting national unity and stability.
Tunisia also notes with satisfaction the Iraqi Government’s efforts to combat
corruption and hold perpetrators accountable, including by establishing a permanent
committee to investigate corruption and major crimes. We hope that work will
continue to strengthen Iraqi sovereignty over border crossings, place all weapons
under State control and complete the reintegration process.
Against the backdrop of these positive developments, my delegation welcomes
the agreement between the Federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government on a temporary solution to budget transfers and encourages the parties
to continue cooperating and to step up efforts to tackle existing challenges in order
to reach a sustainable and long-term agreement on issues of common concern.
Tunisia reaffirms its commitment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, in line with the Charter of the United Nations, and calls
for dialogue and cooperation to resolve border issues. My delegation also calls on
the Iraqi Government to continue its efforts to ensure the protection of all diplomatic
missions and diplomatic personnel in Iraq.
Iraq is in a difficult economic situation because of low oil prices, on the one
hand, and the large expenditures associated with its war on terrorism, on the other.
In that connection, we welcome the efforts to address the economic and financial
crisis, and the economic reform measures that the Government has submitted to the
Council of Representatives. We urge the international community to provide Iraq
with the necessary assistance to overcome the challenges it is facing at this stage.
We express our concern about the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic
on the daily life of the Iraqi people and note the efforts made by Iraqi national
institutions, in particular, the High Committee for Health and National Safety,
to curb the spread of the epidemic and contain its effects. We also commend the
United Nations and its specialized agencies on the role that they have played in
supporting the Iraqi Government’s efforts to respond to this pandemic.
24/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

With regard to Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, Tunisia highly values the cooperation
between the two States and their tireless efforts to consolidate it further. We applaud
Iraq for its readiness to uphold its obligations, including with regard to the Kuwaiti
archives and the search for missing persons. We are satisfied with the progress that
has been made in that regard, and we hope that the effort will continue in the same
spirit of cooperation and solidarity between the two countries.

20-1610525/33

S/2020/1144

Annex XIV
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms.
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing and for highlighting the significant
challenges currently facing Iraq.
Indeed, Iraq faces a severe economic crisis. Economic reform will be critical in
ensuring Iraq’s future peace and prosperity and allowing Iraq to build back stronger
from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We took note of the steps described by the
Special Representative, and we underline the need for fast action from the Council of
Representatives to ensure that economic reform delivers for the Iraqi people.
The international community stands alongside Iraq during these difficult
times. At Iraq’s invitation, the United Kingdom hosted the inaugural meeting of the
Iraq Economic Contact Group in London earlier this year to deepen support for vital
economic reform. We welcome the fact that the follow-up meeting is going to be
taken forward by the European Union and Germany.
We also think that regional economic integration is key to economic
development and stability. We therefore welcome Iraq’s commitment to deepen
trilateral coordination and cooperation with both Egypt and Jordan.
The United Kingdom remains supportive of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi and
welcomes his commitment to holding free and fair elections in 2021, with the support
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I think we should
consider carefully how the United Nations can support the Government of Iraq’s
intention to hold credible elections in order to rebuild public trust and democracy
and to promote participation.
The United Kingdom is encouraged by improvements in the relationship
between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, including
the agreement for the Sinjar district in Ninawa governorate. That agreement offers
the prospect of return for thousands of Yazidis. It is vital that all armed groups
cooperate with its implementation and that both the Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan region of Iraq help to restore services and economic livelihoods.
We welcome Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert’s facilitation of
dialogue on the Sinjar agreement and encourage continued United Nations support to
help normalize the situation there. We urge Baghdad and Erbil to reach an agreement
on a long-term solution regarding resource- and revenue-sharing.
We remain concerned about the security situation in Iraq. It is clear that
Da’esh continues to pose a threat to the peace and security of Iraq. The United
Kingdom, like other members of the global coalition against Da’esh, is committed to
supporting Iraq and addressing that threat.
We also underline the need for dialogue and cooperation between Iraq and
Turkey to combat terrorism and ensure regional security and protect civilians. It is
unacceptable that militia attacks continue in Iraq, including in Baghdad and in Erbil.
Thy have claimed Iraqi and international lives for too long and continue to pose a
risk to Iraqis and diplomatic and military personnel. We acknowledge the efforts of
Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to strengthen security measures so that Iraqi citizens
and foreign personnel can live and work safely, but we urge the Iraqi Government to
continue to make progress in this area.

26/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

We believe the Security Council to be united in our concern over the number
of killings of members of civil society and political and human rights activists, and
we call on the Government of Iraq to do all it can to prevent such killings and bring
those who perpetrate them to justice.
Finally, we commend Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s commitment to compensate
the families of the victims of violence against protesters. However, justice for victims
is critical. We call on the Government of Iraq to ensure credible investigations into
the violence and to ensure that those responsible are held to account.
The Special Representative touched on the issue today in her comments,
but the Iraqi Government’s commitment to resolving the file on Kuwait and thirdcountry nationals pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013) is to be commended. We note
the repatriation of human remains from the Government of Iraq to the Government
of Kuwait that took place on 16 September. We welcome the continued bilateral
Iraqi-Kuwaiti dialogue and cooperation, and we are grateful to Council members
for their cooperation on the press statement that will be issued on the matter today.
I believe that the Council is united in its hope to see Iraq’s political leaders,
with the support of UNAMI, take forward significant reforms to address Iraq’s
challenging economic and security situation, deliver credible and transparent
elections in 2021 and, ultimately, secure stability and prosperity for the
people of Iraq.

20-1610527/33

S/2020/1144

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for her valuable briefing, and I welcome the representative of Iraq to our
meeting today.
We are delighted by the recent positive developments in Iraq following the
formation of the new Government headed by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi.
We have witnessed progress in the Iraqi Government’s delivery of its promises to
combat corruption, reform the economy, provide basic services, strengthen control
over border crossings and finalize the technical and legal requirements to proceed
with the plan to hold early elections in June 2021. We believe the newly ratified
election law is an important step that will help move the country in the right direction.
The Security Council and the wider international community should encourage the
Iraqis to build on those initial achievements and take more concrete steps forward.
We also commend the Iraqi leaders for their efforts in working with the
Kurdistan Regional Government to tackle pending issues. We hope that the recent
agreements between them will create a favourable environment for the return of
displaced persons, the restoration of stability and the strengthening of trust and
confidence. We believe that dialogue, solidarity and national harmony continue to
be the key factors in solving the country’s internal matters.
Regarding Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, we are pleased with the ongoing cooperation
between the relevant parties in the search for missing Kuwaitis and third-country
nationals, despite the constraints resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The repatriation of human remains to Kuwait in September was a
demonstration of their efforts and commitment. We encourage further efforts and
cooperation to accelerate the process. We also urge the international community to
continue to provide support for the work of the technical teams.
However, the challenges facing Iraq today remain profound. The security
situation continues to be a grave concern. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
still poses a threat, and violent attacks occur in many places. Meanwhile, the surge of
COVID-19 and its impact on the economy, the health-care system and humanitarian
situation are alarming.
According to the World Bank, poverty in Iraq is estimated to increase in the
short term by 7 to 14 percentage points. That means that 2.7 to 5.5 million Iraqis
would become newly poor, in addition to the pre-crisis 6.9 million. Currently,
1.3 million people remain internally displaced across the country, and 1.77 million
people are in a state of acute need of assistance.
In that context, the role of UNAMI and other United Nations agencies standing
with Iraq has proved essential. The reports of the Secretary-General on UNAMI
and the letter sent by the Government of Iraq to the Security Council last week
demonstrate the need for the continuation of the Mission. We reiterate our support
for UNAMI and United Nations agencies to continue with their mandate to help
Iraq to overcome its ongoing difficulties. We call for continued and strengthened
collaboration between United Nations teams and the Government of Iraq in coping
with the country’s political, economic and humanitarian challenges.
We also urge the international community to continue to stand beside
Iraq, while providing support and fully respecting Iraq’s political independence,
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The report of the Secretary-General
28/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

(S/2020/1099) mentions violations of Iraq’s sovereignty, which is another major
concern of the region and beyond.
To conclude, we strongly believe that, with the determination of the
Government, the resilience of the Iraqi people and the support of international
actors, Iraq will soon recover and thrive in the future that it deserves.

20-1610529/33

S/2020/1144

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to Ms. Inga Rhonda
King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, on her
presidency of the Security Council during the month of November. I also extend my
sincere thanks to Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for his management of the Council’s meetings last month.
I also extend my gratitude to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
Since the previous meeting on the situation in Iraq in August (see S/2020/845),
there have been no significant changes in terms of the huge and complex challenges
that Iraq is facing. Those challenges are interconnected in nature across various
fields, including economic, security, health and social — however, our willingness to
deal with them is greater. The Government is expeditiously working at the maximum
level, as promised, to meet the people’s expectations and demands by preserving peace
and security, providing services, countering the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, fighting terrorism and achieving political and economic reforms.
The economic situation remains a concern for the Iraqi Government, due to
drops and fluctuations in oil prices on the one hand and large expenditures borne by
Iraq in the fight against terrorism on the other. In that regard, as part of its efforts
to face the economic and fiscal crisis, the Government has submitted a draft bill on
economic reform to the House of Representatives, which will reduce dependence on
oil revenues and enhance investment.
The situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic is critical and could lead to
the collapse of the health system. Despite all the measures taken by the competent
authorities, the number of people infected with the disease is continently high,
reaching rates of 3,000 to 4,000 per day. In that connection, Iraq expresses its sincere
gratitude to the World Health Organization and friendly States for their generous
health aid to support Iraq in countering the pandemic.
One of the important commitments that the Government has made is to meet
demonstrators’ demands. Measures have been taken to fill in the trust gap with
the people, especially the youth, by making their voices heard and honouring the
constitutional rights of peaceful protests and freedom of expression of the people.
The Government promised to protect the demonstrators from any violations of
human rights. In that regard, the competent authorities made great efforts to prevent
violent groups from targeting the demonstrators and to minimize the number of
incidents to the lowest level possible. Furthermore, the Government registers
the families of the victims to receive the benefits stipulated by the martyr’s law,
which provides financial compensation and all the necessary medical treatment to
wounded demonstrators.
Countering corruption is at the core of the reform process. In that regard,
the Government has shown great keenness to restore full control over border
checkpoints so as to prevent and deter any illegal actions. Meanwhile, vigorous legal
attempts have been made to counter corruption and hold those who are involved in
corruption accountable.
I am delighted to highlight one of the most important accomplishments, that
is, the adoption of the new electoral law, which should pave the way for the electoral
process to hold an early election on 6 June 2021, as declared by the Prime Minister of
30/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Iraq, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. The adoption of the new law is the result of tireless
efficient consultation between the Government and the legislative authority.
It is unquestionable that the Government came about in response to a political
crisis, but it aspires to be a Government that accommodates solutions to urgent
problems. In that regard, certain steps should be met in advance. First, the sovereignty
of the State must be preserved and honoured. Secondly, it is vital to strengthen the
rule of law and regain the State’s control over all armed forces. Thirdly, foreign
Powers must be prevented from turning our country into a base for their political and
strategic agendas. Iraq’s sovereignty and independence are crucial to the stability
and security of the region. Iraq strives to maintain strong relations with countries,
especially its neighbouring countries, in accordance with the principles of common
interests and non-interference in internal affairs.
The Government pledges to enforce the State’s authority by controlling the
possession of arms, restricting them to Government and military institutions and
enforcing the rule of law. To that end, the Government is engaged in a process of
achieving security reform that promotes performance in the field, respects human
rights and ensures professionalism, as well as countering the militarization of society
by preventing any form of non-State intervention. The Government also seeks to
prevent outlaw groups from targeting demonstrators and civilians in general and to
counter any prohibited illegal acts, such as attacks targeting the diplomatic missions
accredited in Iraq. In that regard, the security institutions arrested a number of
suspects and is holding them accountable to fair legal procedures. The Government
has therefore managed to take control of the situation since mid-October.
The Government is working tirelessly to create a proper environment for
dialogue with the local Government of the Kurdistan region of Iraq regarding the
upcoming fiscal budget, the control of border crossing points and the management
of the region’s oil resources. The central Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government reached two important agreements.
The first was a revenue-sharing agreement, with monthly transfers from
Baghdad to Erbil to cover civil servants’ salaries in exchange for access to customs
revenues from borders under the control of the Kurdistan Regional Government. The
agreement covers salary payments for August, September and October.
The second agreement, reached on the status of northern Iraq’s Sinjar district
in Ninawa, paves the way for reconstruction in the northern part of the country. The
deal ends the authority of intruding groups and paves the way for the reconstruction
of the city and the full return of its people in coordination with the Kurdistan Regional
Government. The deal is the outcome of months of serious work and discussions
between the Kurdistan Regional Government and the federal Government. Both sides
agreed that Sinjar would be jointly governed in terms of administration, security
and services. The agreement is an unprecedented practice for the implementation of
article 140 of the Constitution.
Fighting and countering terrorism are at the core of my country’s security
strategy. My Government believes that terrorism still poses an imminent threat and
represents an obstacle to the reconstruction of liberated cities, the return of displaced
citizens and access to humanitarian assistance. For instance, on 8 November
Baghdad witnessed a terrorist attack on a military post, which led to the death of five
civilians and six military personnel. In that regard, Iraq reiterates its commitment to
continuing its cooperation with the international community on countering terrorism
and facilitating the access of humanitarian assistance.
Iraq also welcomes all efforts undertaken to date to repatriate the family
members of foreign terrorist fighters and urges other countries to receive their
20-1610531/33

S/2020/1144

non-convicted citizens. There remains an urgent need for concerted efforts to
rehabilitate and reintegrate victims of terrorism, especially in the liberated areas. We
acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism through
the programme of repatriation from Iraq and Syria.
Iraq affirms its strong commitment to establishing friendly relations and
cooperation with its neighbours and the international community. At the same time,
my country expects the same spirit of cooperation and mutual respect from others.
Unfortunately, Turkey irresponsibly insists on conducting military operations
on Iraq’s territory without prior consultation with the Government of Iraq. The
operations have led to casualties among civilians and military personnel, including
recently the death of five civilians and one person wounded. The Iraqi Government
stresses that the Turkish violations of its territory are seen as irresponsible measures
that do not take into account the promotion and development of a peaceful situation
in international relations and are in breach of the Charter of the United Nations and
in disregard for good-neighbourly relations. Furthermore, the Turkish Government
has not taken any steps to inform or brief the Security Council on its unilateral
measures over Iraqi territory. At this point, the Iraqi Government affirms its right
to confront any attack that threatens the security of Iraq. In this perilous security
situation, my country filed a complaint with the Security Council, documenting and
requesting urgent steps to prevent future violations.
Concerning the relations with Kuwait, cooperation is the major focus of those
relations, as Iraq respects its obligations, including searching for the remains of
missing Kuwaitis and continuing to cover compensation instalments on time.
As a sign of commitment, Iraq handed over two lots of human remains —
those of 21 missing persons on 16 September and of 48 missing persons on 8 August
2019. Meanwhile, Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and the State of Kuwait to
accelerate the process of announcing the results of DNA tests of the remains.
The ongoing and painstaking search efforts to find a new set of Kuwaiti
archives that were supposed to be delivered by the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs
in April continue but, due to the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic, the delivery
has been postponed.
Concerning compensation, a payment of $230 million was made on 28 October.
The current situation has put Iraq in an extremely difficult position that no
Government could survive alone without international cooperation and solidarity.
Accordingly, we aspire to secure the Security Council’s support in helping the new
Government to achieve its priorities in the following ways.
First is by condemning violations of the sovereignty of the Republic of Iraq by
any Member State and preventing such acts in the future.
Secondly, one of the most important messages that the Iraqi Government is
trying to deliver to all is that Iraq will not be a staging ground for conflict or a base
point for any other country’s strategy towards any of the neighbouring countries, as
Iraq aims to be an active player on the path of building peace, achieving stability and
improving security opportunities.
Thirdly is by assisting the Government in addressing the main challenges,
especially with regard to COVID-19 and the economic and financial crises.
Fourthly is by continuing to actively cooperate with Iraq in the war against
terrorism, in which Iraq remains on the front line.

32/33

20-16105

S/2020/1144

Fifthly is by continuing international humanitarian support to Iraq for the
reconstruction of the areas liberated from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham and
by facilitating the return of internally displaced people to their areas.
Sixthly is by continuing the vital role of the United Nations in the preparation
of the upcoming early election by providing technical and logistical support to
ensure integrity and credibility.
Iraq commends the support provided by the international community and
reiterates that helping Iraq to preserve its national sovereignty will be a cornerstone
for the success of the Government. The Iraqi Government has been mindful of
strengthening its relationships with the neighbouring countries in the region by
building bridges of cooperation with them all.
Furthermore, the Iraqi Government has engaged in a cooperative and strategic
dialogue with many countries since August. As a result, many official visits from
and to Iraq took place recently. For instance, a high-level delegation, led by the Prime
Minister, visited the United States of America for the second session of a strategic
dialogue, as well as Germany, France and the United Kingdom. The visits sought
to strengthen dialogue with allies, including discussions of future cooperation in
various fields, such as economic, security, cultural and health.
Iraq’s policy of regional engagement also included the participation of the
Prime Minister in the Iraq-Jordan-Egypt tripartite summit, hosted in Amman on
25 August, for the inspiration of a better and prosperous future of the region. Another
sign of Iraq’s positive regional engagement is the recent virtual meeting between
the Prime Minister of Iraq and the Saudi Crown Prince on 10 November to review
the outcome of the fourth session of the Iraqi-Saudi coordination council, which
includes eight committees and took place on 8 November to discuss the prospects
of bilateral relations and to foster the implementation of bilateral agreements and
memorandums of understanding. Both sides agreed to develop a plan to accelerate
the opening of the Iraqi-Saudi Arar border crossing and to enhance cooperation in
several fields, most importantly energy and counter-terrorism.
I extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his supportive stances
towards Iraq, and we hope that the international community will continue to help
its people to achieve a stable and prosperous Iraq. I especially thank the Head of
UNAMI and her team in Baghdad and New York for their tireless efforts.

20-1610533/33
