A/73/907–S/2019/509

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
20 June 2019
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-third session
Agenda item 68 (a)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
promotion and protection of the rights of children

Security Council
Seventy-fourth year

Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2018, is
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2427 (2018). The preparation of
the report involved broad consultations within the United Nations, in the field and at
Headquarters, and with relevant Member States. It highlights global trends regarding
the impact of armed conflict on children and provides information on violations
committed from January to December 2018, as well as related protection concerns.
Where possible, violations are attributed to parties to conflict and, pursuant to
resolutions of the Council, the annexes to the present report include a list of parties
that, in violation of international law, engage in the recruitment and use of children,
the killing and maiming of children, rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children, attacks on schools and/or hospitals and attacks or threats of attacks against
protected personnel, 1 and the abduction of children.
2.
All the information contained in the report has been vetted for accuracy by the
United Nations. In situations where the ability to verify information was hampered
by factors such as insecurity or access restrictions, it is qualified as such. In this
regard, the information contained in the report is only indicative and does not
represent the full scale of violations committed in 2018. In addition, some incidents,
in particular instances of the recruitment and use of children, abduction and se xual
violence committed against children, were verified in 2018 but may have commenced
earlier.
3.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and in identifying
situations that fall within the scope of the mandate, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict has adopted a pragmatic approach aimed at ensuring
broad and effective protection for children. Reference to a situation is not a legal
__________________
1

19-10176 (E)

Under the terms of Security Council resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014), protected persons
are considered to be teachers, doctors, other educational personnel, students and patients.

260719

*1910176*

A/73/907
S/2019/509

determination and reference to a non-State actor does not affect its legal status.
Accordingly, the present report documents situations in which apparent violations of
international norms and standards for the protection of children affected by conflict
are considered to be of such gravity as to warrant international concern. In
characterizing the facts described below as grave violations, it is the aim of my
Special Representative to bring these situations to the attention of Governments,
which bear the primary responsibility of providing effective protection and relief to
all affected children, and to encourage Governments to take remedial measures.
4.
Where significant progress was achieved and measures taken by listed parties
positively affected the protection of children or where ongoing conduct gave rise to
concern, this is highlighted in the country-specific sections. On the basis of the
approach of enhanced engagement with Member States to prevent violations against
children, the annexes distinguish between listed parties that have put in place
measures aimed at improving the protection of children during the reporting period
and parties that have not.

II. Addressing the impact of armed conflict on children
A.

Overview of the situation of children and armed conflict
5.
Continued fighting between parties to conflict, new conflict dynamics and
operational tactics, combined with widespread disregard for international law, had a
devastating effect on children in 2018. More than 24,000 grave violations 2 against
children were verified by the United Nations in 20 country situations. While the
number of violations attributed to non-State actors remained steady, there was an
alarming increase in the number of violations attributed to State actors and to
international forces compared with 2017 (see A/72/865-S/2018/465).
6.
Verified cases of the killing and maiming of children reached record levels
globally since the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children
and armed conflict pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005). In
Afghanistan, the number of child casualties remained the highest such number in the
present report (3,062) and children accounted for 28 per cent of all civilian casualties.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, air strikes, barrel bombs and cluster munitions resulted
in 1,854 child casualties, and in Yemen, 1,689 children bore the brunt of groun d
fighting and other offensives.
7.
Some 13,600 children benefited from release and reintegration worldwide.
However, children continued to be forced to take an active part in hostilities,
including to carry out suicide bombings against civilians. Others were used in support
roles, for example as sexual slaves or as human shields. Somalia remained the country
with the highest number of cases of the recruitment and use of children (2,300)
followed by Nigeria (1,947).
8.
Attacks on schools and hospitals had a devastating effect on access to education
and to health services for thousands of children, with a total of 1,023 verified attacks.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, 2018 witnessed the highest numbers of attacks on
schools and medical facilities (225) recorded since the beginning of the conflict. In
Afghanistan, schools and hospitals (254) were increasingly targeted. Increased
numbers of attacks were also verified in the Central African Republic, Colombia,
Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia, the Sudan and Yemen.

__________________
2

2/43

The use of the term “grave violations” or “violations” refer to each individual child affected by
recruitment and use, killing and maiming, sexual violence and abductions, while the number of
incidents is used for attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access.
19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

9.
In 2018, 933 cases of sexual violence against children were verified. The highest
verified figures for violations relating to sexual violence continue to be documented
in Somalia (331) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (277). Cases of violations
relating to sexual violence remained significantly underreported, in particular when
perpetrated against boys, owing to stigma, the lack of services and concerns for the
protection of victims (for more information, see the annual report on conflict -related
sexual violence, S/2019/280). Impunity for sexual violence against girls and boys by
parties to conflict remained endemic.
10. Some 2,493 children were abducted in 2018. The highest numbers were verified
in Somalia (1,609), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (367) and Nigeria (180).
Increased numbers of abductions were verified in South Sudan (109), the Syrian Arab
Republic (69), the Central African Republic (62), the Sudan (22) and the Philippines
(13). Children were abducted from homes, schools and public spaces by parties to
conflict, often as a precursor to other grave violations, notably recruitment and use,
and sexual abuse, including sexual slavery, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Nigeria and the Syrian Arab Republic.
11. In times of armed conflict, throughout the world, millions of people, children
foremost among them, have inadequate access to or have been denied assistance that
is essential for their survival and well-being. In 2018, only 795 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access could be verified, compared with 1,213 in 2017. The decrease
could be explained by restricted access to information, rather than an improvement
of the situation. The shrinking of humanitarian space translated into widespread
insecurity, severe and persistent constraints on humanitarian access, threats and the
perpetration of violence against humanitarian personnel and civilian infrastructure,
thereby preventing child protection actors and humanitarian actors f rom gaining
access to information.

B.

Challenges in ensuring a child-rights based response
12. Consent of the child is not a valid defence for the crime of recruiting and using
children in war. Children actually or allegedly associated with armed for ces and
armed groups, including those designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations,
must be treated primarily as victims. These groups have abducted, recruited and used
children nationally or transnationally. The children affected have been exposed to the
highest degrees of violence and exploitation, leaving a severe impact on their physical
and mental well-being.
13. Thousands of children actually or allegedly associated with Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and affiliated groups, as well as children born of sexual
violence, were deprived of their liberty, with limited or no parental care, access to
food, medical and psychosocial support, and no access to legal or consular services.
In December 2018, 1,248 children of 46 nationalities fr om areas formerly controlled
by ISIL, mainly under the age of 5, were deprived of their liberty in internally
displaced persons’ sites in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. In Iraq, 902
children remained in detention on national security-related charges, including for
their association or alleged association with ISIL. Similarly, 418 children were
deprived of liberty in Nigeria for their or their parents ’ alleged association with Boko
Haram and 375 children were detained in Somalia for their allege d association with
Al-Shabaab. The deprivation of liberty of children for their actual or alleged
association with groups designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations should
be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest period of ti me.
14. The best interests of the child must be given primary consideration in all actions
affecting their lives, with no exception. All children below the age of 18 have specific

19-10176

3/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

rights to protection and should be treated first and foremost as victims. Me mber States
must take responsibility for their nationals, including the children of their nationals
who are deprived of their liberty in Iraq and in the Syrian Arab Republic for their
alleged or actual association with these groups. The reintegration of al l children
affected by armed conflict must be prioritized through a comprehensive, coordinated
and child rights-based approach so as to prevent recurring cycles of violence and to
build sustainable peace for all children.

C.

The way forward: prevention and reintegration
15. The prevention of violence against children in armed conflict is a crucial
element in building and sustaining peace, as well as in ensuring that children and
youth realize their rights and tap into their potential as agents of cha nge, as identified
in “Youth 2030 – The United Nations Strategy on Youth”. The development of
national, subregional or regional prevention plans covering all violations, as called
for in Security Council resolution 2427 (2018), would both sustain the gains made
through action plans, beyond the duration of those plans, and systematize preventive
measures across regions. My Special Representative launched a process of proactive
engagement with national, subregional and regional actors in order to develop
prevention initiatives to prevent violations against children affected by armed
conflict, in support of my vision on prevention, the Sustainable Development Goals
and the sustaining peace resolutions, Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262.
16. Member States have a central role in providing long -term and sustainable
reintegration programmes, including providing predictable funding for such
programmes. Such support is crucial for ensuring the well -being of children and
sustaining peace and security. Reintegration programmes must include mental health
and psychosocial support, education and vocational training, as well as community based interventions and access to a civil registry and to justice, taking into account
the specific needs of girls and boys, including children with disabilities, so as to
enable all children affected by armed conflict to return to their communities and
regain their childhood. The role of Member States is now supported by the creation
of the Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers, which was
established and is co-led by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and
aims to further explore and address existing gaps and needs for the reintegration of
all children affected by conflict.

III. Information on violations committed against children
during armed conflict and progress made by parties on
dialogue, action plans and other measures to halt and
prevent violations against children
A.

Situations on the agenda of the Security Council
Afghanistan
17. Children continued to bear the brunt of the conflict, accounting for 28 per cent
of all civilian casualties, with 3,062 verified cases of children who were killed and
maimed in 2018, with the number of children killed (927) being the highest number
ever recorded in Afghanistan. In addition, in response to the 2018 parliamentary
elections, armed groups attacked election sites, more than half of which were based

4/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

in schools. Also of concern was the Taliban’s use of indirect fire systems such as
mortars, grenades and rockets in and from civilian-populated areas on election days,
which had indiscriminate effects and contributed to child casualties.
Grave violations
18. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 45 boys and 1 girl, with
some of the children recruited as young as 8, who were used for combat, at
checkpoints, to plant improvised explosive devices, to carry out suicide attacks or
other violations, or for sexual exploitation. At least 22 boys were killed during their
association. Of those violations, 67 per cent of the instances of recruitment and use
were attributed to armed groups (31), including Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (17 boys in
one incident), Taliban (11), Islamic State of Iraq and the Levan t-Khorasan Province
(ISIL-KP) (2) and an unidentified armed group (1). On 14 March, in Dehe Bala
District, Nangarhar Province, ISIL-KP used two boys to publicly execute three men
accused of being associated with the Afghan National Defence and Security For ces.
The 15 remaining children were recruited and used by Afghan local police (6), Afghan
National Police (1) and pro-government militias (8).
19. As at December 2018, the Government reported that 205 boys were detained in
juvenile rehabilitation centres on national security-related charges.
20. The United Nations verified 3,062 child casualties (927 killed, 2,135 maimed),
including 831 girls. The leading causes were ground engagements (276 killed, 916
maimed) and non-suicide improvised explosive devices (129 killed, 388 maimed),
followed by aerial operations (236 killed, 256 maimed), which represented an
increase compared with 2017.
21. Armed groups were responsible for 44 per cent of child casualties (1,343),
including the Taliban (997), ISIL-KP (217), unidentified armed groups (114), selfproclaimed ISIL-KP (7) and jointly to different armed groups (8). The United Nations
attributed 34 per cent of child casualties (1,051) to government and pro -government
forces, including the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces (629) – mainly
the Afghan National Army (467) – international forces 3 (286), pro-government
militias (56), joint operations of government and pro -government forces (58) and
undetermined government and pro-government forces (22). Another 15 per cent of
the child casualties were jointly attributed to government and pro -government forces
and armed groups. Some 6 per cent of the casualties could not be attributed to a
specific party to the conflict and 1 per cent was caused by cross -border shelling.
22. The United Nations verified four cases of sexual violence, affecting two boys
and two girls, perpetrated by the Afghan National Police (3) and the Afghan local
police (1). The two boys were used as bacha bazi.
23. A total of 192 attacks against schools and protected personnel were verified. Of
those attacks, 92 per cent were attributed to armed groups, mainly the Taliban (123)
and ISIL-KP (42). Attacks were also attributed to the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (6), pro-government militias (3), international forces (1), and jointly
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and armed groups (3). During
the parliamentary elections held in October, more than half of the voter registration
and polling sites were located in schools, which were targeted in 92 election-related
attacks mostly attributed to the Taliban (85). An additional cause for concern is the
emerging trend of attacks and threats by armed groups against education facilities,
perpetrated in particular by ISIL-KP, which led to widespread school closures and
__________________
3

19-10176

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is part of the international forces and leads t he
Resolute Support Mission, a non-combat operation with the mandate to train, advise and assist
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and institutions.
5/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

many casualties. ISIL-KP expressly declared its intention to target schools,
specifically girls’ schools.
24. A total of 62 attacks on hospitals and protected personnel were verified, 74 per
cent of which were attributed to armed groups, including the Taliban (30), ISIL-KP
(11), self-proclaimed ISIL-KP (3) and unidentified armed groups (2). The remaining
attacks were attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces (5),
international forces (4), pro-government militias (2) and 1 to an undetermined
pro-government force. Four attacks were jointly attributed to different parties.
25. The United Nations verified the military use of five schools by the Afghan
National Army (4) and ISIL-KP (1) and of two medical facilities by the ANDSF (1)
and by both the Taliban and the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces (1).
26. Similar to the numbers reported in 2017, the abduction of 42 boys and 1 girl was
verified, mostly by armed groups: the Taliban (36), ISIL-KP (3), self-proclaimed
ISIL-KP, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and Hizb-i Islami (1 each). The abduction and
sexual exploitation of one girl by an Afghan local police commander was verified.
27. The United Nations verified 44 incidents of denial of humanitarian access,
mainly attributed to armed groups: the Taliban (27), ISIL-KP (10) and self-proclaimed
ISIL-KP (2). The 5 remaining incidents were attributed to the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (3) and pro-government militias (2). Of particular
concern is the fact that these groups have also hindered demining activities and
vaccination campaigns, especially vaccination against polio, reportedly preventing
840,000 children from receiving immunizations. In addition, the number of instances
of violence against humanitarian personnel remained high, with 28 aid workers killed,
53 injured and 88 abducted during the reporting period.
Developments and concerns
28. I note the significant reduction in the recruitment and use of children by the
Afghan Security Forces and commend the measures taken by the Government to
better protect children affected by armed conflict, including through the child
protection units in the Afghan National Police recruitment centres, which now cover
all 34 provinces of Afghanistan, and the entry into force of the revised Penal Code,
which explicitly criminalizes the recruitment and use of children, including bacha
bazi and falsification of tazkeras (identity documents). I call for the full application
of the revised Code. Notwithstanding those developments, the use of children,
including bacha bazi, remains an issue of concern. I urge the Government to address
remaining gaps, specifically the lack of screening mechanisms within the Afghan
local police and the use of children at police checkpoints, and to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators of grave violations against children.
29. I call on the Government to release children allegedly or currently associated
with parties to conflict from detention facilities in accordance with the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (Paris
Principles), which were endorsed by Afghanistan in 2017. In additio n, children
detained on national-security related charges need to be transferred to juvenile
rehabilitation centres and have access to all services, in line with international
juvenile justice standards.
30. I remain extremely concerned about the continuo us high numbers of children
killed and maimed by all parties, notably the record high number of children killed in
2018. I note the decrease of child casualties attributed to the Afghan security forces,
and the measures taken by the Government to mitigate child casualties. I commend
the ongoing implementation of the National Policy on Civilian Casualty Prevention
and Mitigation, adopted in October 2017, as well as the entry into force of the
6/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War to the Convention on Prohibi tions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Protocol V), in February
2018, and the revision of the aerial targeting protocols, and encourage the
Government to continue the inclusion of legal advisers in targeting processes. I
strongly encourage the Government to include aspects relating to ending and
preventing killing and maiming in the existing action plan. I am also alarmed by the
increase in the number of children killed and maimed by international forces,
especially in aerial operations. I welcome the precautionary measures to mitigate
civilian and child casualties in military operations, including the designation by the
United States of America Department of Defense of a senior civilian responsible for
coordinating compliance with policies relating to non-combatant casualties in United
States military operations. I also note the role of the Senior Child Protection Adviser
of the Resolute Support Mission in protecting children in armed conflict. I request
my Special Representative to engage proactively and follow up on the implementation
of all measures taken by the Government and international forces to mitigate child
casualties. I strongly urge the Government and international forces to immediately
take additional extraordinary measures to protect children during military operations,
including during aerial operations, and to continue to abide by their obligations under
international law. I reiterate my call on armed groups to immediately cease the killing
and maiming of children.
31. I am concerned about the continued recruitment and use of children by armed
groups, including for combat roles, as well as about attacks that affect access to
education and health, including during elections, demining activities and vaccination
campaigns, and demand that concerned parties, notably the Taliban and ISIL -KP, put
an immediate halt to such actions. I strongly encourage the Government to prioritize
the protection of schools and hospitals during elections. I urge listed parties to conflict
to engage with the United Nations so as to elaborate action plans.
Central African Republic
32. Violence between armed and criminal groups for the control of strategic site s
and economic resources, and intercommunal tensions, including between Muslim and
Christian communities, remained the primary source of insecurity and threats against
civilians. Serious incidents, mostly related to transhumance and access to mining
sites, occurred at the end 2018 in Ouaka, Haut-Mbomou and Ouham Prefectures. The
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic facilitated local peace processes, involving armed groups and
community leaders, in order to reduce violence and increase humanitarian space. The
peace process culminated in the signing on 6 February 2019 of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic between the
Government and 14 armed groups.
Grave violations
33. A total of 75 children (14 girls, 61 boys), some as young as 6, were recruited
and used by anti-balaka (34); former Séléka factions (27), including Mouvement
national pour la libération de la Centrafrique (MNLC) (14), Front populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) (10), Rassemblement patriotique pour le
renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC) (2) and Mouvement patriotique pour la
Centrafrique (MPC) (1); Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) (10); PK5 groups (3); and
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (3R) (1). Children were used as combatants,
informants, porters, cooks, servants and for sexual purposes.
34. One girl and seven boys were detained by the national authorities for association
with anti-balaka (six); FPRC and Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC) (one
19-10176

7/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

each). All were released except for the boy associated with UPC, whose case is still
pending before the court.
35. A total of 114 children (38 girls, 76 boys) were verified as having been killed
(71) and maimed (43), a slight increase compared with 2017. The victims, some as
young as four months, were affected as a result of shootings (92), the use of machetes
(12), arson (8) and stabbing (2), during attacks on their communities. The majority of
child casualties were attributed to former Séléka factions (63), followed by
anti-balaka (20) and PK5 groups (9). Ouaka and Nana-Grébizi were the most affected
prefectures. In October, anti-balaka elements killed 12 children by machete outside
Zemio, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, in an indiscriminate attack against two Fulani
families.
36. The United Nations verified incidents of sexual violence affecting 58 girls and
1 boy, some as young as 8. A total of 18 girls were gang-raped, and 14 girls were
victims of sexual violence during their association with armed groups. The main
perpetrators were anti-balaka and former Séléka factions (18 each). One anti-balaka
element, a member of FPRC and a police auxiliary were arrested and detained for the
rape of children. The anti-balaka member was sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment.
37. A total of 34 attacks against schools and 22 attacks against hospitals were
verified, a 21 per cent increase as relates to schools and 16 per cent increase as relates
to hospitals, compared with 2017. The main perpetrators were former Séléka factions
(36) followed by anti-balaka (6). The United Nations verified the military use of seven
schools by FPRC (four), 3R (two) and anti-balaka (one).
38. A total of 62 children (28 girls, 34 boys), some as young as one, were abducted,
mostly for purposes of recruitment (57). Former Séléka factions accounted for the
highest number of such abductions (35) (MNLC (25); FPRC (6); MPC (2) and
FPRC/MPC (2)); followed by LRA (10) and anti-balaka (9).
39. There was an increase in the number of incidents of denial of humanitarian
access (120) compared with 2017 (101), which included the killing (6), injuring (23)
and abduction (5) of humanitarian workers. Those incid ents were predominantly
perpetrated by unidentified armed individuals (57), followed by former Séléka
factions (33), anti-balaka (29), and LRA (1). The Prefectures of Ouham and NanaGrébizi were the most affected.
Developments and concerns
40. I commend the Government for fighting against impunity. Two anti -balaka
leaders were arrested and transferred to the International Criminal Court for crimes
including the recruitment and use of children under 15 years of age. I encourage the
Special Criminal Court to prioritize crimes against children in their prosecution.
41. I welcome the signature of an action plan by MPC, on 30 May 2018, to end and
prevent grave violations, and the appointment of four commanders to serve as child
protection focal points, as well as the engagement with FPRC, leading to the signature
of an action plan on 24 June 2019. I now urge MPC and FRPC to swiftly implement
their action plans. I also call upon the leadership of UPC to adopt an action plan.
42. Dialogue with armed groups enabled the separation of 205 girls and 364 boys
from FPRC (314), anti-balaka (248) and Séléka rénovée (7). In addition, 216 selfdemobilized children were identified in Paoua (Ouham-Pendé Prefecture) and
benefited from reintegration support from UNICEF. As part of the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme initiated at the end of
2018 in Paoua, 389 children were confirmed to have been associated with both
factions of Révolution et justice (RJ). However, UNICEF and partners faced
challenges in implementing reintegration programmes owing to a lack of funds and
8/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

the volatile environment. I urge the Government to adopt a protocol for the handover
of children associated with armed groups to child protection actors, to adopt the draft
child protection code criminalizing the recruitment and use of children, to pass a
decree protecting associated children from prosecution, and to consider a national
prevention plan, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2427 (2018).
43. I remain deeply concerned about grave violations against children, including an
increase in the killing and maiming of children and in the number of attacks against
schools and hospitals by armed groups, as well as abductions attributed to former
Séléka elements. I urge armed groups to immediately cease all violations and abide
by their obligations under international law.
Colombia
44. The new Government took office in August 2018 and while the President, Ivá n
Duque Márquez, affirmed his commitment to implementing the peace agreement with
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia–People’s Army (Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo) (FARC-EP), he also reiterated
intentions to secure a consensual modification to certain controversial parts of the
Agreement. Limited implementation of the peace agreement in some regions led to
frustrations among communities, and in some cases, to the strengthening of non -State
armed groups in former FARC-EP areas, thus exposing children to grave violations.
45. In August, the Government conditioned continued dialogue with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN) on the release of all victims of kidnapping and the
cessation of criminal activity. Those conditions were not met. Negotiations were
formally discontinued by the Government following the attack on the General
Santander National Police Academy in January 2019, which was claimed by ELN.
46. More than 4,800 children were forcibly displaced in the D epartments of Chocó,
Nariño, Cauca, Antioquia, Norte de Santander, Valle del Cauca, Arauca and Boyacá
owing to clashes and threats of child recruitment. According to the Government, by
31 December 2018, more than 1 million people from the Bolivarian Republ ic of
Venezuela had entered Colombia. Refugee and migrant children are at risk of
recruitment and use and sexual violence.
Grave violations
47. A total of 120 incidents of recruitment and use, which affected 293 children,
some as young as 14, were verified, a sharp increase compared with 169 children in
2017. Dissident FARC-EP groups 4 were the main perpetrators (82 children) followed
by the ELN (69) and Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia (AGC) also known as
Clan del Golfo (12). According to the Government, 196 children (105 boys; 91 girls)
who were separated from non-State armed groups entered the demobilization
programme of the Colombian Family Welfare Institute in 2018.
48. The United Nations verified 89 incidents of killing and maiming, which affected
108 children, some as young as eight (34 girls, 60 boys, 14 sex unknown), a sharp
increase since 2017 (53), resulting from clashes between armed groups, crossfire,
bombing and anti-personnel mines. The perpetrators were unidentified armed groups
(63 child casualties), ELN (14), dissident FARC-EP groups (11), AGC (8) and
Ejército Popular de Liberación (EPL) (1). There were 11 child casualties resulting
from Colombian Armed Forces operations against armed groups. According to
__________________
4

19-10176

Throughout the report, dissident FARC-EP groups should be understood as including groups that
did not adhere to the peace agreement and former FARC-EP repeat offenders who abandoned
their commitments under the peace agreement.
9/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

government data, 22 of the child casualties in 2018 were caused by anti-personnel
mines.
49. Incidents of sexual violence, which affected nine girls, were verified and
attributed to dissident FARC-EP groups (five girls) and AGC (four). For example, in
Putumayo Department, a 17-year-old indigenous girl was sexually abused by a
member of Frente Primero, a dissident FARC-EP group, and forced to use injectable
contraceptive methods.
50. A total of 13 attacks on schools and protected personnel were verified in Nariño,
Norte de Santander, Chocó, Valle del Cauca and Arauca, 2 perpetrated by dissident
FARC-EP groups and 11 by unidentified non-State armed groups, which disrupted
school classes. Incidents included the killing of a teacher, threats and the destruction
of school premises.
51. Six children aged between 14 and 16 (including three girls) were abducted by
ELN (two), dissident FARC-EP groups (one) and unidentified armed elements (three).
52. Two incidents of denial of humanitarian access, perpetrated by ELN, were
verified in the Department of Arauca. In one instance, ELN imposed restrictions on
movement for three days and forbade any type of activity, including school classes.
Developments and concerns
53. In August 2018, Decree 1434 was issued, adopting public policy guidan ce on
the prevention of recruitment and use of children and of sexual violence against
children by non-State armed groups. I welcome this positive development and
encourage the Government to strengthen institutions and programmes to prevent
recruitment and use. I call on the Government to prioritize the prevention of sexual
violence against children in the context of armed conflict and to ensure that
perpetrators are held to account.
54. I am deeply concerned about the high number of instances of the recru itment
and use of children by dissident FARC-EP groups and urge them to immediately
release children and end this practice. I remain concerned by the continuing
recruitment and use of children by ELN and by the increase in the killing and maiming
of children by armed groups. I call upon these groups to end and prevent such
violations.
55. As highlighted in my report on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/1159), I am concerned about those children included in the
programme “Camino diferencial de vida” who have not yet received reparations, and
about the lack of adequate resources for the programme. I urge the Government to
implement a reintegration process for newly identified children , who have been
released through informal processes, and to reinforce security guarantees for
programme participants.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
56. The weak presence of state authority in some areas of the country, tensions
linked to the delayed elections, which were held in December 2018, the multiplication
and fragmentation of armed groups, intercommunal clashes between the Hema and
Lendu communities in Ituri and violence in the East and the Kasais all affected
children. Armed groups remained the perpetrators of the vast majority of grave
violations. The United Nations documented a decrease in grave violations against
children, owing mostly to the reduction of conflict in the Kasais.

10/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Grave violations
57. A total of 631 children (91 girls, 540 boys) were recruited during 2018. MaiMai Mazembe (170) and Nyatura (150) accounted for half of the new recruitments,
followed by other armed groups. North Kivu remained the epicentre of child
recruitment and use, with more than 70 per cent of all cas es, followed by the Greater
Kasai region (16 per cent) and South Kivu (10 per cent). Nine children were used in
support functions for periods ranging between one and two months, by the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) (7 boys; 1 girl) and the
Congolese National Police (1 boy), seven of whom were recruited and separated in
2018. For example, four boys were used by FARDC to carry looted goods for five
days in Ituri, while one boy was used by the Congolese National Police in Shabund a
Territory to perform police duties.
58. A total of 2,253 children (including 267 girls) were separated from 39 parties to
conflict, including Nyatura (532), Mai-Mai Mazembe (417), Kamuina Nsapu (335),
Raia Mutomboki (175), Forces démocratiques de libéra tion du Rwanda-Forces
combattantes abacunguzi (FDLR-FOCA) (128), Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové
(NDC-Rénové) (75) and Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) and Alliance
des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (57 each). Almost half of the children
were below the age of 15 when recruited (1,067) and 45 per cent were used as
combatants (1,014). Following United Nations advocacy, 25 per cent of those children
were voluntarily released by the commanders of armed groups.
59. Some 125 children (including six girls) were deprived of liberty by Government
forces, owing to their alleged association with armed groups, and were released after
periods ranging from 3 to 48 days. In addition, 21 boys who were arrested for their
suspected association with Kamuina Nsapu, some since September 2016, continued
to be detained in Kananga prison, Kasai Province.
60. There were 169 child casualties, with 77 killed (39 girls, 38 boys) and 92
maimed (29 girls, 63 boys). Of those casualties, 36 were attributed to FA RDC (33)
and the Congolese National Police (3), mostly in the context of operations in the east.
The remaining casualties were attributed to armed groups, including Kamuina Nsapu
(45) and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) (9), to unidentified armed elemen ts
(47), and 18 were caused by unexploded ordnance.
61. Sexual violence affected 277 girls in North Kivu (107), the Kasais (55), Ituri
(36), South Kivu (31), Tanganyika (11) and other provinces (37). Government forces
were responsible for 50 per cent of the cases, including FARDC (85), the Congolese
National Police (51) and Agence nationale de renseignements (ANR) (5), more than
double the number attributed to government forces in 2017. Eight suspected
perpetrators were arrested and await trial, while five were given sanctions by their
hierarchy. Other perpetrators included Nyatura (24), Raia Mutomboki (17), Conseil
national de la résistance pour la démocratie (CNRD), FRPI and unidentified Mai -Mai
groups (14 each), Mai-Mai Mazembe (8) and Kamuina Nsapu (7).
62. A total of 87 attacks on schools and 10 attacks on hospitals were verified, a
significant decrease since 2017, which is explained by the reduction in violence in
the Kasais, where institutions were no longer targeted. Most attacks occurred in the
context of intercommunal clashes in Djugu Territory, Ituri ( 75). In total, 43 schools
(42) and hospitals (1) were deliberately burned or damaged, another 51 schools (42)
and hospitals (9) were looted and school personnel were attacked (3). Armed groups
were responsible for most of the attacks. Three attacks were attributed to FARDC.
63. Three schools and one hospital used for military purposes by FARDC (3) and
Nyatura (1) in North Kivu (3) and the Kasais (1) were vacated following United
Nations advocacy.
19-10176

11/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

64. The number of abductions decreased to 367 (270 boys; 97 girls) and occurred
mainly in North Kivu (291), South Kivu (51) and the Kasais (17). Main perpetrators
included Nyatura (91), Mai-Mai Mazembe (69), ADF (47), Raia Mutomboki (46),
FDLR-FOCA (24), CNRD (14) and Kamuina Nsapu (10). Seven girls and one boy
were abducted by FARDC mostly for the purpose of sexual exploitation. Children
were mostly abducted for the purpose of recruitment (209). A total of 62 children
were subjected to sexual violence during their association. In addition, a total of 151
children (95 girls; 56 boys), who have been abducted by the Bana Mura militia in the
Kasai region since 2017 and subjected to forced labour and sexual violence, remain
in captivity while 62 children (41 girls; 21 boys) returned to their families. United
Nations advocacy with the Government for the release of the remaining abductees
yielded limited results.
65. Four incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children were verified, all in
South Kivu. For example, Raia Mutomboki attacked and abducted aid workers,
hindering the distribution of vaccines to at least 5,000 children. Other incidents
involved attacks by unidentified armed elements on humanitarian convoys carrying
health supplies. However, the volatile security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo affected tens of thousands of children and hindered the environment in
which humanitarian personnel operate.
Developments and concerns
66. I welcome the screening to determine the age of children during FARDC
recruitment campaigns, as a result of which 146 children were separated before their
enrolment. Standard operating procedures for age assessment screening were
continuously disseminated across the FARDC and PNC.
67. The United Nations increased its efforts to encourage armed groups to cease
grave violations. Eight armed group commanders signed a unilateral declaration
committing to end and prevent child recruitment and use, as well as other grave
violations. Awareness-raising sessions regarding grave violations were conducted
with focal points from nine armed groups and community mediators. As armed groups
lay down their arms, I urge the Government to ensure that protection and screening
measures are in place to identify and separate children and ensure their access to
reintegration services.
68. The United Nations supported the implementation of the 2009 Child Protection
Act, punishing child recruitment by up to 10 years’ imprisonment, including through
support to military justice, lawyers and non-governmental organizations. For the first
time, two armed groups commanders were sentenced to life in prison for charges
including child recruitment. The trial of Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, former commander of
Nduma défense du Congo-Sheka, and two of his commanders, on charges of war
crimes, including child recruitment and use, and sexual violence, started in November
2018. Child victims and witnesses were identified, with support from the United
Nations for those efforts.
69. I commend the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
sustaining the gains of its action plan on child recruitment and use, but I am concerned
by the persistent number of violations involving sexual violence being committed by
security forces and call upon the Government to expedite aspects of the plan relating
to sexual violence against children. I urge the Government to ensure that perpetrators
of grave violations are held accountable and to prioritize the prevention of violations
against children. Moreover, I call upon the Government to ensure that the children
abducted by the Bana Mura militia since 2017 are immediately released and returned
to their families.

12/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Iraq
70. The security situation in the country improved following the military defeat
of ISIL in late 2017, resulting in improved access for the monitorin g and verifying of
grave violations, including those which occurred prior to 2018. Despite the loss of
territory, ISIL continued to pose a threat to security forces and civilians, including
children, by carrying out deadly attacks in Ninawa, Kirkuk, Anbar, Diyala and
Baghdad. Demonstrations, which resulted in violent incidents, including killing and
arson, were verified.
Grave violations
71. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 39 children by parties to
conflict, including five boys between the ages of 12 and 15, used by the Iraqi Federal
Police in Ninawa Governorate to fortify a checkpoint, and one 15 -year-old boy used
by ISIL in Anbar Governorate to drive a car bomb into Fallujah city. In addition, 33
Yazidi boys between the ages of 15 and 17 were rescued after being abducted in Iraq
in 2014 by ISIL and trained and deployed to fight in the Syrian Arab Repub lic.
72. As of December, at least 902 children (850 boys and 52 girls) between the ages
of 15 and 18 remained in detention on national security-related charges, including for
their actual and alleged association with armed groups, primarily ISIL.
73. The United Nations verified the killing (48) and maiming (84) of 132 children
(105 boys, 27 girls), an 82 per cent decrease compared with 2017, mainly due to a
significant reduction in military operations against ISIL. A number of casualties were
attributed to ISIL (38) and the Iraqi Security Forces (1), while responsibility could
not be attributed for the remaining casualties.
74. Almost half of the child casualties (61) were caused by explosive remnants of
war found mainly in areas previously under ISIL control, in the Governorates of
Ninawa, Kirkuk, Diyala and Salah al-Din. Among those casualties, 28 child casualties
resulted from improvised explosive devices, including children used for carrying and
detonating improvised explosive devices, and 19 resulted from indirect attacks with
small arms and light weapons, mainly in Ninawa, Kirkuk, Diyala and Salah al -Din.
Among the remaining casualties, 16 child casualties were a result of targeted killings
and ill-treatment. In addition, two explosions in weapons and ammunition storage
facilities belonging to popular mobilization forces (PMF) occurred near or in
residential areas, in Karbala’ and Salah al-Din governorates, injuring eight children.
75. As a result of stigma and fear of retribution, among other issues, the United
Nations did not verify any cases of sexual violence against children.
76. The United Nations verified 24 attacks on schools (21) and hospitals (3). All
attacks on schools resulted from crossfire between ISF and ISIL during 2016 and
2017, in areas that only became accessible for verification in 2018, mainly in Kirkuk
Governorate. The three attacks against hospitals and medical personnel were
attributed to ISIL and comprised the killing of one member of medical staff in Diyala,
an attack on a medical centre in Kirkuk and the looting of supplies from Dara medical
centre in Kirkuk.
77. A total of 48 incidents of the military use of schools by ISIL were verified in
areas previously under ISIL control in Kirkuk, between 2014 and 2017, which became
accessible for verification in 2018. Of concern was also the temporary presence of
members of the Iraqi Security Forces inside schools in Ninawa, Salah al-Din and
Diyala, prior to and during the election period, to provide security to the Independent
High Electoral Commission.

19-10176

13/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

78. The United Nations verified two abductions of children. In one incident, a
16-year-old girl was abducted by an unidentified armed man in Mosul. In the other
case, a 14-year-old Yazidi girl was abducted by ISIL in 2015 and later sold. Both girls
were rescued by the Iraqi Security Forces in 2018.
79. While no incident of denial of humanitarian access was ver ified in 2018,
humanitarian actors faced bureaucratic impediments, which translated into restriction
of movement. Families with perceived affiliation with ISIL continued to face
challenges in obtaining the necessary security clearance to gain access to bas ic
services, including education and health, as well as restrictions on their freedom of
movement to leave areas or camp settings in order to seek medical assistance.
Developments and concerns
80. I welcome the ongoing discussions with the Government of Iraq on developing
an action plan to prevent child recruitment and use by PMF and encourage its forces ’
screening. I call on the InterMinisterial Committee on Monitoring and Reporting to
resume regular consultations with the United Nations in order to proceed with its
signature and implementation.
81. I welcome the release of 40 boys by tribal armed groups, with the support of the
United Nations, which assisted in their reintegration.
82. I am deeply concerned about the situation of children held in detention on
security-related charges and emphasize the need to treat children primarily as victims
and in line with international juvenile justice standards. I further call for detention to
be a measure of last resort and for the shortest possible period of time, and for the
respect of due process. The restriction of movement imposed on civilians with
suspected links to ISIL in camps for internally displaced persons is of concern, as is
their physical security upon return to their areas of origin. I reiterat e the willingness
of the United Nations to support the Government in prioritizing the reintegration of
children formerly associated with parties to conflict.
83. I call upon all countries concerned to facilitate the repatriation of foreign women
and children actually and allegedly affiliated with ISIL, in line with the guiding
principle of non-refoulement and with respect for the best interests of the child.
Israel and State of Palestine
84. Palestinian and Israeli children continued to be severely affected by the
continuing Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. In 2018,
the United Nations verified the highest number of Palestinian children killed (59) and
injured (2,756) since 2014. Six Israeli children were verified as h aving been injured.
Grave violations
85. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of three 17 -year-old boys
in Gaza (two) and the West Bank (one) by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad ’s al-Quds
Brigades, Hamas’ al-Qassam Brigades and an unidentified Palestinian armed group
(one each). The United Nations received testimony from three children, between the
ages of 15 and 16, that Israeli forces attempted to recruit them as informants.
86. As of December, 203 Palestinian children were held over sec urity offences by
the Israeli forces, including 114 in pretrial detention and/or being detained during
trial, and 87 serving a sentence. The United Nations received affidavits from 127
Palestinian boys who, during interviews with the United Nations, report ed illtreatment and breaches of due process during their arrest, transfer and detention. The
United Nations documented four cases of the administrative detention of Palestinian
children in 2018.
14/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

87. A total of 59 Palestinian children (57 boys, 2 girls), some as young as 18 months
old, were killed in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem (8) and Gaza (51), with
most of the casualties attributed to Israeli forces (56) and one to an Israeli settler. In
addition, one child was killed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad ’s al-Quds Brigades,
and one boy was killed by an improvised explosive device accidentally detonated at
his home by his father, an Al-Aqsa Brigade member. Of these 59 children, 33 boys
and 1 girl were killed by Israeli forces during demonstrations at the Gaza fence, 88
per cent of whom (30) were shot by live ammunition to the upper body, while
reportedly posing no imminent threat of death or serious injury to Israeli forces, and
another 2 boys died after being struck in the head by tear gas canisters. Three children
were killed by Israeli forces air strikes in Gaza. In the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, eight boys were killed by Israeli forces, five of whom were shot during
demonstrations and clashes.
88. The United Nations verified that 2,756 Palestinian children were injured (2,514
boys, 242 girls) in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, an increase compared with 2017
(1,160), owing to injuries sustained during the Great March of Retur n. In the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, 1,421 were injured by Israeli forces (1,398) and
settlers (23) in the context of demonstrations, clashes and search and arrest
operations, including 988 injured as a result of inhaling tear gas, subsequently
requiring medical treatment. Three boys were injured while committing or allegedly
attempting to commit stabbing attacks against Israelis. In Gaza, 1,335 child casualties
were attributed to Israeli forces, 1,276 of whom were injured between March and
December during demonstrations at the Gaza fence, 62 per cent injured by live
ammunition (629) or shrapnel (167) and 35 per cent by tear gas inhalation (443).
Twenty children had limbs amputated.
89. Six Israeli children were injured, including two girls injured in their home by a
rocket fired indiscriminately by a Palestinian armed group.
90. Two schools in Gaza were damaged during ground attacks by Israeli forces, and
a further four schools were damaged during air strikes by Israeli forces. A mortar
launched by Palestinian armed groups from Gaza exploded in the yard of a
kindergarten near Sderot, a town located in southern Israel. No injuries were reported
in connection with those attacks.
91. The United Nations verified 118 incidents of interference with educa tion in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory by Israeli forces (113) and Israeli settlers (5), affecting
23,188 children. Among those were two verified incidents of the military use of a
school by Israeli forces. More than half of verified interferences invo lved Israeli
forces firing live ammunition, tear gas or sound grenades in and around schools,
mostly in the context of clashes or military operations. Of particular concern is the
fact that Israeli forces did not always intervene when settlers entered Urif village and
attacked the secondary school. Attacks on the school in Urif have been verified since
2012.
92. Conflict escalations also caused significant disruptions to children ’s education
in Gaza and southern Israel, when schools were closed for the saf ety of students and
educators as a result of air strikes by Israeli forces and indiscriminate rocket fire by
Palestinian armed groups. For example, school closures affected an estimated 63,000
children in southern Israel and 637,195 children in Gaza during escalations of conflict
on 12 and 13 November.
93. Three health facilities were damaged in Israeli forces air strikes. Three members
of medical personnel were killed and a further 553 injured by Israeli forces, including
375 by tear gas inhalation, while providing medical services during Gaza
demonstrations. Seven interferences with health services were documented in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, due to Israeli forces incursions into or clashes
19-10176

15/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

near health facilities, as well as attacks by Israeli settlers on medical vehicles and
personnel.
94. With respect to applications to Israeli authorities for children to cross into Israel
for medical treatment outside Gaza, approval for 24 per cent of such applications was
reported as having been delayed, affecting 1,079 boys and 689 girls. Applications on
behalf of children injured in Gaza demonstrations were approved at a very low rate
(22 per cent approval compared with the average of 75 per cent for other cases
involving children).
Developments and concerns
95. I am extremely concerned by the significant rise in the maiming of and injuries
caused to children across Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including by
tear gas inhalation requiring medical treatment. I request my Special Repres entative
to further examine the cases of maiming and injuries caused by Israeli forces, and
urge Israel to immediately put in place preventive and protective measures to end the
excessive use of force. I reiterate my call upon Israel to uphold internationa l juvenile
justice standards, as well as to cease the use of administrative detention for children
and end all forms of ill-treatment in detention, and to cease any attempted recruitment
of detained children as informants.
96. I urge all parties to apply all feasible measures to ensure the protection of and
care for children affected by armed conflict and to refrain from the excessive use of
force. I call on all parties to engage constructively with the United Nations to prevent
future violations.
97. I urge all Palestinian actors to refrain from encouraging children ’s participation
in violence. I call upon the al-Quds and al-Qassam Brigades to immediately cease the
recruitment and use of children, and I further request my Special Representative to
further examine recruitment and use by armed groups.
Lebanon
98. Armed clashes in camps for Palestinian refugees, sporadic armed violence and
the presence of mines and other explosive devices negatively affected children
throughout the country.
Grave violations
99. The recruitment and use of children by armed groups continued, with 22
children (21 boys, 1 girl) verified as associated with the Ansarullah Movement (Ansar
Allah) (5), Hizbullah (1) or unidentified militia (16). They were mostly used as guards
or in support roles, for carrying weapons or food. For example, five boys associated
with Ansar Allah, between the ages of 14 and 17, were trained to use weapons, wore
military uniforms and held Kalashnikov rifles in Mieh Mieh camp for Palestinian
refugees in Sidon in October.
100. Children continued to be arrested and prosecuted in relation to terrorism charges
as part of military justice processes, with 20 new arrests in 2018 for alleged
association with ISIL. As of December, 16 children remained in detention on such
charges, 9 of whom were in pretrial detention and 7 of whom were detained following
sentencing.
101. A total of 14 child casualties (13 boys, 1 girl) were verified, resulting from
unattributed mine explosions (6) or crossfire (8), mainly in North Biqa ‘, Akkar and
the south.

16/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

102. Marking an increase compared with 2017, five United Nations facilities in
Palestinian refugee camps (3 schools, 2 health centres) sustained damage from
crossfire between armed actors in three camps for Palestinian refugees. For example,
two schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) were damaged by shrapnel in Ein El Hilweh in
October. In addition, armed clashes in camps for Palestinian refugees disrupted
educational activities in UNRWA schools, with more than 11,000 students deprived
of at least one day of school in Ein El Hilweh and Shatila camps and over 400 students
deprived of 20 consecutive school days in Mieh Mieh camp. Two United Nations
clinics had to close for 2 days and 19 days in Shatila and Mieh Mieh camps,
respectively, affecting approximately 200 patients a day.
Developments and concerns
103. I am concerned about armed clashes in camps for Palestinian refugees and about
the recruitment and use of children. I am also concerned about attacks on schools and
the impact thereof on children’s well-being and access to education. I reiterate my
call for the Government to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Children
associated with armed groups should be treated primarily as victims, detained only as
a last resort and for the shortest possible period of time, and be promptly referred to
reintegration programmes. I call on armed groups to imme diately cease the
recruitment and use of children.
Libya
104. The ceasefire agreement brokered by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in September 2018 led to a decrease in hostilities in Tripoli.
However, sporadic fighting continued in parts of Libya and children fell victim to
indiscriminate attacks, including during exchanges of crossfire in densely populated
areas. The lack of access for monitoring actors, owing to the security situation,
severely inhibited the verification of grave violations against children.
Grave violations
105. The United Nations received reports of the increased recruitment and use of
children, yet information could not be verified owing to security and access
restrictions. Communities are also believed not to have reported incidents, out of fear
of repercussions.
106. Children were deprived of liberty by the Libyan National Army for their alleged
association with the Petroleum Facilities Guard (PFG) in the context of clashes in the
oil crescent region. The United Nations also received reports of refugee and migrant
children held by criminal networks allegedly associated with armed groups.
107. The United Nations verified the killing (30) and maiming (44) of 74 children by
unidentified armed elements. Child casualties resulted from air strikes, shelling in
urban areas, small arms fire as well as from improvised explosive devices and
unexploded ordnance, mainly in Tripoli, Benghazi and in southern Libya. Children
fell victim to clashes, including between the Libyan National Army and the Darnah
Protection Force (DPF) in Darnah, between the Libyan National Army and PFG forces
in the oil crescent region, and between tribal groups in Sabha.
108. The United Nations was unable to verify any case of sexual violence against
children. However, refugee and migrant children were reportedly subjected to sexual
abuse, including forced prostitution and sexual exploitation, in conditions that could
amount to sexual slavery, by traffickers or criminal networks allegedly associated
with armed groups.
19-10176

17/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

109. The United Nations verified attacks on schools (5) and hospitals (37), mostly in
the context of clashes between armed groups including shelling and crossfire,
including in Sabha, Darnah and Tripoli. Attacks on schools were attributed to Ahmad
al-Dabbashi (1) and the Abu Salim brigade (1) while three remained unattributed. The
attacks on hospitals, all of which were unattributed, included the killing and maiming
of 12 members of health-care personnel and of three patients.
110. While no incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verifie d, humanitarian
actors in Libya continued to face restrictions, including administrative and
bureaucratic impediments in providing humanitarian assistance to civilians, including
children, who were also denied access to appropriate health care.
Developments and concerns
111. I welcome the collaboration between the United Nations and local authorities in
the area of Zintan on the reintegration of children and the engagement with armed
groups to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children. I urge all parties to
engage with the United Nations to strengthen the protection and the prevention of
violations against children.
112. I am deeply concerned about the levels of child casualties, often owing to
indiscriminate shelling and crossfire in urban areas. The abuse of refuge e and migrant
children, including through trafficking, deprivation of liberty and sexual abuse, is
abhorrent and I call upon the Government of National Accord to swiftly act to protect
children and prevent them from being subjected to these violations.
Mali
113. The security situation in northern and central Mali remained volatile, marked
by military operations and attacks by armed groups against Malian Defence and
Security Forces, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and armed groups signatories to the 2015 Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting in civilian casualties. The Central
region was caught in a spiral of violence with the rise of self-defence groups and
intercommunal conflict triggering killings and forced displacement, as well as
affecting children’s welfare. Previously peaceful western regions also witnessed
instability.
Grave violations
114. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 109 boys and 5 girls.
The main perpetrators were Platform (57) (including the Groupe d ’autodéfense des
Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés (GATIA) (27), Ganda Lassale Izo (24) and other
Platform members (6)), and the Coordination des mouvements de l ’Azawad (CMA)
(23) (including the Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) (12),
the Haut Conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad (9) and other CMA members (2)). At least
31 children were used as combatants, 3 of whom were children between the ages of
14 and 17 who were associated with Congrès pour la justice dans l’Azawad and were
killed by CMA at a checkpoint in Timbuktu region.
115. A total of 13 boys arrested by the Malian Defence and Security Forces for their
alleged association with armed groups or on national security charg es were released
after between 5 days and 60 days in detention, including 5 boys who were ill -treated
while detained. Three other children were deprived of their liberty in Ménaka by
GATIA, the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad (MSA) and by joint GATIA/MSA
forces (one each).

18/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

116. A total of 77 children (13 girls, 64 boys) were killed and 52 maimed (16 girls,
36 boys) as a result of intercommunal conflict, crossfire, improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war. Responsibility for the majori ty of the child
casualties could not be attributed, except for 16 casualties attributed to the Group of
Support to Islam and Muslims (Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin) (GSIM) and
another 16 to traditional hunters of Dan Na Ambassagou. The regions most affected
were Mopti and Gao.
117. Sexual violence continued to be highly underreported. A total of 20 girls
between the ages of 12 and 17 were victims of rape and sexual violence perpetrated
by unidentified armed groups (18), Forces armées maliennes and GATIA (1 each).
118. A total of 81 attacks on schools were verified, which doubled from the number
verified in 2017 (41). The responsibility for most incidents was unattributed, except
for two attacks perpetrated by GSIM. At least 40 schools closed following direct
threats made to teachers. Other incidents included the burning of schools and physical
attacks on school personnel. The most affected regions were Mopti (50) and
Koulikoro (20) in the centre and the west/south of the country. As of December, 827
schools remained closed, leaving more than 244,000 children with no access to
education. The United Nations verified 21 attacks against hospitals, all unattributed,
in Mopti (12), Timbuktu (7) and Gao (2) regions, involving abductions of protected
personnel and the carjacking of health centres’ vehicles and ambulances.
119. Eight boys and one girl were abducted by unidentified traditional hunters (two) ,
Islamic State in Greater Sahara and GATIA (one each) and unidentified armed groups
(five). The girl abducted by GATIA in Gao region was subjected to sexual violence.
120. A total of 170 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified, the
responsibility for which was unattributed except for incidents attributed to Dan Na
Ambassagou (two), GATIA and Malian Defence and Security Forces (one each). Most
incidents occurred in Timbuktu (41), Gao (36), Mopti (30), Kidal (26) and Ménaka
(24) regions resulting in the disruption of the provision of humanitarian assistance to
children, such as health care, vaccination and food distribution.
Developments and concerns
121. Following the adoption of the Safe Schools Declaration in February, I encourage
the Government to continue its implementation, including the mapping of schools
closed as a result of direct threats and insecurity
122. A joint United Nations-CMA-Government coordination mechanism was
established for the implementation of the 2017 action plan. However, the
implementation has been slow, and I am concerned by the continued recruitment and
use of children. I urge CMA to implement the action plan without delay. In 2018, 102
boys and 5 girls formerly associated with armed groups received reintegration support
from UNICEF and partners.
123. The United Nations continued engagement with French forces from Operation
Barkhane on the protection of children during military operations. Twelve children
captured by Barkhane during military operations were handed over to civilian child
protection actors. Three children captured by MINUSMA were transferred to the
Gendarmerie before their handover to civilian authorities. Dialogue was initiated with
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel to mainstream child protection in
their operations. I welcome the adoption of a compliance framework by the Joint
Force and encourage the Force to implement the child protection aspects therein,
including the handover of children.
124. In the framework of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and integration process in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, nine individuals,
19-10176

19/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

who were presumed to be children, were identified during the screening of combatants
but were not released, as they presented adult identity cards, which had been issued a
few days prior to the screening. I am concerned by these reports and urge all parties
to facilitate the immediate and unconditional release of all associated children. I am
also concerned by the increasing number of child casualties, in particular resulting
from an intercommunal conflict in central Mali, including by Dan Na Ambassagou,
which further deteriorated in early 2019. I am concerned about the continuing high
numbers of children recruited and used by the Platform and urge it to develop an
action plan with the support of the United Nations to release children and end this
practice.
Myanmar
125. Armed conflict continued to take place both between the Tatmadaw and armed
groups, and among armed groups, notably in Shan, Kachin and Rakhine States. In the
last quarter of the year, fighting between the Tatmadaw and the Arakan Army
intensified in central Rakhine and southern Chin States. Attacks by Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army elements against Government forces were also registered. This
resulted in the continuous displacement of civilians across the two states. Hundreds
of thousands of Rohingya, half of whom are children, remained in Rakhine State, and
those displaced in Shan and Kachin States continue to face serious hardships.
Grave violations
126. The United Nations verified 7 children having been recruited and 64 children
having been used by the Tatmadaw in 2018. In addition, the past recruitment of 26
boys by the Tatmadaw was verified in 2018.
127. The United Nations verified 11 incidents of the recruitment and use of 17
children (14 boys and 3 girls) by armed groups. Nine incidents were attributed to the
Kachin Independence Army (KIA), one to Ta’ang National Liberation Army (TNLA)
and one to Karen National Liberation Army. In addition, two incidents were
documented involving United Wa State Army (UWSA).
128. The United Nations documented the detention of five suspected minors, who
had been recruited by the Tatmadaw and held for desertion, and advocated their
release. They were placed on light duty in their regiments, pending assessment of
their ages. In addition, despite United Nations advocacy, an appeal remains ongoing
regarding the charges against the former child soldier Aung Ko Htwe, who was
forcibly recruited by the Tatmadaw in 2005 and sentenced to two years imprisonment
for sharing his experience with the media. As of December, he remained in detention.
Furthermore, the United Nations sent 12 advocacy letters to the Tatmadaw regarding
the assignment to the front lines of 11 suspected minors, who were returned to rear
bases, pending verification of their ages.
129. The United Nations verified 34 incidents of the killing and maiming of children,
resulting in the death of 16 children and injury to 39 children, mainly caused by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices (24),
crossfire (4), air strikes by the Tatmadaw (2), gunshots by Border Guard Police (BGP)
(2) and unidentified elements (1), and mortar shells launched by an unknown armed
element (1).
130. The United Nations documented eight incidents of attacks against schools (five)
and hospitals (three) in Kachin (six) and Shan (two) States, attributed to Tatmadaw
(two), KIA (two), Restoration Council of Shan State/Shan State Army (RCSS/SSA)
(one) and unidentified elements (three).

20/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

131. The United Nations received 32 reports of the military use of schools (30) and
hospitals (2) in Rakhine (30) and Kachin (2) States, attributed to the Tatmadaw (21),
BGP (7), and jointly to the Tatmadaw and BGP (4). In one incident in Kachi n State,
a hospital was used as a military base for 13 days, denying the local population access
thereto.
132. The United Nations verified three incidents of abduction affecting nine boys,
attributed to Tatmadaw (two) and KIA (one). Another six incidents were documented
reportedly affecting 36 children, attributed to the KIA (four), the TNLA (one) and the
UWSA (one).
133. Humanitarian access, particularly in Kachin, Shan and Rakhine States,
continued to deteriorate. International humanitarian organizations have not been able
to deliver relief supplies in areas beyond the Government ’s control since 2016 owing
to denial of travel authorizations.
Developments and concerns
134. I am encouraged by the Government’s formation of an interministerial
committee to prevent all six grave violations and discuss action plans on ending and
preventing sexual violence and killing and maiming, following their listing in my
previous report, and hope for progress in granting access to conflict-affected areas of
Myanmar and holding perpetrators accountable. I reiterate my call for the
Government to fully comply with and to finalize action plans on ending and
preventing the two remaining violations, with the United Nations, as a priority and
encourage the Government to adopt a law on child rights. I remain concerned about
the ongoing recruitment and use of children and detention of children by the
Government.
135. In 2018, the United Nations engaged with all listed armed groups, in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions, except for UWSA, and commitments are
being sought from RCSS/SSA, Democratic Karen Benevolent Army, Karen National
Liberation Army Peace Council and Karen National Union. I strongly encourage
listed parties to remain engaged with the United Nations in adopting concrete
commitments, and to take action to prevent and address the recruitment of children
with immediate effect.
136. During her visit to Myanmar in May 2018, my Special Representative stressed
to the Government the need for accelerated implementation of the joint action plan
on ending and preventing the recruitment and use of children. She urged the
Government to ensure no new violations would occur with respect to child
recruitment and use, to expedite the age assessment of recruits, to release suspected
minors whose cases are pending, and to cease the detention of children for desertion
or for being absent without leave. Though efforts are under way, full comp liance is
yet to be achieved and aggravated cases of new recruitment occurred in 2018, with
no progress on accountability. However, 75 children and young people recruited as
children were released from the Tatmadaw in 2018 and there has been steady progres s
in addressing the backlog of cases from previous years.
137. I am concerned about the levels of recruitment and use, and of the killing and
maiming of children, notably caused by landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices, and condemn grave violations committed by all
parties.
Somalia
138. The political and security situation in Somalia was marked by tensions between
the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states, with the latter
19-10176

21/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

breaking off relations with the Federal Government in September. The situation
improved from December onwards, when the Federal Government engaged federal
member states to normalize relations. Al-Shabaab continued its attacks against the
Somali National Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
used improvised explosive devices against civilians, often with children as victims.
In 2018, the number of children affected by grave violations increased by 23 per cent
compared with 2017.
Grave violations
139. A total of 2,228 boys and 72 girls, some as young as 8, were recruited and used
by parties to conflict. The recruitment of children by Al -Shabaab significantly
increased (1,865) compared with 2017 as the group sustained its recruitment drive,
including by forcing clan elders and parents to provide children or face reprisal. Other
perpetrators included the Somali National Army (155), Somali police (93), Galmudug
forces (67), Jubbaland forces (56), clan militias (24), Puntland forces (20) and Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (ASWJ) (14).
140. The detention of children for their alleged association with Al -Shabaab
remained a serious concern, with 360 boys and 15 girls affected. Children were
detained by the Somali National Army (168), Somali police (145), Jubbaland forces
(20), National Intelligence and Security Agency (18), Galmudug forces and AMISOM
(3 each), clan militia and “Somaliland” elements (2 each) and ASWJ (1). Al-Shabaab
held 13 children for failing to respect their rules.
141. A total of 781 boys and 260 girls were killed and maimed by Al-Shabaab (437),
unidentified armed elements (344), Somali National Army (113), clan militias (36),
Somali police (26), Jubbaland forces (24), Galmudug forces (19), AMISOM (15),
Southwest forces (10), unidentified air strikes (8), Puntland forces (6), Ethiopian Liyu
Police, Ethiopian National Defence Forces and Kenya Defence Forces (1 each). Most
child casualties resulted from crossfire, targeted killings, aerial bombardments,
improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks.
142. The United Nations verified incidents of sexual violence affecting 328 girls and
3 boys, attributed to unidentified armed elements ( 114), Somali National Army (50),
Al-Shabaab (46), clan militias (42), Jubbaland forces (31), Galmudug forces (14),
Somali police (13), Southwest forces (10), Ethiopian Liyu Police (6), Puntland forces
(3), and Ethiopian National Defence Forces (2).
143. A total of 77 attacks on schools were verified, the majority (61) attributed to
Al-Shabaab. Incidents included killing, abduction and threats against teachers,
destruction and looting. On 9 June, a Koranic school teacher was forced to leave
Galharur village, Aden Yabal district, Shabelle Dhexe Region, after receiving threats
for not teaching according to Al-Shabaab’s curriculum. A total of 14 attacks on
hospitals were verified and attributed to Al-Shabaab (7), Galmudug forces (4) and
unidentified armed elements, clan militias and the Somali National Army (1 each).
144. A total of 1,609 children (1,479 boys, 130 girls), some as young a s 8, were
verified as abducted, 97 per cent of them by Al-Shabaab (1,590) mainly for the
purpose of recruitment and use. On 13 October, three boys between the ages of 11
and 16 were abducted by Al-Shabaab from a local madrasa in Howlwadaag village,
Bu’aale district, Juba Dhexe Region. The children were taken to a training facility for
indoctrination and subsequent recruitment.
145. A total of 74 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified by the
United Nations, a sharp increase from 2017 (37). Most incidents were attributed to
Al-Shabaab (41).

22/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Developments and concerns
146. The Federal Government elaborated a road map to expedite the implementation
of the two action plans signed in 2012. I welcome this positive development and call
for its swift implementation by all Government security forces, including the Somali
National Army and the Somali police. I also commend the drafting of the Child Rights
Bill, which incorporates the Convention on the Rights of the Child into domestic law,
and urge its speedy enactment. The Sexual Offence Bill is also a positive development
and I call for its enactment.
147. I welcome the decree signed by the President of Puntland on 20 August
pardoning 34 children who had previously received heavy sentences and been
imprisoned since 2016 for their alleged association with Al -Shabaab.
148. During 2018, 74 children were released from the Puntland forces, 17 of whom
separated during the screening of those Forces earmarked for integration into the
Somali National Army. In addition, the Somali National Army rescued 36 boys, some
as young as 7, from an Al-Shabaab training centre in Shabelle Hoose Region. All
children were handed over to UNICEF and partners for reintegration support. Overall,
1,179 children formerly associated with armed forces and groups received
reintegration support in 2018.
149. I am very concerned by the increase in the recruitment and use, and killing and
maiming of children, and in the number of children who have been subjected to sexual
violence, the perpetration of which is attributed to the Somali National Army and the
Somali police. I am also preoccupied by the steady increase in grave violations by
regional forces, in particular Galmudug and Jubbaland forces, and strongly encourage
them to engage with the United Nations to end and prevent violations.
150. I remain severely concerned by the increased recruitment and use, and the
continuous abductions of children by Al-Shabaab. I call upon all parties to
immediately cease and prevent all violations against children. I also remain concerned
by the detention of children for their alleged association with Al-Shabaab and call on
authorities to treat these children primarily as victims, to prioritize their reintegration
in line with their best interests, and to respect due process and international juvenile
justice standards.
South Sudan
151. The signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in South
Sudan in September 2018 resulted in a decrease in hostilities and a slight
improvement in humanitarian access to children. However, the parties made modest
progress on the implementation of the peace agreement and spikes in abductions and
sexual violence against children were noted after the signing of the agreement. The
greater Equatoria region remained the epicentre of grave violations with 50 per cent
of the total number of incidents.
Grave violations
152. The United Nations verified 102 incidents of recruitment or use affecting 453
children (365 boys, 88 girls), 14 per cent of whom were under 15 years of age at the
time of their recruitment. Almost half of the cases were attributed to the South Sudan
National Liberation Movement (SSNLM) (224 children), followed by the pro -Machar
Sudan People’s Liberation Army-in-Opposition (SPLA-IO) (84) and the National
Salvation Front (NAS) (2), with some cases relating to chi ldren who had been
recruited in previous years. Close to 30 per cent of the children were recruited and
used by Government Security Forces (143), including the South Sudan People ’s
Defence Forces (SSPDF) (94), Taban Deng-allied SSPDF (46), the South Sudan
19-10176

23/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

National Police Service (SSNPS) (2) and the National Prison Service of South Sudan
(NPSSS) (1). In addition, 955 children were released by the SSNLM (629), Taban
Deng-allied SSPDF (318) and NAS (8).
153. A total of 125 children (69 boys, 45 girls, 11 sex unknown) were verified as
having been killed and maimed by Government Security Forces (75), including the
SSPDF (66), the SSNPS (8) and the South Sudan National Fire Brigade (1). The
pro-Machar SPLA-IO was responsible for the killing and maiming of five children.
Fifteen children were affected by crossfire between SSPDF and pro -Machar
SPLA-IO, and crossfire between the South Sudan National Movement for Change
(SSNMC) and pro-Machar SPLA-IO affected seven children. Children also continued
to be affected by unexploded ordnance (23).
154. A total of 72 children, including 1 boy, were subjected to sexual violence, 33 of
whom were under 15 years of age and 8 of whom were gang -raped. The majority of
cases were attributed to the Government Security Forces (57), in cluding SSPDF (47
children, including 1 boy), SSNPS (6), Taban Deng-allied SSPDF (2), and to NPSSS
and the National Security Service (1 each). The pro -Machar SPLA-IO was
responsible for perpetrating sexual violence against 14 girls and responsibility for o ne
case was attributed to unidentified armed elements. In addition, a spike in cases of
sexual violence in northern Unity was reported by the United Nations in the last
quarter of 2018.
155. A total of 30 attacks on schools (18) and hospitals (12) were verified and
attributed to Government Security Forces (11), including SSPDF (10) and the Taban
Deng-allied SSPDF (1), as well as to pro-Machar SPLA-IO (15), NAS (1) and to
crossfire incidents between SSPDF and pro-Machar SPLA-IO (3). Attacks
predominantly involved the destruction and looting of educational or medical
facilities.
156. In addition, 33 schools (26) and hospitals (7) were used for military purposes,
the majority by Government Security Forces (27), including SSPDF (25) and Taban
Deng-allied SSPDF (2), followed by pro-Machar SPLA-IO (5) and SSNMC (1).
157. A total of 109 children (49 boys, 51 girls, 9 sex unknown) were verified as
having been abducted. The pro-Machar SPLA-IO was responsible for a large majority
of those cases (92), often for the purpose of rape and other forms of sexual violence
and for the recruitment and use of children. SSPDF was responsible for the abduction
of 17 children.
158. A total of 14 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified in a
context that continued to be challenging for humanitarian actors Incidents were
attributed to pro-Machar SPLA-IO (10), SSPDF (3), and NAS (1) and involved
attacks, the abduction of humanitarian personnel and the looting of humanitarian aid
intended for children. For instance, in April 2018, pro-Machar SPLA-IO held 10
humanitarian workers for five days in Central Equatoria.
Developments and concerns
159. I welcome South Sudan’s accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict in
September 2018, following the mission of my Special Representative to South Sudan,
and the release of 955 children (including 317 girls) by armed groups that integrated
SSPDF in 2018, including Taban Deng-allied SSPDF and SSNLM. I am encouraged
by the willingness of the Government to engage with the United Nations on the
development of a comprehensive action plan for ending and preventing all grave
violations against children. The elaboration of a draft, together with the United
Nations, in February 2019 is a welcome first step and I encourage the Government
24/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

and allied parties to finalize the action plan without delay. Within the framework of
the existing action plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use, signed in 2012
and recommitted to in 2014, the SSPDF appointed child protection focal points across
its divisions, organized trainings on child protection jointly with the United Nations
and granted access for the United Nations to conduct screenings in Bentiu military
barracks.
160. I am seriously concerned about the ongoing impunity for violations against
children and urge the Government to ensure accountability, in particular for sexual
violence. I urge the Government to ensure that the protection of children is addressed
in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, including by ensuring that
crimes against children are not amnestied. I further urge the Government to cease
attacks on schools and the military use thereof, in line with its endorsement of the
Safe Schools Declaration. In addition, I am extremely concerned about the increase
in abductions, often for the purpose of sexual violence and recruitment, and urge the
pro-Machar SPLA-IO faction to engage with the United Nations on the action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children and the killing and maiming of
children signed in 2016.
The Sudan
161. While fighting subsided in large parts of Darfur, sporadic clashes between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW)
continued in the Jebel Marra area, resulting in the displacement of civilians and in an
upsurge in killing and maiming of children, the number of children subjected to sexual
violence and in the number of children abducted. Progress in implementing the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remained limited, as did political dialogue between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North
(SPLM/N). While unilateral ceasefires were extended in Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan
and Darfur, violations were reported in the Blue Nile, as were clashes between
factions of SPLM/N. The ability of the United Nations to monitor and report on grave
violations was hampered by access restrictions and reduced child protection capacity.
Grave violations: Darfur
162. No cases of the recruitment and use of children were verified in 2018, although
allegations thereof were received.
163. The United Nations verified a total of 77 incidents of killing and maiming
affecting 186 children (121 boys, 65 girls), a 27 per cent increase compared with 2017
(146). Child casualties were attributed to Government Security Forc es (98), including
the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) (33), the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) (57) and the
Sudan Police Force (8), often occurring in the context of military operations in the
Jebel Marra area. Remaining casualties were attributed to unidentified ar med
elements (16), SLA/AW (9) and SLA/General Leadership (1). More than a third of
incidents (62 children) were caused by unexploded ordnance.
164. The United Nations verified that 68 girls were subjected to sexual violence, a
55 per cent increase compared with 2017 (44). Cases were attributed to Government
Security Forces (39), including RSF (20), SAF (17), the Sudan Police Force (1), the
National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) (1), followed by unidentified
armed elements (29). The majority of cases occurred in the context of clashes in the
Jebel Marra area.
165. A total of 17 attacks on schools (14) and hospitals (3) were verified and
attributed to Government Security Forces (12), including RSF (7) and SAF (5),
followed by unidentified armed elements (5). In addition, the United Nations verified
the military use of one school by SAF in West Darfur, which was vacated during the
19-10176

25/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

year. A school used for military purposes by SAF in Laiba, East Jebel Marra, reported
on previously, remained occupied at the time of writing.
166. A total of 22 children (17 boys, 5 girls) were verified as having been abducted
by the Government Security Forces (14), including RSF (9), SAF (2), the Border
Guards (2) and the Popular Police Force (1), and most of those abductio ns were
followed by arrests. Unidentified armed elements were responsible for the abduction
of eight children.
167. While no incident of denial of humanitarian access was verified, the prevailing
security situation and access restrictions imposed by partie s to conflict largely
complicated humanitarian access to children.
Grave violations: Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile and Abyei
168. During the reporting period, access restrictions hindered monitoring and
reporting by the United Nations on grave violations committed against children.
169. The killing of a boy by unexploded ordnance was verified in Southern Kordofan.
170. Three schools and one health clinic in Blue Nile, which had been used for
military purposes since 2011, were vacated by the Government in June 2018.
Developments and concerns
171. Major political developments in April 2019 resulted in the removal of the
President of the Sudan and his Government. I welcome efforts made to sustain the
gains of the action plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use, which was
completed in 2018, including by preserving institutional structures at the national and
state levels and taking steps to develop, with the United Nations, a national plan for
the prevention of violations against children. I am encouraged by the continued
collaboration between the Government and the United Nations in the training of
security forces, local authorities, community members and community-based child
protection networks on child protection and child rights, in particular at the state level,
and I encourage these areas of collaboration to be further reinforced in all parts of
Darfur. I also welcome the vacating by military authorities of schools and health
facilities and encourage the authorities to continue to demilitarize schools, in line
with the Safe Schools Declaration. I further encourage the authorities to
operationalize the complaint mechanism manual for reporting child recruitment, to
disseminate the standard operating procedures on the release and handover of children
associated with armed groups among all Government security forces and to roll out
the national awareness-raising campaign for preventing violations against children.
172. I am, however, concerned about the elevated numbers of cases of killing and
maiming, sexual violence and abductions perpetrated against children in the context
of clashes in the Jebel Marra area. I remind all pa rties to abide by their obligations
under international law to protect children, including by respecting the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and by ensuring the accountability of all
perpetrators. I am further concerned about the lack of access for the United Nations
to areas under SPLM/N control and call on the group to allow and facilitate safe and
unimpeded access to verify the implementation of its 2016 action plan on ending and
preventing the recruitment and use of children.
Syrian Arab Republic
173. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic continued throughout 2018, with an
increasing number of grave violations (3,021), the highest number of violations ever
verified in the country, despite security and access restrictions . In addition, 934
violations that took place in 2017 and in previous years were also verified. In January,
26/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

the Government of Turkey officially launched Operation “Olive Branch” in support
of groups self-affiliated with the Free Syrian Army (FSA) in northern Syrian Arab
Republic. Following a five-year-long besiegement, pro-Government forces regained
control over the previously besieged enclave of eastern Ghutah. April witnessed the
launch of the Government’s military operations against armed groups in southern
Damascus. In July, fighting between the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), supported
by the international counter-ISIL coalition, and ISIL in Hajin and Dashishah, Dayr
al-Zawr, intensified, with air strikes and ground operations.
Grave violations
174. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 806 children (670 boys,
136 girls), 22 per cent of whom were under 15 years of age (179), and 94 per cent of
whom were used in combat roles (754). The majority of the children were recruited
and used by YPG/YPJ (313) operating under the umbrella of SDF, followed by Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (Levant Liberation Organization) (187), groups
self-affiliated with the FSA (170), Ahrar al-Sham (34), ISIL (30), Army of Islam (17),
Nur al-Din al-Zanki (16), Syrian Government forces (10), and unidentified armed
elements (29). More than 40 per cent of the children recruited by the YPG/YPJ (126)
were girls, 20 of whom were below the age of 15 and 119 of whom served in combat
roles. The majority of cases were verified in Idlib, Aleppo and Raqqah. At least 25
child casualties resulted from combat and there were cases of children switching
association after new groups gained control of territory.
175. The United Nations verified the deprivation of liberty of 51 children (50 boys,
1 girl) for their alleged association with parties to conflict, the majority by YPG/YPJ
(40), followed by groups self-affiliated with FSA (8), Syrian Government forces (2)
and Ahrar al-Sham (1). Some were subject to ill-treatment, torture or rape. In addition,
at least 1,248 children, mainly under the age of 5 and of multiple nationalities, were
deprived of their liberty in sites for internally displaced persons across the north -east
of the country. The camps were managed by local authorities and YPG/YPJ.
176. The United Nations verified the killing (1,106) and maiming (748) of 1,854
children by Syrian Government and pro-government air forces (888), Syrian
Government forces (148), pro-Government forces (96), ISIL (70), groups selfaffiliated with FSA and Operation “Olive Branch” (54), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by
Nusrah Front (25), YPG/YPJ (10), Army of Islam (7), the international counter -ISIL
coalition (4), Ahrar al-Sham (2) and by unidentified armed elements (550). The
majority of child casualties occurred in Idlib, Rif Dimashq and Aleppo and more than
half of the casualties resulted from air strikes (987), including the use of barrel bombs
and cluster munitions, followed by unexploded ordnance (434) and shelling (118) .
For instance, in January, Syrian Government forces dropped a barrel bomb on a
residential area in Armanaz town, Idlib, resulting in the killing of 15 children.
177. The United Nations verified 38 incidents of sexual violence perpetrated against
children by ISIL (30), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (5), FSA-affiliated
Faylaq al-Sham (2) and Syrian Government forces (1), 30 of which occurred in
previous years. Incidents included forced marriage, rape, trafficking and sexual violence
while children were deprived of liberty. Sexual violence remained underreported
owing to access restrictions, the lack of access to services for victims and stigma.
178. The United Nations verified 113 attacks on schools, a 69 per cent increase
compared with 2017, and 112 attacks on hospitals, the highest number recorded since
the beginning of the conflict. Attacks on schools were attributed to government and
pro-government air forces (60), Syrian Government forces (24), pro -government
forces and militia (12), ISIL (2), YPG/YPJ (2), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah
Front (1) and unidentified elements (12). Attacks on hospitals were attributed to
19-10176

27/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

government and pro-government air forces (82), Syrian Government forces (5),
pro-government forces and militia (6), ISIL (1), the international counter-ISIL
coalition (1) and unidentified armed elements (17). Child casualties resulted from
attacks on schools (96) and hospitals (55). Close to 70 per cent of the attacks on
schools and hospitals were caused by air strikes, including the use of barrel bombs,
followed by shelling and the use of improvised explosive devices. Education and
medical personnel were killed and maimed (48) and education personnel were
detained (9).
179. The United Nations verified the military use of 24 schools and three hospitals,
used as ammunition storage, military bases and as detention facilities. Schools were
used by YPG/YPJ (14), groups self-affiliated with FSA and Operation “Olive Branch”
(7), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (2) and ISIL (1). Hospitals were
occupied by ISIL (1), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (1) and unidentified
armed elements (1). Two health facilities and three schools were attacked following
the military use thereof.
180. The United Nations verified the abduction of 69 children (40 boys, 24 girls, 5
sex unknown), some as young as two years old, by ISIL (44), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham
led by Nusrah Front (8), FSA-affiliated Rahman Corps (4), YPG/YPJ (3), Army of
Islam (2), Ahrar al-Sham (1) and unidentified armed elements (7). Children were
primarily abducted because of the alleged affiliation of relatives with parties to the
conflict (32), for recruitment (25) and forced marriage (12). One in five children
abducted was subjected to ill-treatment, torture, rape or execution.
181. The United Nations verified 59 incidents of denial of humanitarian access
involving attacks and threats of attack on humanitarian facilities (37), humanitarian
transport and personnel, and the removal or blocking of humanitarian supplies (22).
The attacks resulted in the killing and maiming of humanitarian workers (18), and
deprivation of liberty (23). Main perpetrators included the Government and
pro-government air forces (13), Syrian Government forces (8), pro-government forces
(3) and pro-government militia (1), YPG/YPJ (9), ISIL (2), Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led
by Nusrah Front (2), groups self-affiliated with FSA (2), and unidentified armed
elements (19). Several children in Rukban have died from preventable conditions as
a result of the lack of access to adequate health care.
Developments and concerns
182. I note the United Nations dialogue with the Government on child protection,
including on the reintegration of children. I encourage the Government to put in place
long-term preventive measures on the protection of children, including by prioritizing
the implementation of the national workplan on ending and preventing child
recruitment by the national committee. I note a significant reduction in the
recruitment and use of children in 2018. I further call for the adoption of an action
plan on ending and preventing the grave violations for which it is listed.
183. I welcome the engagement of SDF, including YPG/YPJ, with my Special
Representative, leading to the development and adoption of an action plan to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children in 2019. I urge SDF to expedite its
implementation, notably the screening of all children within their ranks, including
their swift handover to civilian authorities, the implementation of awareness -raising
activities and the establishment of a public complaint procedure to report the
recruitment and use of children.
184. I note the engagement by groups self-affiliated with FSA, and by Ahrar al-Sham
and Army of Islam, as regards training, as well as the commitments made regarding
child protection. I am encouraged by the issuance of a military order by Army of Islam
setting 18 as the minimum age of recruitment and call for its swift imp lementation.
28/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

The cases that occurred in the context of Operation Olive Branch are currently under
investigation.
185. I am seriously concerned about the increasing number of grave violations
verified by the United Nations in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular, the elevated
numbers of child casualties and attacks against schools and hospitals. I remain deeply
concerned about the detention of children on security-related charges.
186. I call upon all countries concerned to facilitate the repatriation of foreign women
and children actually and allegedly affiliated with ISIL, in line with the guiding
principle of non-refoulement and with respect for the best interests of the child.
Yemen
187. The conflict in Yemen entered its fifth year, with further deterioration in the dire
humanitarian situation. Throughout the year, the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in
Yemen continued air strikes, the Houthis continued to fire missiles into Saudi Arabia,
and ground fighting intensified throughout the country. Air s trikes attributed to the
Coalition affected the majority of governorates, in particular Hudaydah, Sa ‘dah and
Hajjah. In June, Government forces, backed by the Coalition, launched an offensive
against the Houthis in Hudaydah Governorate. In December, the in tra-Yemeni
consultations convened by my Special Envoy for Yemen resulted in the Stockholm
Agreement, followed by the establishment by the Security Council of a monitoring
mission, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement, to support
its implementation. The capacity of the United Nations to monitor and verify grave
violations was significantly impeded by threats and by monitors being deprived of
their liberty by parties to conflict. A detailed account of the impact of armed conflict
on children in Yemen is available in my country report (S/2019/453).
Grave violations
188. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 370 children, attributed
to Houthis (170), Yemeni Government forces (111), Security Belt Forces (44),
Shabwani Elite Forces (23), Popular Resistance (17), Hadrami Elite Forces (4) and
forces loyal to the Southern Transitional Council (1). The decrease compared with
2017 (842) is mainly a result of access and security restrictions, the fear experienced
by communities, should they report, owing to the risk of repercussions, and cases of
the deprivation of liberty of monitors. Of the total number, 37 per cent of the children
(138) were used in active combat, at least 50 per cent of whom (70) were below the
age of 15. Large-scale child recruitment reportedly took place in schools, orphanages
and communities.
189. For the first time, the United Nations verified the recruitment of 16 girls between
the ages of 15 and 17 by the Houthis in Sa‘dah. The girls were used to encourage
male members of their families to join the Houthis and to mobilize other women and
girls to do the same. Some were also trained in the use of weapons. Boys were
recruited and used as combatants and in various support roles, including as porters,
guards, for patrolling and to assist in intelligence gathering.
190. The United Nations verified the deprivation of liberty of 96 boys by parties to
conflict for alleged association with opposing parties, markin g a substantial increase
compared with 2017 (23). The majority of the children were held by the Houthis for
their alleged association with the Yemeni Government Forces and were subsequently
released (53). The Coalition captured 42 boys and Yemeni Governmen t Forces held
them in Ma’rib Governorate for their alleged association with the Houthis, 27 of those
boys were released in February and reportedly reunified with their families. At the
time of writing, the remaining 15 children were still held in Ma ’rib. Lastly, one boy
was held by the Popular Resistance for his alleged association with the Houthis.
19-10176

29/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

191. The United Nations verified 1,689 child casualties, including the killing of 576
children (430 boys, 143 girls, 3 unknown sex) and maiming of 1,113 childre n (815
boys, 298 girls). The majority of child casualties resulted from ground fighting (755),
followed by air strikes (685) and unexploded ordnance (223). A total of 43 per cent
of child casualties were attributed to the Coalition (729) of which 684 were due to air
strikes and 45 to ground fighting, followed by the Houthis (398), the Yemeni
Government Forces (58) and the Popular Resistance (48), among other parties. Child
casualties attributed to the Coalition remained high throughout the year, with a
decrease during the last quarter of 2018. Of the total child casualties, 30 per cent
occurred during offensives in Hudaydah (507), 267 of which were due to ground
fighting and 181 to air strikes. The second highest number of child casualties was
verified in Sa‘dah Governorate (354), followed by Ta‘izz Governorate (341).
192. The United Nations verified the perpetration of sexual violence against nine
children (7 boys, 2 girls) between the ages of 9 and 17, attributed to the Yemeni armed
forces (6), the Popular Resistance (2) and the Houthis (1).
193. The United Nations verified 44 attacks against schools (28) and hospitals (16),
an increase compared with 2017, 84 per cent of which caused the partial or complete
destruction of the facilities. Attacks on schools were attributed to the Coalition (12),
the Houthis (12) and unidentified parties (4). Attacks on hospitals were attributed to
the Popular Resistance (5), the Coalition (3), the Houthis (3), Al -Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) (2) and unidentified armed elements (3). One third of the attacks
occurred in Ta‘izz (14), followed by Sa‘dah (10) and Hudaydah (7).
194. The United Nations verified 32 military uses of schools, a fourfold increase
compared with 2017, attributed to the Houthis (28), Yemeni Government Forces (3)
and Security Belt Forces (1). At least 20 schools were used by the Houthis to mobilize
and train children and 4 were used for recruiting and mobilizing girls. Three military
use of hospitals were attributed to the Houthis (2) and the Popular Resistance (1). The
majority of cases took place in Sa‘dah, Mahwit and Hudaydah.
195. The United Nations verified 275 incidents of denial of humanitarian access,
including restrictions of movement (177), interference in the implementation of
humanitarian assistance (49), violence against humanitarian personnel, assets a nd
facilities (44) and attacks on humanitarian water facilities (5). The incidents were
mainly attributed to the Houthis (206), the Coalition (41) and the Yemeni Government
Forces (7), among other parties, and were concentrated in Hudaydah, Sana ’a and
Sa‘dah. Access to areas along the frontlines was particularly difficult, with limited
presence of humanitarian actors in the most affected districts and with the Houthis
often requesting humanitarian organizations to share beneficiary lists and project
details as a precondition to implementing humanitarian activities in areas under their
control.
Developments and concerns
196. I welcome the endorsement of a road map by the Government in December 2018
to expedite the implementation of the action plan to end and prevent recruitment and
use of children of 2014 and call for the immediate release of all children from its
ranks, as well as for the provision of unimpeded access to civilian child protection
actors to children deprived of liberty for their allege d association with armed groups.
I count on the Government to follow through with commitments made.
197. I am encouraged by engagements with the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in
Yemen, including the signing of a memorandum of understanding in March 2019 to
enhance the protection of children, which provides a framework for the development
of a workplan with my Special Representative. I look forward to the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding and further steps to strengthen child protection.
30/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

198. I condemn the increasing number of child casualties, which are often a result of
attacks in densely populated areas and against civilian objects, including schools and
hospitals. The rise in the number of child casualties attributed to the Government
Forces and the Coalition and the persistent killing and maiming of children by the
Popular Resistance are increasingly worrying. I renew my call for all parties to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, and to ensure that military operations are conducted in line with the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution.
199. I strongly condemn violations against children committed by armed groups and
I am particularly concerned about the persistently high levels of the recruitment and
use, and killing and maiming of children and of denial of humanitarian access and by
the increase in the attacks on schools and hospitals committed by the Houthis. I call
on the Houthis to meaningfully engage with the United Nations to conclude an action
plan.
200. I also call upon all parties to the conflict to enhance engagement with the United
Nations to develop standard operating procedures on the release and reintegration of
children associated with parties.

B.

Situations not on the agenda of the Security Council or
other situations
India
201. Children continued to be affected by incidents of violence between armed
groups and the Government, particularly in Jammu and Kashmir and in the context of
the Naxalite insurgency.
Grave violations
202. The United Nations received reports of child recruitment and use in Jammu and
Kashmir. Five children, some as young as 14, were reportedly recruited by militant
groups, including by Hizbul Mujahideen (two) and Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind (one).
The two other children joined Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and were reportedly killed in an
encounter with the government forces on 9 December. In addition, reports of the
systematic recruitment of children by Naxalites continued to be received.
203. Children continued to be reportedly killed and injured in operations by the
government security forces against Naxalites in the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Odisha. For example, on 22 April, ei ght children were
reportedly killed during an attack on Naxalites in the district of Garhchiroli,
Maharashtra, where the C-60 district-level special forces claimed to have killed at
least 40 Naxalites. In Jammu and Kashmir, 31 children between the ages of 7 and 17
were allegedly killed, including during Government armed forces operations. At least
150 children, some as young as 1, were reportedly injured, mostly by pellet bullets
used by the security forces.
204. Allegations of the perpetration of sexual violence against girls by the security
forces in Kashmir were reported. For instance, an 8 -year-old girl was reportedly
abducted, drugged, raped for three days and murdered in Kathua district by special
police officers.
Developments and concerns
205. I welcome the Government’s measures to provide protection to children, notably
through the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, but remain
concerned by the reported child casualties and the recruitment and use of children in

19-10176

31/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

some areas of the country. I encourage the Government to put in place prevention and
accountability measures to hold perpetrators of grave violations to account in view of
ending and preventing grave violations against children.
Nigeria
206. The Boko Haram crisis was marked by attacks across the Lake Chad Basin and
by increased attacks on hospitals in north-east Nigeria. The abduction of children, in
particular girls, often for the purpose of sexual abuse, forced marriage or used to bear
improvised explosive devices continued at elevated levels. In 2018, the United
Nations faced significant access restrictions to conflict -affected areas, impeding its
ability to verify grave violations and to deliver life -saving aid to children.
Grave violations
207. A total of 1,947 children (1,596 boys, 351 girls) were verified as having been
recruited and used in Nigeria, 1,646 by the Civilian Joint Task Force (CJTF) and 301
by Boko Haram. No new recruitment and use by CJTF was verified in 2018 and all
cases verified occurred in previous years. 833 children (694 boys, 139 girls) were
formally separated from the group during 2018 as a result of the action plan. Boko
Haram continued to recruit children and used 48 (38 girls) for the purpose of bearing
and detonating improvised explosive devices in north-east Nigeria, 30 in Cameroon,
24 in Chad and 10 in the Niger.
208. In 2018, 418 children were deprived of liberty in Nigeria for their or their
parents’ alleged association with Boko Haram (304 boys, 86 girls, 28 unknown sex).
The majority (52 per cent) of the children had been in detention for over two years.
In 2018, the Nigerian authorities released 241 children from detention. In addition,
125 children were held in detention for alleged association with Boko Haram in the
Niger, Cameroon (57) and Chad (18).
209. The United Nations verified 432 children killed (175) and maimed (257),
attributed to Boko Haram (405), Nigerian Security Forces (NSF) (16), CJTF (1) and
unattributed incidents of unexploded ordnance (10). Of the total child c asualties
attributed to Boko Haram, 58 per cent (234) were due to explosions of improvised
explosive devices borne by civilians, including 48 children directly used as carriers
of improvised explosive devices. Cases attributed to NSF occurred during the co urse
of their response to Boko Haram offensives.
210. A total of 43 girls were subjected to rape and other forms of sexual violence by
Boko Haram (40) and NSF (3). Cases attributed to Boko Haram involved subjecting
girls to sexual abuse and forced marriage while in captivity.
211. Attacks on schools (5) and hospitals (10) were verified in north-east Nigeria and
attributed to Boko Haram (14) and NSF (1). Furthermore, one hospital in the Far
North Region of Cameroon and two schools in the Diffa region of the Niger were
attacked by Boko Haram. In addition, NSF used four schools in north-east Nigeria for
military purposes.
212. Boko Haram abducted 180 children (45 boys, 135 girls), often for the purpose
of recruitment, sexual abuse, forced marriage or for use as carriers of improvised
explosive devices. In February 2018, Boko Haram abducted 111 children (110 girls)
from a girls’ school in Dapchi, Yobe State. Five of the girls died during the abduction,
104 girls were eventually released, and one girl remains in captivity. More than 100
of the Chibok girls abducted in 2014 remain in captivity or missing. In addition, Boko
Haram abducted 28 children in Cameroon, 23 in the Niger and 9 in Chad.
213. The number of denials of humanitarian access increased, from 5 in 2017 to 33
in 2018, in an environment where humanitarians face restrictions on movement
32/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

imposed by parties to conflict. Most cases were attributed to NSF (23) and Boko
Haram (10) and took place in areas where the humanitarian needs of children were
dire.
Developments and concerns
214. The United Nations continued engagement with CJTF within the framework of
the action plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use, signed in September
2017, and 833 children were formally separated from CJTF in 2018. I welcome this
development and call on CJTF to continue the implementation of the plan with the
United Nations. I take note of the constructive role played by the Government in
support of this process and of the reintegration of released children.
215. While the release by the Nigerian authorities of 241 children from detention is
encouraging, I remain concerned about children remaining in detention owing to their
alleged association with Boko Haram. I call on the authorities to release all children,
ensure their sustainable reintegration, swiftly adopt a handover protocol for children
associated with armed groups to civilian child protection actors, in line with
international standards, and provide access to the United Nations to all children
deprived of liberty. I also urge the Government to avoid impinging on students’ safety
and education, in line with its commitments in the Safe Schools Declaration, and to
swiftly endorse the Paris Principles.
216. The scale and brutality of grave violations perpetrated by Boko Haram in north east Nigeria and the subregion remain a serious concern, notably the continued use of
children, in particular girls, as carriers of improvised explosive devices and the
targeting of girls’ education, including through abductions and attacks on schools. I
call upon the group to immediately cease all violations and abide by its obligations
under international law.
Pakistan
217. Elections to the Senate and general elections, tensions between neighbouring
countries and the emergence of new groups and continued threats from militant
groups affected the security situation, including children’s rights and protection.
Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Newly Merged Districts remained the
main geographical areas of concern.
Grave violations
218. The United Nations received reports of 36 incidents which resulted in the killing
(7) and maiming (56) of 63 children. Of those incidents, 20 were attributed to armed
groups, including attacks claimed by Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan in Balochistan (2) and
Killa Abdullah (1) and the Islamic State in Quetta (1). Ten of the reported incidents
involved the use of improvised explosive devices disguised as toys and resulted in the
maiming of 19 children, mainly in Bannu, North Waziristan in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
and the Newly Merged Districts. The remaining 16 incidents involved cross-border
attacks between Pakistan and India and reportedly killed (4) and maimed (18) 22
children.
219. A total of 34 attacks on schools, injuring 26 students, were reported. Among
those, 14 attacks, which targeted girls’ education, occurred during a single day in
August in Chilas in Gilgit-Baltistan. Some attacks involved explosions and the use of
improvised explosive devices and grenades. In addition, personnel of the Global Polio
Eradication Initiative reported over 300 attacks in 2018.
220. During the General Election, on 25 July, 8 schools were reportedly used as
polling stations and half of them were attacked with grenades. For example,
19-10176

33/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

unidentified elements allegedly threw a hand grenade at a girls ’ primary school in
Kushak Village, before polling started.
Developments and concerns
221. I am seriously concerned by the reported spike in the number of child casualties
and attacks on schools, including the targeting of girls’ education, as well as attacks
relating to the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. I welcome the Government ’s
efforts to protect workers conducting the polio campaign and call on the Government
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration and take preventive measures to protect
schools.
Philippines
222. Although the Marawi siege ended in October 2017, military operations
continued throughout 2018 against remaining members of the Maute Group, the
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) and other
Islamic State-affiliated groups. Additionally, conflict-related incidents between the
New People’s Army (NPA) and the Armed Forces of the Philippines, who were
supported by pro-government paramilitary groups, intensified after the President,
Rodrigo Roa Duterte, declared the Communist Party of the Philippines -NPA a
terrorist organization, in December 2017, and after the cessation of formal peace talks
in June 2018. Those operations resulted in the displacement of over 212,000 people,
half of whom were children, the prolongation of martial law until December 2019 and
access restrictions for the monitoring and verification of grave violations.
Grave violations
223. The United Nations verified 69 grave violations against children, 26 of which
took place in 2017 but could only be verified in 2018, mainly owing to restricted
access to Marawi after the siege.
224. The recruitment and use of 19 children (10 boys, 9 girls) by armed groups (18)
and armed forces (1) were verified. The Maute Group used 13 children as human
shields, to extract gunpowder from firecrackers or to ransack houses during the
Marawi siege in 2017. NPA used five children in combat or support roles, and the
Armed Forces of the Philippines used one boy to provide support in a military camp.
The United Nations received additional allegations of the recruitment and use of
children by NPA (eight), Maute Group (four) and ASG (one).
225. The United Nations verified the detention of four children (including one girl),
between the ages of 16 and 17, by security forces for their alleged association with
armed groups, for periods ranging from two days to one month.
226. The United Nations verified the killing (16) and maiming (41) of 57 children
(33 boys, 24 girls). Child casualties were attributed to the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (8), NPA (3), Maute Group and ASG (1 each). Responsibility in 10 case s
was attributed to armed groups allegedly influenced by Islamic State, and in 34 cases,
responsibility could not be attributed. Half of the total casualties were caused by
explosive remnants of war (17) and improvised explosive devices (12). For instance,
on 2 September, in Isulan city, Sultan Kudarat, the explosion of an improvised
explosive device resulted in the killing of a girl and the maiming of four boys, some
as young as 5.
227. Three cases of the rape of girls, some as young as 14, perpetrated by the Maute
Group, were verified. The girls had been raped or forced to marry Maute Group
members during the Marawi siege in 2017.

34/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

228. The United Nations verified attacks, including threats of attacks, on schools and
protected personnel, which affected two schools and 23 teachers, who were threatened
mainly because they were suspected to be supportive of NPA. Those violations were
attributed to the Armed Forces of the Philippines (18), the Maute Group (5) and
unidentified armed elements (2). In addition, t wo schools were used for up to a week
by the Armed Forces of the Philippines as bases during military operations.
229. The United Nations verified the abduction of 13 children (6 boys, 7 girls) by the
Maute Group (10), during the Marawi siege, and by ASG (3). For instance, a 16-yearold girl was abducted by the Maute Group, was raped twice and was assigned to
extract gunpowder from firecrackers and to take care of Maute Group members ’
children. On 16 October 2017, she managed to escape, together with other hostages,
but was injured by a bullet.
Developments and concerns
230. I welcome the establishment of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority and
reaffirm the readiness of the United Nations to help build its capacity to achieve
peace, democratic governance and respect for human and children’s rights. I
commend the Government for the enactment of the Children in Situations of Armed
Conflict Bill into national law on 10 January 2019, for the signing of the
implementing rules and regulations of this law, and for its continuous commitment to
the finalization of the national policy framework on schools as zones of peace. I trust
that it will strengthen the protection of children and prevent further threats or attacks
on indigenous communities’ schools from the Armed Forces of the Philippines and
pro-government paramilitary groups, and I call on the Government to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration.
231. I am encouraged by the decrease in the number of grave violations but remain
deeply concerned regarding the increased number of child casualties caused by
explosive remnants of war, and by the lack of access for humanitarian actors to
monitor, verify and provide appropriate response to the victims of the Marawi siege.
I am concerned about the lack of due process for children arrested and detained by
security forces for their alleged association with armed groups and would like to
remind the Government that children demobilized from armed groups, against whom
charges have been brought, are protected under the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act.
Thailand
232. 2018 saw a continued decline in the number of violent incidents in the southern
border provinces of Thailand. Talks between the Government and the umbrella
MARA Patani continued at a slow pace. The Government proposed to pilot, with the
collaboration of non-State armed groups, a “safety zone” in one district that would
have aimed to reduce attacks on civilians. The concept never truly advanced, in part
owing to a reported lack of full commitment by the Barisan Revolusi Nasional, the
main non-State armed group operating in the border provinces.
Grave violations
233. Children continued to be victims of shootings and of the use of improvised
explosive devices. Reportedly, one child was killed and at least five children were
maimed during the year. For instance, on 6 February, 50m from Baan Siyoh School
in Yala’s Yaha district, an attack using improvised explosive devices, allegedly
targeting security forces who were part of a teacher protection unit, injured two
12-year-old girls.

19-10176

35/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

234. One attack against a school was documented, although additional attacks were
launched near schools, including attacks on security forces who were guarding
teachers.
Developments and concerns
235. A technical mission was conducted in January 2019 by the office of my Special
Representative and UNICEF, with the aim of further strengthening Government and
civil society efforts to better protect children and schools from attack in the southern
border provinces. Findings included the need to highlight good practices and potential
gaps in the Government’s efforts to protect schools and the need for further
specialized training of the security forces. The strengthening of child protection
capacity in the Southern Border Provinces Administration Centre is a key positive
development in this regard and I call on the Government to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration and take preventive measures to protect schools. Thailand endorsed the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use
of Child Soldiers and is welcomed as a centre of excellence in this regard.

IV. Recommendations
236. I am deeply concerned by the scale and severity of the grave violations
committed against children in 2018, notably the record high number of casualties as
a result of killing and maiming and the increase in the number of violations attributed
to international forces. I call upon all parties to immediately end and take all
necessary measures to prevent such grave violations, including through ensuring
mitigation measures and enhancing training on preventing the six grave violations, as
well as by ensuring strong accountability measures for the perpetrators of crimes
against children.
237. I urge Member States, including when acting as part of international forces, to
ensure that their responses to all threats to peace and security are conducted in full
compliance with international law, in particular the principles of distinction,
proportionality and military necessity. I request my Special Representative to engage
proactively with all parties referred to in the present report to end and prevent further
grave violations against children.
238. The detention of children remained an issue of concern and I reiterate tha t this
measure should only be used as a last resort, for the shortest period of time, and that
alternatives to detention should be prioritized whenever possible. Moreover, I urge
Member States to treat children allegedly associated with armed forces or gro ups,
including groups designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations, primarily as
victims.
239. In line with Security Council resolution 2417 (2018), I call upon Member States
to allow safe, timely and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance and the
protection of humanitarian personnel and assets. Parties to conflict should
disseminate clear orders specifying that humanitarian assistance for children be
facilitated.
240. I reiterate my call upon Member States to continue supporting the
implementation of action plans and other commitments aimed at strengthening the
protection of children in armed conflict, including by facilitating the engagement of
the United Nations with armed groups.
241. I encourage Member States, regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen dedicated child protection capacities and to engage with the U nited
Nations to development prevention initiatives in order to forestall grave violations.
36/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

242. I reiterate my call upon the Security Council to ensure that provisions for the
protection of children are included in all relevant mandates of United Nations peace
operations and to request adequate child protection capacity so as to mainstream child
protection, conduct dialogue on action plans, release and reintegrate children and
further strengthen monitoring and reporting.
243. I enjoin the donor community to engage in a discussion to better address the
funding gaps for the reintegration of children, thereby allowing child protection actors
to react swiftly to the release of children and put in place long-term viable alternatives
to military life, notably by placing a specific focus on girls, in particular on
psychosocial support and on education programmes and vocational training for girls.
244. I call on Member States to engage closely with the United Nations to facilitate
the return or relocation of foreign children and women actually or allegedly affiliated
with groups designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations, and to ensure a
coordinated response on the basis of international law and children ’s rights, bearing
in mind their best interests.
245. I welcome national and international efforts to hold perpetrators accountable for
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict and encourage Member States
to play a further proactive role in ensuring an international response where national
accountability efforts are unsuccessful, so that impunity can end and cycles of
violence can be broken.
246. I welcome all steps taken to ensure full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, and call on Member States to
further strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict, including through the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the endorsement and implementation of the Paris Principles, the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.

V. Lists contained in the annexes to the present report
247. No new listings were added for 2018, but a number of previously listed parties
to conflict have had additional violations added, on the basis of incidents verified in
2018. In Afghanistan, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan Province
(ISIL-KP) continued to commit attacks against schools and hospitals and has
therefore been listed for this violation. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo ,
Nyatura has been listed as a result of the group continuing to perpetrate incidents of
rape and other forms of sexual violence. In South Sudan, the pro -Machar Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition (pro-Machar SPLA-IO) has been
listed for abduction.
248. There will be no delisting for 2018, except for two technical delistings. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mai-Mai Kata Katanga has been removed, as the
group ceased to exist when its leader surrendered in October 2016. In South Su dan,
the White Army has been removed, as the group no longer showed evidence of clear
leadership or structure and ceased to exist.
249. Other modifications to the list have resulted from changes in the landscape of
armed conflict in the respective situations or changes in measures taken by parties to
protect children. In this regard, in the Central African Republic, the Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC), as part of the former Séléka coalition, signed
an action plan and will be listed in section B of annex I with respect to measures put
in place. Similarly, in South Sudan, the South Sudan People ’s Defence Forces
(SSPDF) will be listed in section B of annex I, with regard to recruitment and use
only. Lastly, in the Syrian Arab Republic, the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
19-10176

37/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

(YPG/YPJ) will be listed in section B of annex I as a result of their enhanced
engagement, which led to the signature of an action plan in 2019. On the other hand,
in the Sudan, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM/N) will fall
back to section A of annex I owing to the lack of action in support of the action plan
during 2018.
250. Modifications to terminology and to names of parties resulted from some
political changes on the ground. In South Sudan, the Sudan Peo ple’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) is now listed as South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF). In addition,
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition – pro Taban Deng is
now listed as Taban Deng-allied SSPDF. They are now included as part of SSPDF and
therefore listed as State actors. In Yemen, the Houthis/Ansar Allah will be listed as
Houthis, and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula/Ansar al-Sharia will be listed as
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. The coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen a lso
changed to be listed as the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen. Lastly, in the
Syrian Arab Republic, the People’s Protection Units will be listed as Kurdish People’s
Protection Units (YPG/YPJ) to reflect changes on the ground.
251. In view of the preventive and protective measures taken by the Government to
better protect children over the past number of years, Thailand will be removed from
the report in 2020.

38/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Annex I
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015), parties that commit
grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict on the agenda of the Security Council*
A.

Listed parties that have not put in place measures during the
reporting period to improve the protection of children
Parties in Afghanistan
Non-State actors
1.

Haqqani Network a,b

2.

Hizb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar a,b

3.

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province a,b,d

4.

Taliban forces and affiliated groups a,b,d,e

Parties in Colombia
Non-State actors
Ejército de Liberación Nacional a
Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors
1.

Former Séléka coalition and associated armed groups, including the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique a,b,c,d

2.

Local defence militias known as the anti-balaka a,b,c

3.

Lord’s Resistance Army a,b,c,e

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Non-State actors
1.

Allied Democratic Forces a,b,d,e

2.

Bana Mura militias c,e

3.

Forces démocratiques
abacunguzi a,c,d,e

4.

Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituria,c,d,e

de

libération

du

Rwanda-Forces

combattantes

* Parties listed in section A have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of
children during the reporting period; parties listed in section B have put in place measures to
improve the protection of children during the reporting period.
a
Party that recruits and uses children.
b
Party that kills and maims children.
c
Party that commits rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Party that engages in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
e
Party that abducts children.
f
Party that has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
19-10176

39/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

5.

Kamuina Nsapu a,d,e

6.

Lord’s Resistance Army a,b,c,e

7.

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain a

8.

Union des patriotes congolais pour la paix (also known as Mai-Mai Lafontaine) a

9.

Mai-Mai Mazembe a,b,e

10.

Mai-Mai Simba a,c

11.

Nduma défense du Congo a,b

12.

Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové a,b

13.

Nyatura a,c,e

14.

Raia Mutomboki a,c,e

Parties in Iraq
Non-State actors
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant a,b,c,d,e
Parties in Mali
Non-State actors
1.

Ansar Eddine a,c

2.

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest a,c

3.

Platform, including affiliated groups a

Parties in Myanmar
State actors
Tatmadaw Kyi, including integrated Border Guard forces b,c
Non-State actors
1.

Karen National Liberation Army a

2.

United Wa State Army a

Parties in Somalia
Non-State actors
1.

Al-Shabaab a,b,c,d,e

2.

Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a (ASWJ) a

Parties in South Sudan
State actors
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF), including Taban Deng-allied
SSPDF b,c,d,e
Non-State actors
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army-in-Opposition – pro-Machar a,b,e,f

40/43

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Parties in the Sudan
Non-State actors
1.

Justice and Equality Movement a,f

2.

Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid a

3.

Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi a,f

4.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North a,f

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
State actors
Government forces, including the National Defence Forces and pro -government
militiasa,b,c,d
Non-State actors
1.

Ahrar al-Sham a,b

2.

Groups self-affiliated with the Free Syrian Army a

3.

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant a,b,c,d,e

4.

Army of Islam a

5.

Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (Levant Liberation Organization) a,b

Parties in Yemen
Non-State actors

B.

1.

Houthis a,b,d

2.

Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula a

3.

Pro-government militias, including the Salafists and popular committees a

4.

Security Belt Forces a

Listed parties that have put in place measures during the
reporting period aimed at improving the protection of children
Parties in Afghanistan
State actors
Afghan National Police, including the Afghan Local Police a,f
Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors
Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique as part of the former Séléka
coalition a,b,c,d
Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
State actors
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo c,f

19-10176

41/43

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Iraq
State actors
Popular mobilization forces a
Parties in Mali
Non-State actors
Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad a,c,f
Parties in Myanmar
State actors
Tatmadaw Kyi, including integrated Border Guard forces a,f
Non-State actors
1.

Democratic Karen Benevolent Army a

2.

Kachin Independence Army a

3.

Karenni Army a

4.

Karen National Liberation Army Peace Council a

5.

Shan State Army a

Parties in Somalia
State actors
Somali National Army a,b,f
Parties in South Sudan
State actors
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF), including Taban Deng-allied
SSPDF a,f
Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
Non-State actors
Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG/YPJ) a
Parties in Yemen
State actors

42/43

1.

Government forces, including the Yemeni armed forces a,f

2.

Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen b

19-10176

A/73/907
S/2019/509

Annex II
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1379 (2001), 1882
(2009), 1998 (2011) and 2225 (2015), parties that commit
grave violations affecting children in situations of armed
conflict not on the agenda of the Security Council, or in
other situations*
A.

Listed parties that have not put in place measures during the
reporting period to improve the protection of children
Parties in Nigeria
Non-State actors
Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad, also known as Boko Harama,b,c,d,e
Parties in the Philippines
Non-State actors

B.

1.

Abu Sayyaf Group a

2.

Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters a

3.

New People’s Army a

Listed parties that have put in place measures during the
reporting period aimed at improving the protection of children
Parties in Nigeria
Non-State actors
Civilian Joint Task Force a,f

* Parties listed in section A have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of
children during the reporting period; parties listed in section B have put in place measures to
improve the protection of children during the reporting period.
a
Party that recruits and uses children.
b
Party that kills and maims children.
c
Party that commits rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Party that engages in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
e
Party that abducts children.
f
Party that has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
19-10176

43/43
