A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/27
19 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 154 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/609)]

54/27.

Outcome of the action dedicated to the 1999 c e ntennial of the first
International Peace Conference

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment of the United Nations and its Member States to the adherence to and the
development of international law as a basis for conducting international relations,
Recognizing the historical importance of the first International Peace Conference, held at the Hague
in 1899, for the rule of international law, the peaceful settlement of disputes, the development and codification
of international law and the practice of multilateral diplomacy,
Recalling that, in accordance with its previous resolutions,1 the centennial of the first International Peace
Conference coincides with the closing of the United Nations Decade of International Law and could be
considered as a third international peace conference,

1

Notably resolutions 44/23, 51/157, 52/153 and 53/100.

00 24717

/...

A/RES/54/27
Page 2

Recalling also that the Decade was closed by the General Assembly in plenary meeting on
17 November 1999,2
Recalling with gratitude the initiatives for the celebration of the centennial of the first International
Peace Conference by the Governments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Russian Federation with
regard to the themes of the Conference: development of international law relating to disarmament and arms
control, humanitarian law and laws of war, and peaceful settlement of disputes,3
Recalling that those initiatives called for, inter alia, discussions on the themes on the basis of in-depth
reports at the global, regional and national levels by intergovernmental, governmental, diplomatic, academic
and civil society experts at conferences, seminars and other meetings, as well as through the Internet, to be
reported on to the General Assembly for consideration at its fifty-fourth session,4
Noting that the general outcome of those discussions was that, while progressive development and
codification of international law remains important, the furtherance of the rule of international law would best
be served by the faithful compliance of States with existing international obligations, focusing more on the
timely implementation of these obligations,
Noting also that the year 1999 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the four Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949,5
Noting further that the Permanent Court of Arbitration was established in 1899 as a result of the first
International Peace Conference,
Convinced that the legacies of the first International Peace Conference have been enhanced by the
centennial initiatives and by the discussions in the General Assembly in plenary meeting at the closing of the
Decade,
1. Takes note with interest of the outcome of the action dedicated to the centennial of the first
International Peace Conference, reported by the co-hosts, the Governments of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Russian Federation;6
2. Commends all who, through their efforts, wisdom and expertise, contributed to the success of the
celebration of the centennial of the first International Peace Conference;

2

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, 54th and
55th meetings (A/54/PV.54 and 55), and corrigendum.
3

See resolutions 51/159, 52/154 and 53/99; see also A/C.6/52/3, A/C.6/53/10 and A/C.6/53/11.

4

See “The Hague Agenda for Peace and Justice for the Twenty-first Century” (A/54/98, annex).

5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

6

A/54/381, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/27
Page 3

3. Also commends the International Committee of the Red Cross for its work in promoting adherence
to and compliance with the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 5 and other instruments of
international humanitarian law;
4.

Congratulates the Permanent Court of Arbitration on its one hundredth anniversary;

5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for bringing the outcome of the action
dedicated to the centennial of the first International Peace Conference to the attention of the relevant
international forums;
6. Invites States, organs of the United Nations, international organizations and other relevant
international forums to take note of the outcome of the action dedicated to the centennial of the first
International Peace Conference and to consider, where appropriate:
(a) Giving attention to the outcome of the thematic discussions within the sphere of their respective
competencies or mandates;
(b) Making use in the future of the format of the discussions of the centennial of the first International
Peace Conference in accordance with any relevant rules and procedures;
7.

Invites:

(a) The Governments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Russian Federation to file the records
of the centennial of the first International Peace Conference in their archives and to provide access to those
records to interested parties;
(b) All who contributed to the centennial of the first International Peace Conference to file their records
in this respect with either of these Governments.

55th plenary meeting
17 November 1999
