S/PRST/2013/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 November 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7066th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 November 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of the appalling
attacks and war crimes and crimes against humanity carried out by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and its violations of international humanitarian law
and abuses of human rights. The Council condemns further the LRA’s
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, killing and maiming, rape,
sexual slavery and other sexual violence, and abductions. The Council
demands an immediate end to all attacks by the LRA and urges the LRA to
release all those abducted, disarm and demobilise. The Council welcomes the
recent progress made with regard to ending LRA war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Central Africa and reiterates its resolve to maintain the
current momentum until a permanent end to the threat posed by the LRA has
been achieved.
“The Security Council welcomes the diplomatic efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa and AU Special Envoy
on the LRA Issue Francisco Madeira to strengthen regional cooperation and
facilitate renewed AU-Regional Task Force (AU-RTF) operations in the
region. The Council urges the United Nations Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), in its coordination role, as well as the United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions in the region and other relevant United Nations
presences to enhance their efforts in support of the implementation of the
United Nations Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the
Activities of the LRA (the UN strategy), as appropriate and within the limits of
their mandates and capacities. The Council encourages the Secretary-General
to optimise UNOCA’s efforts in this regard, including through the use of staff
and provision of support to anti-LRA efforts. The Council also calls on the
international community to support the implementation of the UN strategy
where possible. The Council notes in this regard the meeting of the
International Working Group on the LRA (IWG-LRA) co-chaired by the
European Union and the United States on 4 October 2013 in Brussels.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA (AU RCI-LRA), and
commends the significant progress made by the AU-RTF. The Council
13-58043 (E) 251113

*1358043*

S/PRST/2013/18

welcomes in particular the AU-RTF’s enhanced operations against LRA camps
in recent months, which have increased pressure on the LRA command
structure and degraded the LRA’s capabilities. The Council urges all regional
governments to fulfil all their commitments under the AU RCI-LRA and to
provide the necessary basic provisions for their security forces. The Council
encourages neighbouring states to cooperate with the AU-RTF, in order to end
the LRA threat. The Council further encourages all states in the region to take
measures to ensure that the LRA is not able to operate with impunity in their
territory. The Council notes the importance of continued international support
for the AU-RTF’s operations, logistics, and headquarters. The Council
underlines the need for all military action against the LRA to be conducted in
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, as applicable, and to minimise the risk of
harm to civilians in those areas.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken to deliver an enhanced,
comprehensive, and more regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to victims of sexual violence and other attacks and urges
further progress in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in
the LRA-affected region to protect civilians. The Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the Republic of
South Sudan, Uganda and the Central African Republic (CAR), in coordination
with the African Union, to end the threat posed by the LRA, and urges further
efforts from these countries, as well as from other countries in the region.
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern that the continued
instability and increased security vacuum in the CAR continue negatively to
affect counter-LRA operations and to contribute to the reinforcement of the
LRA in the country. The Council further notes with concern that LRA attacks
in the CAR have reportedly taken place in areas outside of the AU-RTF’s
principal area of operations. In this regard, the Council emphasises the need
for strong coordination and information-sharing between BINUCA, the AURTF and the African-led International Support Mission for the Central African
Republic (MISCA) in the context of their protection of civilians activities and
counter-LRA operations.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts by the UN Organisation
Stabilisation Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO) in tackling the LRA. In this
context the Council encourages further and reinforced efforts by MONUSCO
to address the LRA including through improved responsiveness to imminent
threats to civilians, training and capacity building of the FARDC, support to
the Joint information Operations Centre (JIOC), and implementation of the
DDRRR robust programme to encourage and facilitate further LRA defections.
“The Security Council notes the mandates of the MONUSCO and the UN
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to help protect civilians in LRA-affected
areas and support the disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration of LRA
combatants in their respective countries. The Council urges both missions to
enhance cooperation with the AU-RTF in order to coordinate operations,
patrols and protection of civilians strategies. The Council encourages
MONUSCO and UNMISS to provide appropriate logistical support to the AU-

2/4

13-58043

S/PRST/2013/18

RTF, within their existing mandates and resources, and to cooperate closely
with the AU-RTF in response to anticipated protection of civilians threats. The
Council also notes the mandate of the United Nations-African Union Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) to cooperate
and share swiftly information related to the regional threat of the LRA. In line
with the UN strategy, the Council stresses the need for enhanced cross-border
coordination, including through the use of common Standard Operating
Procedures and swift information-sharing between these missions, as well as
among all other relevant actors in the region, to better anticipate LRA
movements and imminent threats of attack.
“The Security Council takes note of reports suggesting the existence of
an LRA base in the disputed enclave of Kafia Kinga, on the border of the CAR
and between South Sudan and Sudan. The Council further notes reports of
suspected attacks and abductions by the LRA in Western Equatoria, South
Sudan and reports of the resumption of LRA activity in the Bas-Uele and
Haut-Uele regions in the DRC.
“The Security Council encourages the UN, AU and ECCAS, to continue
to work together, including through joint field assessments, to further develop
and maintain a common operating picture of the LRA’s current capabilities and
areas of operation, as well as to investigate the LRA’s logistical networks and
possible sources of military support and illicit financing, including alleged
involvement in elephant poaching and related illicit smuggling. The Council
notes the conclusion of the Secretary-General in his most recent report on
UNOCA and the LRA (S/2013/671) that increased poaching activities have
contributed to concerns over security in the CAR and the wider region and are
used to finance transnational criminal networks and armed rebel groups,
including the LRA.
“The Security Council urges MONUSCO, BINUCA, UNMISS, and other
United Nations actors in the LRA-affected region to continue to work with
regional forces, international actors and non-governmental organisations, as
appropriate, to promote a common approach to the promotion of defections
and support for DDRRR efforts across the LRA-affected area. The Council
highlights the importance of programmes in support of the release, return and
successful reintegration of children abducted by the LRA, in particular those
that target community acceptance of such children.
“The Security Council encourages the AU-RTF to maintain its operations
against all LRA groups, while working with the UN and non-governmental
organisations to establish safe reporting sites and provide information to assist
LRA who demonstrate a genuine commitment to demobilisation and
disarmament. The Council notes reports that small groups of LRA fighters in
the CAR are seeking to disarm and surrender. In this regard, the Council urges
BINUCA to work with the Transitional Authorities in the CAR to ensure that
all efforts to encourage LRA defections adhere to UN LRA DDR Standard
Operating Procedures.
“The Security Council commends efforts by international donors to
provide humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected populations in the CAR, the
DRC and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council reaffirms its call for all

13-58043

3/4

S/PRST/2013/18

parties to allow safe and unhindered access for humanitarian organisations to
the civilian population, consistent with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law and the UN guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
The Council encourages donors to increase funding for humanitarian and early
recovery projects outlined in the UN strategy. The Council also expresses
concern about the departure of many humanitarian actors from LRA-affected
areas in the DRC and the lack of regular humanitarian access to many LRAaffected communities in the CAR and the DRC, including because of poor
infrastructure, and encourages increased UN efforts and international donor
support for creating conditions conducive to improved and timely passage of
relief consignments, equipment and personnel.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the swift and full
implementation of the conclusions of the working group on children and armed
conflict concerning the situation of children and armed conflict affected by the
Lord’s Resistance Army. In this regard, the Council encourages those countries
affected by the LRA which have not yet done so to establish Standard
Operating Procedures for the reception and handover of LRA children to
civilian child protection actors.
“The Security Council recalls that the International Criminal Court’s
arrest warrants for Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen on
charges of, inter alia, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
murder, rape and forced enlistment of children, have yet to be enforced, and
calls upon all States to cooperate with relevant national authorities and the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with their respective obligations,
in order to implement those warrants, and to bring to justice those responsible.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed on the activities of UNOCA, the progress of implementation of the
Regional Strategy and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and other relevant United Nations agencies to that end, including
through a single report on UNOCA and the LRA to be submitted before
15 May 2014.”

4/4

13-58043
