2. Recommends that the Administering Members continue to co-operate with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, when and where appropriate, with a
view to the practical achievement of the eradication of illiteracy in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;

3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to take account
in its studies of the experience of various States
in this matter;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Orgqnization in any necessary
studies, taking as a basis the information transmitted under Article 73 e, together with any
relevant supplemental information and any relevant studies undertaken by the Trusteeship Council with regard to Trust Territories.

3. Invites the specialized agencies concerned
to communicate annually to the United Nations
information on the progress of the work indicated in the previous paragraph which would be
of service in Non-Self-Governing Territories, including information on the extent to which their
serviL.J have been provided for any of the NonSelf-Governing Territories ;
4. Invites the specialized agencies to take account in their studies of the experieuce of various
States in respect of the problems enumerated
above;

5. Invites the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the Administering Members and the
specialized agencies concerned the comments made
during the discussions in the Special Committee
on Information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter in relation to agriculture, education,
labour, public health and social welfare;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
with the specialized agencies in any necessary
studies, taking as a basis the information transmitted under Article 73 e, together with any relevant supplemental information and any relevant
studies undertaken liy the Economic and Social
Council am! by the Trusteeship Council with
regard to Trust Tcrri,ories;
7. Z:llrthe,- im·itcs the Secretary-General, in his
analyses of information m1 Non-Self-Governing
Territories to be su,mtitted to the General 1\ssemLly, to select such aspects of economic, sociai and
educational problems as appropriately provide opportunities for possible co-operation with the specialized international bodies, as proviclecl in Article
7 3 d of the Charter, with a view to the improvement of economic, social ancl educational conclitio11s in the :\nn-5di-l ;m•crning Tcrritori,'s.

263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

331 (IV). International collaboration
in regard to economic, social and
educati.onal conditions in Non-SeliGoverning Territories
The General Assembly,
Having considered the summaries and analyses
of information transmitted under Article 73 e of
the Charter,
Having regard to the provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 13 220 (Ill) and 221 (Ill)
of 3 November 1948 concerning respectively liaison with the Economic and Social Council and
the collaboration of the specialized agencies i11
regard to Article 73 e of the Charter,

263rd plenary meeting,
2 Deccm/Jer 1919.

Having noted aspects of the programmes of the
Economic and Social Council and of the special
ized agencies which include within their scope
economic, social and educational conditions affeccting Non-Self-Governing Territories,

332 (IV). E'-'tah!ishmcnt of a Special
ConnniHcc cm Information trans-

miilled urnfor Article 73 e of the
Char!cr

1. Emphasizes the importance of promoting liic
technical training of the inhabitants of the 1\ 011Self-Governing Territories, and requests the .\dministering Members to co-operate when and
where appropriate with specialized international
bodies wi_th a view to examining the possiliiky
of prov1d111g adequate training facilities for thc,w
inh~bitants in the fielcls of economic development,
agriculture, eduC1tio11, laliollr, public health an:!
social welfare;

The General , lssclllbly,
l la'i'ing cunsid,rc,l the work of the Special
Committee 011 l11i(Jr111atiuu transmitted under
,\nick 73 e u: th,'. Charter which was constituted
by re~ulutirm 2 l 'I ( l l r J 11 adopted liy the Ccneral
Assembly 011 3 :\m·,·11111(']' ltJ-k,, and
Taking into a,count the possibilities of further
r1,11structive \1·urk I,\' such a Committee,
1. I Jee id ,·s to rrn1st.it1ttc a Special Committee
tor a thret·-year pvriud;

2. Requests the appropriate international bodies
to take full account oi conditions in the Non-SeitGoverning Territories in work unllertaken Lv
them in connexion with eco11omic clevelopmeut,
the world ccnsus of agricLtlture, the study of soil
erosion, the training of plllilic health 1,crsu1111vl.
the study of prolilcms of nutrition, the applic"
tion of international lalionr cunvcnti"ns, the proL
!em of niigrant labour in Africa, the dcvelopn w111
of social welfare servicts, the prevL'lltion anrl treat
ment of juvenile cleliuquency, the study of the
most appropriate means of imprm·i11g hu11Si11g in
tropical regions, and the problems of higher edt1cation;
13

2. c·uns,'d,rs tlut tltl' ~Jl<'Cial Co111111ittee should
i1e l'(Hl!JH>S<'(] ,1f tl1<1.<c .\lt"nti>crs of the United
:\'.;1ti,,i1, tr:u1.,;11i1ti11:· iniurrnation in accordance
\, itlt ,\rti,·k 13 ,. ,>l'tlll' c·11arler arnl of an equal
munlJer of rn111-,1drni11istering l\kmliers elected by
the l•ollrth Co1111,1iltl'e \Jll lithalf of the General
:\,sunl , u11 ;:, wi,le ,t geographical Lasis as
] <Oscii ,le-. Th,· 11, ,11:•dlllinistning l\lcrnbers of the
.C:peci;d l '01 lllllit ll'l' .,kill lie elected for a term of
three 1·c: 1 r:; . .\t the first elrction however two
'.\h-ndi;-rs shall lw ekctcd for a ter;11 of two ;cars,
and two ior a ,n111 .,f one vcar only. A separate
vote shall he taken tor each election;

See Official Records uf the third scssinn of the Grn

11
~:,"' ( I i7irinl I<c,,,,·d, of tl,c third session of t/ie Gentrlrl .·I 1·,-., u1l 1/_1', J),1rt l, l<1..·St)lutions, page 82.

era! Assembly, Part I, Resolutions. p.1g;c 83.

42

\

'

3. Invites the Special Committee to examine,
in the spirit of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 1
and of Article 55 of the Charter, the summaries
and analyses of information transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter on the economic, social
and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, irtcluding any papers prepared
by the speciali1t!d agencies and any reports or
information o~-fneasures taken in pursuance of the
resolutions adopted. by the General Assembly concerning economic, social and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Considers that the Special Committee should
meet in 1950, 1951 and 1952 before the opening
of the regular sessions of the General Assembly,
at places and dates to be determined by the
Secretary-General, in order that it should conclude its work not later than one week before the
opening of each session ;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit to
the regular sessions of the General Assembly in
1950, 1951 and 1952 reports containing such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem
desirable relating to functional fields generally but
not with respect to individual Territories;
6. Decides that at its regular sessions in 1950
and 1951 the General Assembly will proceed to
any new elections for the Special Committee that
may be necessary, and examine in 1952 the question whether the Special Committee should be
renewed for a further period, together with the
questions of the composition and terms of reference of any such future Special Committee.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.
*

*

the UNION OF Sov1ET SocIALIST REPUBLICS;
For a term of two y,·ars: MExtco, the PHILIPPINES;

For a term of one year: VENEZUELA, SWEDEN.
The General Assembly, informed of these elections through document A/1214, took note of them
at its 274th plenary meeting on 9 December 1949.
The Special Committee is therefore composed of
the above-mc11tioncd ciglit Members. and of the follm»ing l\Icmbcrs transmilting information under
Article 73 c of the Chartrr ·
AUSTRALIA,
BEI.GllJM, DF.:-!MARK, FRANCE, the
NETHERLANDS, Nnv ZEALAND, the U:-irTED KINGOF GREAT BRITAIN A"!D NoRTIIERN
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

333

2. Invites members of the Special Committee
to make special preparations in this field for the
1950 session, with a view to facilitating the constructive interchange of ideas and experience on
such educational problems;

3. Invites the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies in order to secure their collaboration in the
study of these problems.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

*

In accordance with the terms of the abo,•e resolution, the Fourth Committee, at its 142nd meeting
on 5 December 1949, elected eight members to the
Special Committee. Thr f olloiving M embrrs of the
United Nations were elected:
For a term of three ymrs: BRAZIL, EGYPT, INDIA,

DOM

Considering that the value of the work of the
Committee would be enhanced if, without prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the
Charter, special attention were given to one field
each year,
Noting that the Special Committee will have
before it at its 1950 session a considerable volume
of documentation on the subject of education including various reports from the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Considering that information on the development of facilities for the training of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories deserves
particular attention at a time when programmes
of economic and social development are being extended or initiated,
l. Invites the Special Committee at its 1950
session, without prejudice to the consideration of
the other two functional fields, to give special
attention to the problems of education in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, with particular
attention to development of training in the economic and social fields;

]REI.AND,

nv). Work of the Sprria! Committee on Information transmiUetl
under Artide ·,;i c of 1)u'. Clrnrh'r

The c;cneral ,·lssnnl,/y,
N otinr; that resoiut ion 3J2 ( IV ) ado1,tccl hv the
General Assembly on 2 I kccml )('f l CJ.+') provided
for the estalili.,lm1enc of a Special Committee on
Information transmitted undn Article 73 e of the
,Charter for a three-year periorl without pn·judice
as to the future,

43

334 (IV). Territories lo which Chapter
XI of the Charter applies
The General Assembly,

H ai>ing regard to the obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter accepted by the Members which have or assume
responsibilities for the administration of territorif's whose peoples have not yet attained a full
measurl' of self-government,

Ii aving regard to resolution 66 (I) 15 adopted
by the (ieneral Assembly on 14 December 1946 in
which seventy-four territories were enumerated,
in accordance with the declarations of the responsible Governments, as falling within the scope of
Article 73 e,
H aviny uotcd the information supplied by
certain l\Iembers concerning the constitutional
chauges which have led to the cessation of the
transmission of information under Article 73 e
in respect of certain territories which were e11t1111eratl'd in resolution (>CJ (I),

l. Collsidcrs that it is within the responsibility
of the ( ;eneral A~scmbly to express its opinion
on the principles which have guided or which
may in future guide· Lhc l\lernhers concerned in
enunH·rating the terriluries for \Yhich the obligation exists to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter;
5
'
See Hcsolulions adopted /,y the General Assembly
dnring tlw second part of its first session, page 124.
