A /68/PV.44

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

44th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 6 November 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 11
Sport for peace and development: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/68/L.8)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Russian Federation to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.8.
Mr. Chernyshenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As the President of the Organizing Committee
for the XXII Olympic Winter Games and the XI
Paralympic Winter Games to be held in Sochi, Russia,
in 2014 — the first time the Games have been held in
my country — I have the honour to introduce to the
General Assembly a draft resolution entitled “Sport for
peace and development: building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal” (A/68/L.8).
The draft resolution is inspired mainly by the
2,000-year-old ancient Greek tradition of calling for
a truce during the Olympic Games in order to ensure
the safe passage of athletes to and from the site of the
Games. Together with an appeal for a truce during
the forthcoming Olympic Games in Sochi, the draft
resolution also calls upon the States Members of the
United Nations to cooperate with the International
Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic
Committee in their efforts to use sport as a tool for
reconciliation. The draft resolution welcomes the

United Nations initiative to designate 6 April as
the International Day of Sport for Development and
Peace. The Olympic Games in Sochi are to become a
symbol of constructive dialogue among peoples. The
draft resolution pays a particular attention to the Sochi
2014 cultural and educational programmes as well as
peacebuilding.
Since the announcement of Russia as host of the
Games, a historic event, we have set ourselves the
ambitious goal of conducting innovative Games that
will express the character of a new, modern Russia and
promote sustainable positive changes. Our vision of the
Olympic Games in Sochi has relied on the consolidation
of the entire nation united by the Olympic dream, the
legendary athletic traditions of Russia, and the overall
support we have for the Olympic values of friendship,
respect and aspiration to perfection. It is precisely that
vision that has been driving our decisions, efforts and
expectations on the long road to the Olympic Games.
We can see already now how our goals are
becoming a reality. The Games in Sochi have exerted
a significant influence on our country by giving an
impetus, in particular, to the development in Russia
of such socially important phenomena as the volunteer
movement, the creation of an environment accessible to
all, and the practical implementation of the principles
of sustainable development in accordance with green
standards.
In recent years, Sochi has become a venue for
major forums dedicated to the strengthening of peace.
The Generations for Peace International Camp has

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-54989 (E)

*1354989*

A/68/PV.44

been held in Sochi since 2010. The participants in the
Generations for Peace International Camp will meet
again during the Paralympic Games in Sochi in 2014. In
2012, the capital of the future Olympic Games hosted a
prestigious Forum on Sport for Peace. Representatives
of 90 countries participated in its work. The Cultural
Olympiad Sochi 2014, which was launched in 2010, has
united our country from Kaliningrad to Vladivostok.
For four years, tens of thousands of events have been
held across Russia for millions of spectators. The
Cultural Olympiad is successfully fulfilling its mission
of preserving and promoting the cultural wealth
of Russia and demonstrating the best examples of
that wealth to our compatriots and the guests of our
country. The best that our culture has to offer will be on
display to visitors at the Games and to the entire world
community during the finals of the Cultural Olympiad
in Sochi.
An extensive Olympic educational programme,
known as Sochi 2014, is being rolled out. Annually,
Olympic classes have been attended by over 5 million
Russian high-school students, and thematic shifts
dedicated to the Olympic Truce have been organized
in summer camps. The establishment of the world’s
first Russian International Olympic University,
offering education for representatives of all 205
National Olympic Committees, is the pinnacle of the
Sochi 2014 educational programme. The University
was inaugurated by Mr. Vladimir Putin, President
of the Russian Federation. Recently, the President of
International Olympic Committee, Mr. Thomas Bach,
met with the students of the University. The first
enrolment in the University included students from 15
countries, and there will be a unique opportunity to
put all of their learning into practice during the Sochi
Games.
We have emphasized in the draft resolution the
importance of the volunteer movement, both in the
framework of the Games and on a global scale. The
Sochi Games have become a powerful catalyst for the
emergence of the volunteer movement in Russia. Based
on the volunteer centres located in all federal districts
of the country, hundreds of thousands of Sochi 2014
volunteers are conducting their daily work in the regions,
helping vulnerable groups within the population and
addressing essential social and environmental issues.
Sochi 2014 volunteer centres throughout Russia have
already implemented over 3,000 volunteer projects of
their own in addition to preparing for the Games.

2/22

06/11/2013

As a main consequence of the Sochi 2014
volunteer programme, Russia has received a rating of
8, starting practically from zero, in the World Giving
Index 2012, for the involvement of its population in
volunteer activity. Let me note that, for the first time
in the history of the Olympic Games, the Sochi 2014
Organizing Committee has engaged volunteer students
in the drafting of an Olympic Truce resolution.
Students of the Moscow State Institute of International
Relations — future diplomats and policymakers — have
formulated proposals for the initial draft.
The draft resolution focuses on the need to ensure
and protect the rights of persons with disabilities.
Thanks to the Sochi Games, we have managed to make
the standards of access to buildings and infrastructure
an indispensable and compulsory requirement for
all regions of Russia. The all-Russia project of an
accessibility map makes it possible for persons
with disabilities to find accessible facilities in their
hometowns, allowing them to become more actively
involved in social life.
The 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics torch relay
has helped to bring together all of the more than 200
nationalities living in Russia. The relay started on
7 October in the capital of our homeland, Moscow,
and will be the longest national torch relay in the
history of the Winter Olympics in terms of both
duration — 123 days — and distance covered — over
65,000 kilometres. The torch has already visited the
North Pole as part of the international research expedition
and became a symbol of joint exploration of the Arctic
by all eight Arctic Powers. And today, at 11.14 p.m.
New York time, the Olympic torch will be launched
into space in the international space station and for the
first time carried in a spacewalk. This event is one more
step into the future, and the appearance of the Olympic
torch in space will be a symbol of the limitlessness of
human possibility and of the striving of athletes from
every country to reach ever new heights in sport.
Russia commends the fruitful cooperation among
States Members of the United Nations and their
contributions to the drafting of the text of this year’s
draft resolution. We are grateful to the International
Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee and the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace for their
constant support. We are also grateful to the Group of
Friends of Sport for Development and Peace for their
valuable help.

13-54989

06/11/2013

There are 93 days left until the opening ceremony
of the Sochi Olympic Games, and 121 until that of the
Paralympic Games. The Olympic villages, housing
athletes from 85 countries, will be open even sooner,
and within them will rise the walls of the Olympic
Truce, where the athletes can leave their wishes. The
blue flags of the United Nations will be unfurled above
the Olympic stadium and villages. We are eagerly
looking forward to hosting the whole world as our
guests and will do everything we can to ensure that
the Sochi Olympics are remembered first of all as a
contest among the greatest athletes of the world in an
atmosphere of hospitality, intercultural exchange and
mutual respect.
On behalf of the Russian Federation, the city of
Sochi, the Sochi 2014 Organizing Committee and
all our partners, I would like to thank the General
Assembly for its attention and to ask that it support our
draft resolution.
Ms. Singh (India): I feel honoured and privileged to
participate in today’s debate on agenda item 11, entitled
“Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
India welcomes resolution 67/296, adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session and
proclaiming 6 April as the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace. We hope that its observance
will help spread awareness about the importance of
sport as a tool for development and peace. We are also
happy to be a sponsor of draft resolution A/68/L.8,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”, to be adopted by the
Assembly today.
We also welcome the deliberations in the
third International Forum on Sport for Peace and
Development, organized jointly in June at United
Nations Headquarters in New York by the United
Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace
and the International Olympic Committee (IOC). We
are confident that the collaboration between the United
Nations and the IOC will lead to the integration of sport
into all areas of development and peace and help to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Since the dawn of human civilization, the intrinsic
links between sports, games and the human pursuit
of excellence have been recognized. That pursuit of
excellence through sport reached its epitome in the

A/68/PV.44

civilization of ancient Greece, the progenitor of the
modern Olympic movement.
In India, sports and physical activities have also
been an integral part of our civilization, through the
practice of yoga and its highly evolved system of
physical, mental and spiritual regimens. Yoga, as a form
of physical and mental exercise, is now popular across
the world. In addition, India also has a range of highly
developed indigenous games and martial arts. After
India attained independence in 1947, the integration
of physical education and sports into formal education
was emphasized in our first five-year plan. A separate
Department of Sports was subsequently set up in 1982,
and a national sports policy was announced in 1984,
a year that also saw the establishment of the Sports
Authority of India, aimed at ensuring the effective and
optimum utilization of various sports facilities, and
overseeing all matters pertaining to sports promotion
and management. India has encouraged the autonomous
functioning of national sports federations, and we are
proud to say that the Board of Control of Cricket in India
is one of the most resourceful autonomous sports bodies
in the world. All sectors of our society, including the
media and the corporate sector, are actively involved in
promoting sports.
Sport is a highly effective tools in achieving
development objectives in the areas of health, education
and child development. It helps generate public
awareness and inspires broad and inclusive action in
support of the development agenda. It is heartening
to note that sport has been recognized as one of the
tools to address development challenges. We appreciate
the work of the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace, and of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace in bringing the worlds of sport and development
closer together. Efforts should continue to focus on
sport for development, and to root it in the United
Nations system.
Associating sports personalities with the United
Nations in order to create public awareness of education,
health and development issues, and promoting
tolerance, understanding and peace within and between
communities and cultures, is a praiseworthy endeavour.
I would like to mention here that Indian athletes have
also been associated with different United Nations
entities — the Indian tennis star Vijay Amritraj has been
a United Nations Messenger of Peace, and our cricketing

13-549893/22

A/68/PV.44

hero Sachin Tendulkar is a Goodwill Ambassador for
the United Nations Environment Programme.
India welcomes the work of the International
Olympic Committee and the International Paralympics
Committee in promoting and strengthening a culture of
peace based on the spirit of the Olympic Truce. I assure
them of India’s full cooperation and support in their
efforts to use sport as a tool to promote peace, dialogue
and reconciliation. India also cherishes and celebrates
the noble ideals and values of the Olympic movement,
and stands committed to furthering international
fraternity, friendship, goodwill and unity. We believe
that there is no better medium than sport to inculcate
and foster the values of respect, diversity and tolerance
across communities, civilizations and cultures.
Mr. Wijaya (Indonesia): Organized sport enjoys
an honoured tradition, as it has promoted peaceful
international interaction among diverse peoples
and nations competing without strife and despite
geopolitical differences. In that context, we welcome
the adoption of the biannual draft resolution (A/68/L.8)
being considered under the current agenda item, which
showcases, inter alia, the recognition by Member States
of the unique potential of sport to promote peace and
development and the valuable contribution of sport in
creating an atmosphere of tolerance and understanding
among peoples and nations.
As we are now entering the final push towards the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) before the 2015 deadline, sport can play an
important role that generates broad, inclusive and
committed action in support of the MDGs and make a
meaningful difference in the life of people.
In Indonesia, we have a Ministry of Youth and
Sports which is a Government institution dedicated
to developing and integrating sport into our national
development strategy. The commemoration every
9 September of the National Day of Sports and the
implementation of the law on the national sport system,
Law No. 3 of 2005, mark our deep commitment to
nurturing the culture of sport within our society. The
law on the national sport system provides a legal basis
for, inter alia, raising awareness of the relevance of sport
to character-building in our nation and galvanizing
efforts to cultivate in young generations the strong
traits of discipline, perseverance, competitiveness,
sportsmanship, friendship and unity. The traditions of
the Olympic Truce and the Olympic ideal need to be

4/22

06/11/2013

preserved and promoted as they can be powerful tools to
help educate and send messages of peace, non-violence,
fairness and tolerance to current and future generations.
We all share the aspiration to live harmoniously
in peace and prosperity. Sport is an exemplary way to
transmit our shared values through friendly, peaceful
interactions. It gives us a means to demonstrate the shared
humanity in all of us and has a unique and strategic role
to play in energizing the public by encouraging actions
at the local, regional and international level in support
of the development agenda. With its power to attract,
inspire and mobilize people, sport can be an effective
tool for conveying crucial messages on matters related
to education, conflict prevention, post-disaster relief
and normalization of life, economic development, as
well as on issues related to the environment.
Meanwhile, at the international level, Indonesia is
honoured to take part in the Group of Friends of Sport
for Peace and Development initiative and to co-sponsor
today’s draft resolution with a view to fostering the
culture of sport as an integral part of our life.
Finally, as highlighted by the draft resolution,
Indonesia wishes to underscore the importance of
partnerships among related stakeholders, undertaking
concrete actions at the local, national, regional and
international levels, and promoting and strengthening
a culture of peace based on the spirit of sport and the
Olympic Truce. In that regard, Indonesia reiterates its
ongoing support for advancing cooperation through
sport for peace and development.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): On
6 February 2014, the United Nations flag will again fly
at the Olympic site, side by side with the five rings and
the Russian flag, when the Olympic and Paralympic
Winter Games open in Sochi.
Our consideration of agenda item 11, “Sport
for peace and development: building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”, has
special and symbolic significance this year because
it allows Monaco to celebrate a moving anniversary.
Twenty years ago, on 25 October 1993, the General
Assembly adopted for the first time a resolution entitled
“Observance of the Olympic Truce” (resolution 48/11)
following an initiative of the Organization of African
Unity presented by Egypt. That was the first draft
resolution that the Principality of Monaco, which had
become the 183rd Member State of the Organization a
few months earlier, had co-authored.

13-54989

06/11/2013

Since then, and during the then-presidency of
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the United Nations and the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) were able
to forge an increasingly fruitful partnership. That
strong link was affirmed when the IOC was granted
observer status in the General Assembly in 2009, under
the presidency of Mr. Jacques Rogge, whom I wish to
commend once again for his dynamic accomplishments
oriented towards the inclusion of sport for development
and peace. I am also absolutely certain that Mr. Thomas
Bach’s vast knowledge of the Committee will allow it
push the shared action of our two organizations even
further. I can therefore strongly reaffirm the full support
of my delegation for the work of the Committee, in full
compliance with the unwavering commitment to the
Olympic ideal of His Serene Highness Prince Albert II,
IOC member and five-time Olympian.
As resolution 67/296, declaring the International
Day of Sport for Development and Peace, recently
reaffirmed, the mission and role of the International
Olympic Committee — which are to place sport in the
service of humankind, promote a peaceful society and a
healthy lifestyle, align sport with culture and education,
and preserve human dignity — have always been held
in our highest esteem. In that context, it is therefore
natural that the International Olympic Truce Centre in
Athens should be a key player in promoting the ideals
of peace, tolerance, understanding and mutual respect,
under the banner of the Olympic truce.
The Olympic Games always arouse strong feelings
and great joy, despite ongoing conflicts. The noble
mission of the Olympic Truce during the Games
reminds us of our lofty commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Olympic Charter. On another level, like any sports
event intended both for professionals and amateurs and
young people, the Games also promote values intrinsic
to the exercise of outdoing oneself, respecting others
and bringing cultures closer together.
That focus inspires the work of the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for
Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke. Here, I
welcome the initiative of the youth leadership camps,
the seventh of which took place from 23 August to
2 September in Gwangju, Republic of Korea, bringing
together young people from all regions of the world to
share, in the context of sport, a unique experience of
learning from and understanding others.

A/68/PV.44

Allow me also to mention the importance of the
Universiades, organized by the International University
Sports Federation, which, like the Olympic Games,
take place every two years in summer and winter, the
latest of which was held in Kazan in July. Some 10,000
university athletes thus carried the flags of the 162
participating countries.
The many partnerships among the United Nations,
the United Nations Office on Sport for Development and
Peace, the International Olympic Committee and the
organizers of the Olympic host countries are promising.
They encourage us to seek all possible contributions to
the great scheme that inspires us, namely, to achieve a
peaceful and better world.
The peoples of the world have never been so able to
travel, meet, engage and fraternize. The arrival of the
Olympic torch in the host country is always a moving
moment. Following its arrival in Moscow on 6 October,
it has now embarked on one of the longest odysseys of
its history before being set alight in Sochi on 7 February
next year. It will have travelled no less than 65,000
kilometres in 123 days from Olympia to Moscow, from
Kaliningrad to Anadyr, from Vladivostok to Lake
Baikal and the Black Sea, and even to space, as we
heard this morning.
But travelling through such a vast area must be more
than a mere statistic. That unique unifying momentum
has been fully embraced by the host country, as reflected
in the unparalleled number of 14,000 relay runners who
will have participated in the torch’s journey.
For all participants, spectators and fans, the
Olympic Games are not confined to competition or to
seeking a record. Each Olympian takes part in a huge
common human adventure with thousands of other
athletes of all outlooks and cultures. Sport is above
all a human voyage within oneself, on the one hand,
to surpass one’s own limits and towards others, on the
other hand, as the main aim is not necessarily to win
but to share in respecting others.
I congratulate the delegation of the Russian
Federation on the draft resolution and join millions
of spectators who are keenly awaiting the opening of
the winter Olympic and Paralympic Games in the hope
that, in line with the Greek tradition for thousands of
years now, weapons will fall silent.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation for the

13-549895/22

A/68/PV.44

activities of the United Nations in the area of sport
and the work of the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace. I would also like to commend
the efforts of Mr. Wilfried Lemke, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, and to convey to him our support for peace
and development throughout the world by means of
sport. I also thank Mr. Thomas Bach, President of the
International Olympic Committee. I am convinced that
he will strengthen the United Nations partnership with
sport.
Sport shows how peace can be strengthened because
it has no geographical or social boundaries. Sport is a
way to strengthen social and economic integration at
all levels. It is also a way to develop friendship through
non-violence, tolerance and justice. Through sport, we
can resolve problems that arise from crises since it is a
way of bringing people together.
In view of the importance of sport, the United
Nations believes that it can improve and promote
solidarity among peoples. Given the importance of
sport and physical activity, the connection between
sport and human rights is evident. It helps us to meet
the Millennium Development Goals, as mentioned by
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport
for Development and Peace.
Sport can also be a way to promote peace and
security. In that connection, I would like to thank
the representative of the Russian Federation for
strengthening solidarity through sport and the efforts in
that regard. I express my appreciation for the importance
that Member States give to sport and its place in national
policymaking and international policies. It is a way to
strengthen the bases for education and health.
Allow me also to thank and reiterate my
congratulations to the Government of the United
Kingdom on its successful thirtieth Olympic Games
and fourteenth Paralympics. That helps to strengthen
the culture of peace and harmony in the spirit of the
Olympic Truce. It can also to act as a catalyst for
friendship and the spirit of sportsmanship among
athletes whatever their religion or belief.
I would also like to thank all Member States for
the Truce and for declaring 6 April International Day
of Sport for Development and Peace. Allow me also
to express my support to Brazil for hosting the World
Cup and the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016. I

6/22

06/11/2013

would also like to congratulate Japan, which will host
the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2020.
As I said earlier, in order to foster that momentum
and to make sport a means for promoting the universal
principle of international solidarity, I congratulate
the Russian Federation on the draft resolution that it
introduced, entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal” (A/68/L.8).
The draft resolution affirms respect for the Olympic
Truce and the ideals of the United Nations and the
Olympic Movement, namely, friendship among peoples,
harmony, non-violence and non-discrimination. I hope
that all Member States will support the draft resolution,
thereby sending a strong message to all those that work
for the noble practice of sport and greatly encouraging
every athlete.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the presentation given on behalf
of the Organizing Committee of the Sochi Winter
Olympics, which we know will be a great success.
Sport is an important activity for human development
and cooperation at the national and international levels.
Cuba believes that sport is a practice that strengthens
solidarity and friendship among peoples as essential
components of the promotion of peace, development
and cooperation among nations.
Following the triumph of the Cuban Revolution in
1959, sport was no longer an exclusive pursuit in our
country and became a right enjoyed by all. In order to
guarantee that right, we have promoted a pedagogical
system that incorporates physical education as an
integral component of education at all stages, which has
led to significant successes in regional and international
competitions. At the London 2012 Olympic Games,
Cuba, though only a small developing country, took
sixteenth place in the medals table. Cuba also ranked
fifteenth in the Paralympic Games this year, achieving
its best-ever performance with nine gold medals.
In Cuba, we work to provide sports training from
an early age, which allows us to promote talented
individuals who go on to become distinguished athletes.
At the same time, we reject the notion that money is
the only reward of athletic activity, and we therefore
denounce the theft of talented athletes from developing
countries.
For years, the Cuban sports movement, headed
by the Cuban Olympic Committee and the National

13-54989

06/11/2013

Institute of Sports, Physical Education and Recreation,
has pursued collaboration with several developing
countries. Through bilateral agreements, Cuban
technicians, teachers and coaches share their sports
training methods with many developing countries,
thereby helping to attain even better sporting results
and raise even further the popularity of sport. This
contributes ultimately to strengthening the bonds of
friendship among peoples.
Cuba has also made its Institute of Sports Medicine
and anti-doping laboratory available to the countries of
the South in order to contribute to the fight against the
scourge of drugs and and cheating that, in exceptional
cases, corrupts athletes and impedes fair play. The
International School of Physical Education and Sport
in Havana trains professionals whose core values are
solidarity and respect for human dignity.
Cuba congratulates the city of Sochi in the Russian
Federation on hosting the XXII Olympic Winter Games
in February 2014 and commends the work carried out
so far. We wish the Games all the success they deserve.
Moreover, we trust that the 2016 Olympics in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, will be a success for all of the peoples
of the South, and for those of Latin America and the
Caribbean in particular.
The choice of Sochi and Rio de Janeiro to host
the Olympic Games is also due recognition of the
efforts devoted and results achieved by the peoples and
Governments of both countries in terms of economic
and social development for the benefit of their citizens
and others who live on their territories. They can count
on our respect and support in their mission to ensure the
success of these celebrations of sport and friendship.
We emphasize the need to further develop
international cooperation and solidarity through the
Olympic ideal. Cuba urges greater investment in
education, health, culture and sport projects by drawing
on the billions of dollars currently spent on weapons. A
great deal could be done for the right to development of
millions of people around the world with the resources
available. All that is needed is political will.
Finally, Cuba reiterates its decision to continue
sharing its greatest sporting asset — the human capital
created by the revolution. A genuine commitment to
the Olympic ideal, our efforts to realize international
law and solidarity, and the ongoing struggle for social
justice continue to guide the efforts of the Cuban

A/68/PV.44

people. Sport will continue to be a major component of
our efforts for the betterment of humankind.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): Dating back to the eighth
century B.C., the ancient Olympic Games were meant
to be a force for peace and solidarity among ancient
Greek city-States, which declared a truce for a period
of seven days before the beginning and seven days after
the end of the Games. Before every Olympiad, heralds
in the city of Elis announced the truce, which was
implemented as a cessation of hostilities, a prohibition
of entry into the city of military forces, a pause of any
legal dispute and the suspension of the imposition of
death penalties. The ultimate goal was the peaceful
conduct of the Games by protecting the city from
invasion and ordering individuals and State authorities
to refrain from interfering with the safe passage of the
athletes. As Thucydides claims, if States violated the
truce, their athletes were banned from participating.
The concept of the Olympic Truce once born was
carried out for a period of 1,200 years. Greeks saw in
the Games a chance to replace conflict with friendly
competition. This aspect of Olympism was of great
importance to Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who revived
the Olympic Games as a firm believer in their potential
to advance international understanding and promote
world peace. His initiative paved the way for the
embodiment of the ideal of the Olympic Truce to the
modern Olympic Games.
In today’s world, emphasis on Olympic peace has
become a major feature of modern Olympic ideology.
The foundation of the International Olympic Truce
Centre, for the creation of which Greece actively
toiled alongside the International Olympic Committee,
gave new dynamism to the pursuit of peace. Most
importantly, the inclusion of the Olympic Truce in the
United Nations framework for the first time through
resolution 48/11, in 1993, granted a distinct role to the
ideal, given that the United Nations and the Olympic
movement share common values and goals. We should
bear in mind that in a world of differences, inequalities
and conflicts, even an agreement for a temporary truce
is an achievement for the international community. It
is therefore our responsibility to continue to herald the
Olympic Truce and spare no effort to ensure its actual
implementation.
In the context of the United Nations and its role as
a forum for world peace, this year’s draft resolution,
entitled “Sport for peace and development: building

13-549897/22

A/68/PV.44

a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal” (A/68/L.8), specifies the request to
States to observe the Olympic Truce from seven days
before until seven days after the Games, mirroring the
period of the ancient truce. The draft resolution’s goal
is to reiterate the value of sports, culture, education and
sustainable development towards a peaceful planet. It
further elaborates on the role of sports in promoting
social inclusion without discrimination of any kind,
tolerance and understanding, aiming at raising
awareness around their potential for peace. In the same
vein, the draft resolution welcomes the establishment
of the International Day of Sport for Development and
Peace, the sole goal of which has been set as mobilizing
for action towards peace.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) Vice-President, took the Chair.
In 2014, the Russian Federation will host the Winter
Olympic Games in Sochi. I seize this opportunity to
wish Russia every success in that difficult endeavour.
The task of the rest of us is to meet our responsibilities
by observing the Olympic Truce and making peace a
feasible goal. We should all find inspiration in next
year’s Olympic Games and reflect on how sports can
be used as a propitious tool to reduce tensions and to
build bridges.
Finally, with a sense of collectivity, we should
make a difference and, for the first time — even for a
brief period of time — we should lay down our arms
and make the Olympic Truce a reality.
Ms. Al-Mulla (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure for my delegation to take part in this meeting
and to deliver a statement on agenda item 11, “Sport for
peace and development: building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”, based on
the State of Kuwait’s belief in the importance of sports
and the great service it provides to the international
community and to improving relations between nations.
The State of Kuwait affirms the importance of the
General Assembly’s deliberations on sport for peace
and development. It expresses its appreciation for the
work of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Sport for Development and Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke,
and it pledges to do its utmost to promote the United
Nations endeavours in that field. We were honoured
to join in the consensus adoption of resolution 66/5,
entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”, in 2011. We congratulate
Russia on submitting draft resolution A/68/L.8.

8/22

06/11/2013

Sport provides a great opportunity for peace
and friendly relations to prevail, and constitutes an
important driving force at the national and international
levels. It spreads the spirit of peace and teamwork, and
it mitigates the threat of wars and animosity. Sport
plays a prominent role in improving the lives of peoples
worldwide. It builds bridges between individuals and
societies and provides a fertile ground for peaceful
cordiality. Sport is considered to be a powerful
tool in fostering social links between countries and
promoting peace, solidarity and justice. It also plays
a prominent role in enhancing social integration,
economic development and sustainable development in
all fields, and plays an important role in enhancing the
Millennium Development Goals.
Young people are the cornerstone of social
development. We must therefore exploit their potential
through policies, programmes and plans that will
inevitably lead to a prosperous future for nations. The
State of Kuwait attaches great importance to the role
of youth through its Ministry of Youth Affairs and its
Public Authority for Youth and Sport, which play an
important role in training and guiding young people,
improving their sports achievements and administering
their participation in various tournaments, especially
the Olympic Games.
In addition, we cannot forget the role of women
in the fields of sport, culture and society. My country
has worked eagerly to remove all barriers hindering
women’s participation in sport games. My country
organized the first Gulf Cooperation Council women’s
handball tournament in October, in which five Gulf
countries participated. We also participated in the
XXX Olympic Games in London in 2011, in which 11
Kuwaiti men and women participated.
Sport has become an integral part of the United
Nations objectives and an effective tool to foster the
principles of peace and justice, solidarity and cultural
and humanitarian diversity among peoples. I reaffirm
my country’s support for making sports a priority at the
United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the interest
accorded by all Member States to the universal nature
of sport as an important tool in fostering peace,
development, education and health.

13-54989

06/11/2013

Mr. Lee (Singapore): Singapore looks forward to
the adoption today of draft resolution A/68/L.8, entitled
“Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
We are pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution and
welcome the ideals that the Olympic Truce represents.
I take this opportunity to thank the former President
of the International Olympic Committee, Mr. Jacques
Rogge, for his invaluable contributions to the Olympic
movement during his 12-year tenure. I also offer our
warmest congratulations to the new President of the
International Olympic Committee, Mr. Thomas Bach,
and am confident that the Olympic ideals will continue
to flourish under his stewardship.
Sport brings many benefits to individuals and
communities. It encourages healthy lifestyles and
inculcates the values of humility, hard work, discipline,
fair play and determination. The timeless Olympic
values of striving for excellence, demonstrating
respect and celebrating friendship have inspired our
top sportsmen and sportswomen to do their best and to
overcome their personal limitations through peaceful
rivalry. More importantly, sport has a profound way
of bringing people together in the pursuit of sporting
excellence, transcending differences in socioeconomic
backgrounds, cultures and nationalities. And the
Olympic Games, standing at the pinnacle of sporting
achievement, have contributed immeasurably to
the promotion of peace and greater tolerance and
understanding in the world.
Singapore is honoured to be part of Olympic
history through our hosting of the inaugural Youth
Olympic Games in 2010. The Games have been a source
of inspiration for us to continue to do everything we
can to develop and build a strong sporting culture in
Singapore. Our Vision 2030 master plan is a national
strategy to stimulate positive, deeply embedded values
for Singaporeans and our nation through sport. We
believe that sport can help maintain Singapore’s social
integrity and economic strength. It can help us overcome
the challenges presented by an ageing population, rising
regional and international competition, and increased
diversity within our multicultural and multiracial
society.
Sport is more than winning medals or keeping fit.
By its very nature, sport develops the attributes that we
need to compete in the evolving global conditions: a
winning spirit, a respect for teamwork, a commitment
to leadership and a love of country. Those are principles

A/68/PV.44

that we want firmly rooted not just in our athletes, but
throughout our society, in our schools and universities,
as well as in our workforce. We believe we can live
better through sports.
Singapore will continue to champion the Olympic
ideals through sports. We competed in the 2012 Summer
Olympic Games and the Summer Paralympic Games
with our largest ever Olympic contingent — 23 athletes
and 8 parathletes, respectively. In 2015, Singapore will
host the twenty-eighth Southeast Asian Games, which
will also coincide with our fiftieth anniversary as a
nation and is therefore doubly significant and historic.
Our athletes and parathletes, champions in their own
right, will continue to blaze the trail and inspire many
young people to dream bigger.
The 65,000-kilometre Sochi Winter Olympic torch
relay has already begun, with the torch recently reaching
the North Pole. Singapore extends its best wishes to
Russia in hosting a successful Olympic Winter Games
and Paralympic Winter Games in Sochi in February
next year. We also wish China every success in hosting
the second Youth Olympic Games in Nanjing in August
2014. We believe that through these Games, sports and
the Olympic vision will remain a force for good and
peace in this uncertain world.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution entitled “Sport for peace and development:
building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal” (A/68/L.8). We especially want to
draw attention to the language in the draft resolution
“calling upon host countries to promote social inclusion
without discrimination of any kind”. This is the first
time that language of that kind appears in a resolution
on the Olympic Truce, and it sends a powerful message
highlighting the role that sport plays for all people.
The phrase emphasizes the importance of the inclusion
and participation of all people in sporting activity,
regardless of identity, including persons of different
sexual orientations and gender identities.
In its recitation of the fundamental principles of
Olympism, the Olympic Charter states that
“[e]very individual must have the possibility of
practicing sport, without discrimination of any
kind and in the Olympic spirit, which requires
mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship,
solidarity and fair play”.

13-549899/22

A/68/PV.44

Many of the most inspirational moments in the Olympics
have come through the ever-broadening participation
of persons of various backgrounds in the Games,
including Native American Jim Thorpe’s decathlon and
pentathlon gold medals in the 1912 Olympics; the four
gold medals African-American Jesse Owens won at the
1936 Berlin Olympics; the three 1960 gold medals of
Wilma Rudolph, an African-American woman stricken
with polio at age 4 whose childhood doctors feared
she might never walk without wearing a leg brace; and
the recent inspirational performance of South African
Caster Semenya, who faced unprecedented challenges
and unfair gender testing in 2009, only to return proudly
and medal in the London Games, where her teammates
selected her for the honour of serving as her nation’s
flag-bearer during the opening ceremony.
Part of what makes sport so important is that it
promotes inclusion, bringing together people of different
ages, races, religions, social status, disabilities, sexual
orientation and gender identity. Sport embraces all
segments of society and is instrumental in empowering
people of diverse backgrounds, while fostering
tolerance and respect for all people, no matter what they
look like, where they come from, where they worship,
or whom they love.
Mr. Silwamba (Zambia): Zambia believes that
sports can play an important role in our societies.
Sports promote excellence and a healthier lifestyle and
is a wonderful way of bringing people together from
all walks of life. In Zambia, sports has been a means
of recreation, promoting healthier life styles and,
more importantly, transmitting life-serving messages,
especially to young people. Sports has helped my
country, especially its young, by keeping them
away from vices such as drug abuse, premarital and
unprotected sex, and beer drinking, among other bad
habits. Sport has also been an avenue that has helped to
reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Sports knows neither gender, tribe, race nor
religious affiliation. It is a unifier of humankind. The
Government of the Republic of Zambia is encouraging
gender mainstreaming in sports and urges more girls
and women to get involved in games. In that regard, the
Zambian Government has seen an increase in women
participating and winning prizes in sports tournaments.
Many women are now participating in boxing, a sport
traditionally regarded as a male preserve. Furthermore,
sports is now incorporated into school programmes,
with regular tournaments held in various disciplines

10/22

06/11/2013

among schools, colleges, universities and other learning
institutions.
As the world grapples with the issue of high
unemployment, sport is becoming a sector that is
undeniably creating employment, particularly among
the young. In a bid to encourage Zambians to get more
involved in sports, our Members of Parliament from all
political parties regularly play football and other games.
A football team of Zambian Members of Parliament
has from time to time hosted informal games with
their counterparts from Malawi and other countries
of the Southern African Development Community. It
is gratifying to report that our Members of Parliament
have also engaged diplomats accredited to Zambia in
sports competitions as a means of enhancing mutual
understanding and improve mutual cooperation.
My Government encourages the private sector, as
part of its corporate social responsibility, to support
sports in all parts of the country. Working with
several partners, including the International Olympics
Committee (IOC) and friendly countries like China, the
Zambian Government has embarked on the construction
of sports infrastructure, including large-capacity
football stadiums, in various parts of the country. To
our gratification, the International Olympic Committee
in 2010 constructed the Olympic Youth Development
Centre in the capital city, Lusaka. The Centre is a pilotproject in the series of multi-sport facilities scheduled
to be built in developing countries as part of the
International Olympic Committee’s Sports for Hope
programme.
The Centre in Lusaka comprises football and
hockey pitches, a running track, tennis courts, a boxing
ring and multi-purpose areas that can accommodate
such sports as basketball, handball, weight-lifting,
volleyball, judo and gymnastics. The Olympic Youth
Development Centre is home to some 10,906 children
aged between 10 and 17 years who are registered and
actively participate in various sporting activities there.
Of these, 6,624 are male and 4,282 are female. Between
500 and 700 children and youths visit the Centre on a
daily basis. The Centre offers a wide range of educational
programmes, health services and community activities
aimed at improving young people’s quality of life.
Thousands of athletes from Zambia and
neighbouring countries have already been to the
Olympic Youth Development Centre for training. Since
its inception, it has hosted international tournaments
with four to eight countries participating. The Centre
13-54989

06/11/2013

has embarked on a programme to build accommodation
facilities to house athletes from other parts of Africa
during training camps and tournaments.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and International
Olympics Committee President Mr. Jacques Rogge
visited the Centre on 25 February 2012 to encourage
youth participation in sports. My Government
appreciates such support and calls upon our partners
to continue working with us to ensure that the Centre
continues to be a model of excellence and a model that
can be replicated in other parts of the world. Zambia
reaffirms its commitment to promoting sports and to
encourage the young and old alike to get involved in
one form of sport or another for their well-being.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Before the first Olympic
torch was lit and before a ball was kicked for the first
time in the World Cup, sports had become part of
our social and cultural identity. Many types of sport
have evolved since and the spirit of the competition
carried by each sport is no longer just about winning
or losing. It has gone beyond that. Sport is associated
with everything that defines us as human: courage,
determination, emotions, perseverance, acceptance,
discipline, teamwork and much more.
Sport somehow has a unique charisma to attract,
mobilize and inspire people all around the world. It is
like a language that we all speak and understand. It
plays a significant role as a social instrument that can
promote social integration and economic development,
strengthen social ties and networks, and promote the
ideals of peace, fraternity, solidarity, non-violence,
tolerance and justice.
As a developing nation, Malaysia has identified
sport as a medium that serves as a catalyst to its
nation-building process. Since independence, sport
has been seen as a means of contributing to the
development of the spirit of nationalism and national
integration. In sports, nationalism forms the natural
framework into which people unite and structures the
valuable consolidation of Malaysia’s society. Malaysia
is fully aware of the positive influence of sport and will
continue to utilize sport and its potential by integrating
its values into our national development strategies and
approaches in our society’s capacity-building process.
The Ministry of Youth and Sports of Malaysia has
outlined its strategic plan for the period 2010-2015 with
the objective of encouraging Malaysians from all walks
of life to embrace the motto “a healthy mind in a healthy

A/68/PV.44

body”. Through the strategic plan, we aim to become a
true sporting nation whose people engage in physical
exercise and play various sports on a daily basis,
emulating positives trends in many countries around
the world. Some of the main initiatives to achieve that
target include the following.
First, in order to cultivate sports for all, the Ministry
of Youth and Sports has undertaken programmes and
activities to ensure the participation of all, including
through the establishment of a variety of sports clubs;
the promotion and demonstration of various sports;
the building and upgrading of sports infrastructure
and facilities; and the combining of efforts with the
Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health in
creating awareness of the merits of being actively
engaged in sports and its relationship with good health
and good results in education.
Thus far, our efforts, along with relentless
awareness campaigns, have yielded encouraging results,
as Malaysians show great interest in running, futsal,
paintball, cycling, wall-climbing and more. In line with
the spirit of ensuring access to sports for all, Malaysia
has also undertaken initiatives to promote and raise
awareness of sport and disabilities, and is developing
that concept to ensure our active participation in
various multi-disability competitions, single-disability
competitions and single-sport competitions, including
the Paralympic Games.
Secondly, in order to strengthen the development
of high-performance sports, Malaysia is currently
producing champions in certain sports. Nevertheless,
we cannot rest on our laurels, because compared to the
sport achievements of major sporting countries, there
is still a long way to go for Malaysia. Malaysia aims
to increase its performance and improve its ranking
in several sports by investing in their development,
identifying and nurturing talent and producing
world-class national coaches via a train-the-trainers
programme. The success of that strategic initiative can
be measured by only one outcome — the number of
medals achieved in international arenas, including the
Olympic, Commonwealth and Asian Games.
Thirdly, in terms of developing sport as industry,
Malaysia has a vision to create a strong industry
based on sport that can boost the economy and further
contribute to our gross domestic product. To achieve
that, strong partnerships between the corporate sector
and the sporting industry must be fostered. Progress
towards achieving that goal is on the right track, with

13-5498911/22

A/68/PV.44

Malaysia being continually entrusted to host various
international sporting events, such as Formula 1,
MotoGP, Le Tour de Langkawi and regattas in Selangor,
Kedah, Terengganu and Sarawak, to name a few.
Malaysia’s efforts are not confined to our national
initiatives. Through the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) ministerial meeting on sports,
Malaysia pursues its interest in sport development and
lends its support to ASEAN and its various bodies,
including the ASEAN Football Federation, ASEAN
Basketball League, ASEAN Volleyball Tournament
and ASEAN Para Sports Federation. Realizing
ASEAN’s potential for sport in a region of 600 million
people, Malaysia has proposed that 2013 be designated
the ASEAN Sports Industry Year, a proposal that
was accepted by the ASEAN ministerial meeting on
sports. Malaysia is optimistic that the sports industry
will benefit ASEAN, as the latter is moving towards
becoming a single community by 2015.
The free movement of trades and goods will also
accelerate the growth of the sports industry, which
presents valuable commercial opportunities through an
open market, allowing larger cross-border transactions
in sponsorships, licensing and merchandising; sports
tourism; and broadcasting distribution rights. In
addition, the sports industry will also encourage the
growth of areas related to sports medicine, marketing,
events and management.
In conjunction with the ASEAN Sports Industry
Year, Malaysia will convene MYSportsFest this year,
an event that will feature 100 sports-related activities,
including competitions, exhibitions, carnivals, sports
clinics and talent searches. Apart from encouraging
Malaysians to lead a healthy lifestyle, MYSportsFest
will provide an opportunity for companies involved in
the sports industry to promote their products.
While sports alone cannot prevent conflict or build
peace, it can assist in peacebuilding interventions.
Sports can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among peoples and nations. Through
collaboration and cooperation, Governments should
strengthen their efforts to use sports to overcome
development challenges and, in turn, achieve the
Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
To conclude, Malaysia believes in the concept
of sport for development and peace, as it transcends
sociocultural and political barriers. The ability of sport
to reach millions of people all over the world and its

12/22

06/11/2013

potential to empower, motivate and inspire is amazing
and has no boundaries.
Mr. Roet (Israel): On behalf of the State of
Israel, I would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, for his important work
encouraging dialogue, collaboration and partnership.
Israel is proud to be one of the sponsors of today’s
draft resolution (A/68/L.8), which focuses on sport
as a rallying point. It is interesting that sport, which
brings people to compete against one another, can
transcend differences and establish common ground.
Put more simply, sport fosters friendship, cooperation
and understanding. Sport has the ability to touch hearts
and minds and bring tangible benefits to every corner
of the globe.
Throughout the world, there are hundreds of
non-profit organizations that seek to bridge cultural
divides and eliminate hatred through sport. In Israel,
the Peres Center for Peace was founded by Israel’s
President Peres to further his vision of having people
in the Middle East work together in genuine friendship.
One of the programmes run by the Center is the
Twinned Peace Sport Schools. It is the longest-running
coexistence sport project in the Middle East. Every
year, close to 2,000 Israeli and Palestinian children
participate in programmes with twinned communities
across the country. The project fosters peace and
coexistence between young Palestinians and Israelis
by challenging stereotypes. Palestinian and Israeli
children unite under a common banner to cheer each
other on and build lasting friendships. Programmes like
those have two goals: teaching children how to score
goals and, more importantly, teaching them mutual
respect, equity and reciprocity. In the process, they can
heal wounds, mend fences and overcome differences.
Sadly, not all sporting events have been driven
by those ideals. We recall the 1972 Olympic Games
massacre in Munich, when Palestinian terrorists
killed 11 Israeli athletes, coaches and a referee under
the interlocking rings of the Olympic banner. It is
regrettable that, more than 40 years after the Munich
massacre, the International Olympic Committee has
refused all requests to observe a moment of silence in
their honour. The memory of that inhumane act is still
felt in Israel and is a warning for the ages that sports
cannot be used as a vehicle for incitement and hatred.

13-54989

06/11/2013

While we like to think that the days of discrimination
are behind us, Israel continues to suffer from prejudice
in certain sporting arenas. Only weeks ago, a Tunisian
athlete was ordered to forfeit a quarterfinal match
against his Israeli opponent in the Association of Tennis
Professionals Challenger Tour tennis tournament in
Uzbekistan. That flies in the face of everything that
sportsmanship represents.
Today, we must recommit to advancing sports and
ensuring that every athlete is given the opportunity to
compete. We must commit to being the torchbearers
of the true Olympic spirit, ensuring that sport carries
connotations of peace, harmony and tolerance and that
it is not hijacked by those committed to fundamentalist
ideologies. Sporting initiatives in Israel break down
boundaries such as class, religion, race and even
physical abilities. Such institutions as the Israel
Sports Center for the Disabled are helping to integrate
every member of society. By encouraging youth with
disabilities to participate in sports, the organization is
helping heal psychological and physical wounds while
building self-confidence.
Israel is sharing its experience using sports to
promote peace and tolerance with countries throughout
the developing world. Mifalot is the largest and most
diverse sport-for-development and peace organization
in the Middle East. With over 300 programmes,
Mifalot harnesses the power and popularity of football
to build compassionate and cohesive communities.
From leadership training to assisting new immigrants,
Mifalot helps thousands of people with educational
and social needs. Today, Mifalot applies its successful
model to utilize football — the world’s game — as a
platform for social change in countries ranging from
Jordan to Rwanda and from Haiti to Nigeria.
As Israel’s President Shimon Peres said, “Peace
should be done not only among Governments but among
people”. Sports have the ability to unite us, but only
if the politics of coexistence come before the politics
of hate and division. We encourage all people in the
Middle East and throughout the world to use sports to
promote coexistence, to learn from one another and to
foster peace and harmony.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): Japan highly appreciates
the efforts made by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
his Special Adviser on Sport for Development and
Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke; and Mr. John Ashe and
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, the current and the former Presidents

A/68/PV.44

of the General Assembly, towards achieving human
development and peace through sport.
Sports can connect the world. Sports are capable of
uniting and inspiring people in a way that transcends
differences such as nationality, ethnicity, gender and
political persuasion. Sports are a gift that can be shared
by all, despite our varying abilities. It is for reasons such
as those that Japan is strongly committed to conveying
and sharing the joy of sports and creating a better world
through sport. In line with that commitment, we believe
that sport should be promoted by the international
community and that it should be made available and
accessible to all. No one should be left out, and in
particular, women and people with disabilities should
be able to enjoy the same benefits and pleasures of
sports as everyone else.
Japan appreciates the various efforts of the
international community to promote the positive use of
sports to build a peaceful and better world. For example,
Japan, as a sponsor, welcomes resolution 67/296, on the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
which was adopted in August under the initiative of
the United Nations and the International Olympic
Committee (IOC). I would also like to commend the
Russian Federation for promoting this year’s draft
resolution A/68/L.8, on the Olympic Truce. Japan, as
a sponsor of the draft resolution, strongly supports its
spirit of building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal. We firmly believe that the
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games to be hosted in
Sochi next year will realize the ideals and objectives of
the draft resolution.
On 7 September, Tokyo was selected to host
the 2020 Olympic Games. I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to all those who supported
Tokyo’s candidacy to host the Games. I also wish to
heartily commend the tireless efforts of the campaigns
conducted by both Madrid and Istanbul. We were in a
truly neck-and-neck competition right down to the very
final moments.
Towards the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo, we are
committed to conveying and sharing the joy of sports
and creating a better world through sport. To that end,
as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe stated in the IOC session,
Japan will further contribute to the Olympic movement
by implementing various programmes under our new
plan Sports for Tomorrow, targeted towards more than
10 million people in more than 100 countries, including
developing countries, over the next seven years.

13-5498913/22

A/68/PV.44

06/11/2013

Specifically, we intend to concentrate on the
improvement of sports facilities, cooperation in sports
curricula design and the development of international
human resources in the sporting arena through
invitational programmes and by dispatching coaches
and athletes. In addition, we will work closely with
concerned organizations in further strengthening
international anti-doping activities.

In recognition of the central and inherent potential
role that global and traditional sports play in economic
and social development, Ethiopia has made sport one of
its development priorities and been actively working to
promote and develop national sports by incorporating
them into our overall development agenda, including
in our international relations, in order to develop and
further strengthen bonds of friendship and cooperation.

Japan will continue to collaborate with Mr. Lemke
and the United Nations Office on Sport for Development
and Peace (UNOSDP). Among its initiatives, Tokyo
will host the UNOSDP Youth Leadership Camp in
January next year.

At the national level, the Government has
developed a comprehensive national sport policy and
strategic implementation plans. The basic objectives
of this policy are to enhance the participation of the
community in traditional and modern sports and to
make sporting activities accessible to all, consistent
with their capacities and preferences, so as to realize
the fundamental rights of citizens to the enjoyment
of sports. The policy also aims to register great
achievements of international scope by tapping the
huge potential resources existing in communities,
and in particular among young people, by creating
awareness and enabling environments for various
societal purposes.

In the wake of the earthquake of 2011, the people of
Japan received warm support and encouragement from
the IOC and the international sports community. The
2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games in London served
as a great source of inspiration to the people of Japan,
and once again opened our eyes to the inherent power of
sports to inspire dreams, hopes and aspirations and to
strengthen the bonds between people, thus experiencing
ourselves the power of sport to make the world a better
place.
Now it is our turn to do the same. Towards the 2020
Olympic Games in Tokyo, Japan will strengthen our
contribution to the achievement of human development
and peace through sports. Japan will make every effort
so that the 2020 Olympic Games can captivate and
inspire people all over the world. We look forward to
the Assembly’s support and cooperation.
Mr. Kebret (Ethiopia): Ethiopia recognizes the
historical and diverse roles of sport, be it in the form of
competitive sports, physical activities or play. Indeed,
sports not only are physical exercise and games, but
also have the universal potential power and means to
an end in the sphere of economic, political and social
change and/or development, as well as in the promotion
of peace and cultural understanding in every society.
Hence, sport has become a universal phenomenon and a
language of communication and information that have
a potential positive impact on human relations. This is
not only because sport possesses such unique attributes
not only for developing healthy human relations in
society and with respect to the peaceful relationship
and coexistence of States, but also because it has long
been recognized as an essential factor in the realization
of development and peace objectives.

14/22

More importantly, we are exerting every effort to
use sport to foster social integration, development and
peace, further promote our national image, enhance the
inclusion of persons with disabilities, ensure that all
schools provide opportunities for students to engage in
physical exercise during and after school, improve the
quality of education, bring about sustainable economic
development, promote employment and curb poverty,
and recognize and motivate sport volunteerism in
national and local sport events by making it an integral
and indispensable part of our sport initiatives. In short,
our Government has been running community-, schooland youth-based sport development programmes with a
view to realizing our people’s basic right of participation
in sport and leisure activities.
Obviously, ensuring and sustaining community
sport and developing elite sport programmes across
the country requires the investment of a huge amount
of resources. In other words, sport development or
promotion through increasing public participation
cannot be achieved by one particular body alone;
implementation must be supported with adequate
resources and a broad range of individual, societal and
international organizations on the basis of partnerships.
Accordingly, changing our existing low-level sport
development requires the optimal involvement of all
stakeholders as partners. Sport, as a cross-cutting

13-54989

06/11/2013

issue, therefore needs the action-oriented collaboration
of all relevant bodies, such as the United Nations and its
agencies and international sporting organizations.
Unfortunately, in that regard, few or no meaningful
partnerships have been established. For this reason, we
are aware of the need to effectively implement our policy
for improving national sport development and to work
on resource- and capacity-development programmes
in partnership with development agencies, United
Nations bodies and international sport movements. It
is only when we act decisively and in collaboration that
we can harness the power of sport for realization of
development and peace endeavours.
My delegation therefore calls upon the international
community, sport partners and other stakeholders to
develop and establish partnerships for meaningful and
beneficial cooperation in the field of sport to enhance
its positive contribution to the sustainable development
and promotion of lasting peace.
Finally, I wish to announce on behalf of my
delegation that Ethiopia is glad to join the sponsors of
draft resolution A/68/L.8, introduced by the Russian
Federation.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States.
The adoption of draft resolution A/68/L.8, entitled
“Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”,
would put the indispensable interaction between peace
and sport on the front page. The European Union and its
member States remain faithful advocates of the values
of Olympism and will spare no effort in promoting the
Olympic Truce as an effective means of building peace
and solidarity.
The Olympic Games have always been inherently
associated with the ideal of truce. We consider sport
to be an invaluable tool to encourage dialogue and
effectively mobilize the world for the accomplishment
of peace. Furthermore, the concept of the Olympic
Truce provides us with a unique opportunity to achieve
the cessation of hostilities, even temporarily, and to
promote the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
This year, draft resolution A/68/L.8 increases the
period of the observance of the Olympic Truce from
seven days before the beginning until seven days after
the conclusion of the Games. Moreover, it encourages

A/68/PV.44

the Olympic and Paralympic movements to cooperate
with national and international sports organizations
on the use of sport for the purpose of contributing to
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). In addition, acknowledging the contribution
of the volunteer movement to the Olympic Games,
the draft resolution calls on host countries to promote
social inclusion without discrimination of any kind and
recognize the role of sports in building tolerance and
mutual understanding.
We believe that the international community must
seek to address and fight all forms of discrimination on
the basis of race, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender
orientation, disability, age, religion, political or other
opinion, national, social or ethnic origin, or any other
grounds and to promote respect for diversity.
In conclusion, allow me to restate our commitment
to support the peaceful resolution of existing conflicts
and use this opportunity to urge all Member States to
send a message of unity and to preserve the Olympic
Truce during the 2014 Olympic Games in Sochi.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and wishes to make the following additional remarks in
its national capacity.
Italy welcomes the imminent adoption of draft
resolution A/68/L.8 today and is proud to be among its
sponsors. The strong consensus that we expect today
in the General Assembly demonstrates that the ideal
of the Olympic truce is alive and powerful. We must
now translate that commitment into reality. Looking at
the many conflicts taking place around the world, the
challenge seems daunting, yet ancient history is there
to prove that strong ideals backed by serious political
commitment can overcome such challenges.
Italy appreciates the new elements introduced into
the draft resolution this year, in particular the extension
of the period of truce from seven days prior to the
beginning to seven days following the conclusion of
the Games, in line with the Greek tradition. The draft
resolution also recognizes the important role of the
International Olympic and Paralympic Committees,
as well as their partnership with the United Nations,
in particular the United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace. Along with civil society
organizations and the media, they are actors who
are crucial to raising awareness of the extraordinary
opportunity represented by the Olympic Truce. Special

13-5498915/22

A/68/PV.44

efforts must be devoted to mobilizing the young people
of the world.
Italy is a strong believer in sport as a powerful tool
and vehicle for promoting peace and development. In
2009 we actively supported the adoption of resolution
64/3, granting observer status to the International
Olympic Committee. Last year in the United Nations we
introduced the Intercampus Programme, a non-profit
social initiative of the Italian soccer team F.C.
Internazionale providing assistance to needy children
and young people in 24 countries around the world. Its
aim is to give back to those children their right to play.
Through football programmes, young people learn
teamwork and the meaning of fair play, and gain access
to health and education services often absent from their
own villages. Intercampus proves that sport can make
a difference in the daily lives of many people around
the world.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon once said, sport
has become a world language, a common denominator
that breaks down all the walls, all the barriers. We hope
that next February sport will speak the language of
peace and inclusivity. It is in that spirit that we wish
the Russian Federation every success in organizing the
2014 Olympic Games in Sochi.
Mr. Lazarev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus welcomes draft
resolution A/68/L.8, entitled “Sport for peace and
development: building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal”, before the
Assembly today. Belarus has joined the list of the draft
resolution’s sponsors.
We welcome this recognition of the importance of
observing the Olympic principles at the high level of a
General Assembly resolution. The draft resolution we
will adopt today can serve as a foundation basis for the
future strengthening and observation of the principle of
the Olympic Truce. That can be ensured if States, the
United Nations, the International Olympic Committee
and the chief officials of those organizations play an
active role in promoting and protecting the Olympic
ideals.
We are convinced that the politicization of issues
relating to sport and the Olympic Games is contrary
to the principles of friendly and civilized international
relations, the ideals and principles of sport and the
spirit and letter of the Olympic Charter. Unfortunately,
the last Summer Olympic Games showed that not all

16/22

06/11/2013

countries are prepared to meet their obligations to
abide in good faith by the Olympic principles to which
they commit when they are given the lofty honour of
organizing the Olympic Games. We are convinced that
such actions should be appropriately evaluated at the
international level, particularly on the part and at the
initiative of the leadership of the International Olympic
Committee and the United Nations. Unfortunately, that
mechanism is not yet functioning effectively.
Belarus is convinced that the XXII Winter
Olympic Games and XI Winter Paralympic Games in
Sochi will be conducted at a high level and will be a
visible affirmation of the contribution that sport and
the Olympic movement make to building a peaceful and
happy world. We wish our Russian colleagues every
success in the preparation and holding of the Olympic
and Paralympic Games.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): Ukraine has
traditionally recognized the value of sport in building
a peaceful and better world, promoting tolerance,
equality and understanding among people and nations.
Through its unique power to bring us together, sport
can transcend boundaries and unite people irrespective
of their race, religion or political views.
The Government of Ukraine firmly believes
in sport’s potential to contribute to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and to make
a real difference in people’s lives, including those
from the most vulnerable groups. In Ukraine sport
and physical education are considered as part of a
broader perspective on promoting healthy lifestyles and
constitute a strategic priority in Government policy. We
believe that a holistic multisectoral approach to sport
can be very effective in helpting to achieve the MDGs,
including those relating to health and education.
Guided by the noble ideals and principles of
the Paralympic movement, Ukraine pays particular
attention to the use of sport as a means to rehabilitate
persons with disabilities and enhance their social
inclusion. My country runs a unique State sports
institution, the Ukrainian Centre for Physical Education
and Sport for Persons with Disabilities. It consists of
27 regional centres and 106 local offices, with 26 sport
schools for children with disabilities. More than 50,000
persons with disabilities actively practice sport and use
it for rehabilitation.
Ukraine is committed to promoting sport as a
means to advance peace and development around the

13-54989

06/11/2013

world. Last year, as a contribution to that goal, Ukraine,
together with Poland, hosted the fourteenth Union of
European Football Associations (UEFA) championship.
It was the first UEFA championship held in Eastern
Europe, and it is our sincere hope that this major
event succeeded in contributing to a renewed spirit of
friendship and solidarity in the region and to its social
and economic development as a whole. In 2013 we
hosted the thirty-second Rhythmic Gymnastics World
Championship, as well as world youth championships
in boxing and athletics, and in 2015 we will host the
thirty-ninth European Basketball Championship.
I have the pleasure to inform the General Assembly
that yesterday the National Olympic Committee of
Ukraine, supported by the Government of Ukraine,
officially declared its intention to hold the 2022
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games in Lviv.
Our vision for the Games goes far beyond economic
outlook, improved infrastructure, new facilities or
promoting Ukraine’s global image. For us it is rather
about developing a legacy for future generations
built on our collective respect for sport and its basic
values — friendship, goodwill, tolerance and fair play
in competition. We have launched a national project,
Olympic Hope — 2022, in support of realizing this
initiative, with the aim of creating a sports and tourism
infrastructure in Ukraine suitable for hosting the 2022
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
My delegation commends the continued work of
the United Nations Office on Sport for Development
and Peace and of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, in advocating sport as a
tool for achieving peacebuilding, development and
humanitarian objectives. We would like to assure them
of our full support for their activities. Ukraine is also
pleased to be a sponsor of today’s draft resolution
and would like to wish our Russian colleagues welldeserved success with the upcoming Winter Games in
Sochi.
Ms. Hewanpola (Australia): Australia is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/68/L.8, entitled “Sport
for peace and development: building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
As a proud sporting nation and a past Olympics
host, Australia appreciates the valuable contribution
that sport and the Olympics have made to enabling
people to cross language, cultural and geographic

A/68/PV.44

divides, to inspire and unite us all, and to promote peace,
cooperation, intercultural understanding, education
and development. In that regard, we acknowledge
and support the efforts of the International Olympic
Committee, the International Paralympic Committee,
and the United Nations Office on Sport for Development
and Peace in areas including poverty alleviation, gender
equality, health promotion, child and youth education,
HIV/AIDS prevention, peacebuilding and sustainable
development.
Clearly, the Olympics has an important role to play
in contributing to the promotion of social inclusion; in
bringing together people of differing ages, genders,
races, cultures, faiths and status; in educating people
on such traditional values as respect, diversity,
tolerance and fairness; and in combating all forms of
discrimination, including on the grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity. We commend the
inclusion of the simple but comprehensive language in
the draft resolution calling on all host countries of the
Olympic Games to promote social inclusion without
discrimination of any kind.
The realization of the Sochi 2014 cultural and
educational programmes, which aim to promote cultural
diversity and enhance understanding between diverse
communities, can also contribute to our peaceful
coexistence. Australia looks forward to participating in
the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games and Paralympic
Winter Games.
Mr. Elshareef (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Sudan would like to express its
continued support for the biannual resolution first
adopted in 2011 and entitled “Sport for peace and
development: building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal”, which is before
us today as draft resolution A/68/L.8.
The Sudan recognizes that all forms of sports
have since time immemorial played an important and
effective role in building and promoting relations
among diverse peoples and nations. Sports has played
an important role in modern times both in bringing
people closer and in effecting a thaw between countries
with heretofore very icy relations. The delegation of
the Sudan appreciates the central role played by sports
in promoting the values of patience, cooperation,
perseverance, respect for others and tireless efforts.
The Sudan, convinced of the importance and value
of sports, including traditional ones, in all societies,

13-5498917/22

A/68/PV.44

has promoted sports policies to consolidate the values
I have mentioned and to employ the energies of youth
in fruitful activities that help to forge a national
identity, thereby contributing to the Sudan’s national
development efforts, to the creation of an atmosphere
of tolerance and understanding among nations and
peoples, and to the promotion of the culture of peace.
Against that backdrop and in that spirit, my delegation
would like to pay tribute to all the international bodies
that promote the role of sports across the globe.
We wish every success to the organizers of the XXII
Winter Olympics, to be held next year in Sochi in the
Russian Federation. My delegation also acknowledges
the establishment of the Russian International
Olympic University in Sochi, which will be dedicated
to promoting knowledge and lofty Olympic values,
ideals and traditions, including the activities of the
International Olympic Committee. The delegation of
the Sudan also welcomes the reference in the draft
resolution to the use of sports to promote peace and
reconciliation in conflict zones.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan has
supported and co-sponsored the draft resolution before
the Assembly today.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 64/3, of 19 October 2009, I
now give the floor to the President of the International
Olympic Committee.
Mr. Bach (International Olympic Committee)
(spoke in French): The International Olympic Committee
(IOC) presents its compliments to the General Assembly
and is honoured to have the opportunity to address the
Assembly today, just three months before the opening
of the 2014 Olympic Games and Paralympic Games
in Sochi, in the framework of the debate on the draft
resolution entitled “Sport for peace and development:
building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal” (A/68/L.8).
I wish to thank all those who made it possible for
us to be here today. The IOC expresses its most sincere
gratitude to the Government of the Russian Federation
and its representatives to the United Nations; to the
Sochi 2014 Organizing Committee and its president,
Mr. Dmitry Chernyshenko; to the Group of Friends of
Sport for Development and Peace; and to the United
Nations Special Adviser on Sport for Development and
Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke. Once again, we ask for
support for the Olympic Truce.

18/22

06/11/2013

(spoke in English)
“Olympic principles are United Nations principles,”
said Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his keynote
speech to the 2009 Olympic Congress in Copenhagen.
Our bond became even stronger after the General
Assembly granted the IOC Permanent Observer status
that same year.
Olympic principles are United Nations principles.
That is just as true today as the General Assembly
addresses a tradition dating back thousands of years
ago in ancient Greece — the ekecheiria. That sacred
truce, the Olympic Truce, is based on the tradition
that followed an agreement among three ancient
Greek kings. At that time, the Olympic Games were
the only bond that linked the Greeks. There was no
political unity. Only the Games brought Greeks from
the mainland and the colonies together, just for a few
days every four years. The ekecheiria ensured a halt
to hostilities, allowing athletes and spectators to travel
safely to and from Olympia.
This shows that even thousands of years ago,
a partnership between sports and politics already
existed. That partnership has been, and is, not without
its frictions, but it endures. Now is the time to adapt it
for today’s world.
Our partnership today has a completely different
dimension. At the time three city-States came together.
At the United Nations today we are talking about an
association of 193 States, and, at the International
Olympic Committee, 204 recognized National Olympic
Committees. That is a new dimension of the challenge
in our partnership between politics and sport.
The IOC is, above all, a sports organization: sport
is its first priority. The IOC recognizes its obligation to
youth and society by contributing to the betterment of
the quality of life, in accordance with its fundamental
principles as set out in the Olympic Charter, namely:
“to place sport at the service of the harmonious
development of humankind, with a view to
promoting a peaceful society concerned with the
preservation of human dignity”.
That describes universal values and goals similar to
those of the United Nations.
Sport is a good starting point for putting those
values and goals into practice, being truly the only area
of human existence to have achieved what is known

13-54989

06/11/2013

in political philosophy as universal law and in moral
philosophy as a global ethic. Regardless of where in the
world we practise sport, the rules are the same. They are
recognized worldwide. They are based on a common
global ethic of fair play, tolerance and friendship.
But to apply this universal law worldwide and spread
our values globally, sport has to enjoy responsible
autonomy. Politics must respect that sporting autonomy,
for only then can sport organizations implement those
universal values amid all the differing laws, customs
and traditions.
Responsible autonomy does not mean that sport
should operate in a law-free environment. It does mean
that we respect national laws that are not targeted
against sport and its organizations alone, sometimes for
chiefly political reasons.
In many States Members of the United Nations, the
fact that sport can hold its international competitions
and promote its values only if enjoying autonomy is not
always understood or accepted. For that reason, I ask
members to take this message back to their countries:
in the mutual interests of both sport and politics, please
help to protect and strengthen the autonomy of sport.
Only in that way can we create the win-win situation
of a fruitful partnership for the benefit of youth and
society in general.
Naturally, that means that sport, too, must live up to
its responsibilities. Our partners in politics, whom we
expect to respect our autonomy, are entitled to expect
that we exercise that autonomy responsibly, and in
accordance with the rules of good governance. The IOC
sets an example in that regard. We want the Universal
Principles of Good Governance of the Olympic
Movement to be accepted as a minimum standard and
implemented at all levels of sport.
Within that partnership, sport must remain
politically neutral. That does not mean that sport is
apolitical. Sport must include political considerations
in its decisions. It must also consider the political,
economic and social implications of its decisions.
That is true in particular when choosing the venues for
major sports events — above all, of the largest and most
important of those, the Olympic Games.
With the Olympic Games, the IOC sets an example
of peaceful interaction. The Olympic Games, the
Olympic athletes and in particular the Olympic Village
are a powerful symbol of that. They break down the
barriers of cultural differences. They serve as an

A/68/PV.44

example of mutual respect and non-discrimination. And
it is always moving, not least for me as a former athlete,
to see how, in the Olympic Village, young people from
all parts of the world live together harmoniously and
peacefully in one place. There the Olympic spirit is
alive.
Beyond that, Organizing Committees are
increasingly taking up the vision of the Olympic Truce.
The London 2012 programme offered young people in
every school and college across the United Kingdom a
chance to take part in sporting and cultural activities,
which helped encourage peace in their schools and
communities.
The Sochi 2014 youth initiatives are also aimed
at promoting peace, harmony and respect. As part of
that programme, the Sochi Organizing Committee
is devoting a great deal of attention to working with
young people all over Russia, as well as internationally,
while drawing their attention to peace, tolerance and
participation.
Going beyond the Games themselves, the IOC seeks
to set examples of mutual understanding and solidarity.
Through the programmes run by Olympic Solidarity,
the International Sports Federation and the National
Olympic Committees, we emphasize that striving for
peace also requires sustainable development, solidarity
and support. In the current Olympiad, the Olympic
family is investing more than $600 million into putting
that solidarity into practice.
Precisely because many of our principles are
the same, it must always be clear in the relationship
between sport and politics that the role of sport is
always to build bridges; it is never to build walls. Sport
stands for dialogue and understanding, which transcend
all differences. Sport, and the Olympic Movement
especially, understands the global diversity of cultures,
societies and life designs as a source of richness. We
never accuse or exclude anyone.
For that reason, we oppose boycotts of any kind.
Boycotts are a fundamental contradiction to the spirit
of sport, depriving it of the means to continue working
for peace, mutual understanding and solidarity. This is
even more true if sport is the sole instrument misused
for the boycott, while political, economic and cultural
relations continue as normal.
If the IOC and the United Nations stand side by
side in this partnership, understood in this way, even

13-5498919/22

A/68/PV.44

more fruitful cooperation is possible, in particular in
the areas of education, development, integration and
efforts for peace.
Sport is not just physical activity; it promotes health
and helps prevent, or even cure, the diseases of modern
civilization. It is also an educational tool that fosters
cognitive development, teaches social behaviour and
helps to integrate communities. For that reason, we offer
even more intensive dialogue with the United Nations
and its agencies, in particular UNESCO. Education and
learning are the keys to the future of all our societies.
Mens sana in corpore sano. That old Latin phrase
puts the idea in a nutshell — a healthy mind in a healthy
body. I therefore plead for the educational asset that
sport represents and that the teaching of values through
sport be included in school curriculums all over the
world. Both our organizations feel obliged to help
young people enjoy a better future. The IOC therefore
welcomes the Secretary-General’s United Nations youth
strategy and the appointment of the Envoy on Youth.
We are thankful for the contribution of United Nations
agencies to the Culture and Education Programme at
the Youth Olympic Games.
In order to work together even more closely, we
suggest enhancing our cooperation with respect to
sport as an instrument for development and peace.
We applaud the General Assembly’s historic decision
in August to establish the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace (resolution 67/296). In that
context, the General Assembly recalled the IOC’s role
in promoting healthy lifestyles and creating access to
sport for as many people as possible. Sport promotes
integration; it boosts self-esteem and joie de vivre,
which can play an important role in the integration
of societies, including in crisis areas, where the IOC
works with humanitarian and development agencies.
We are prepared to do even more. The integrative power
of sport can work its magic in crisis areas, helping to
build understanding and reconciliation while, at the
same time, improving quality of life.
All such measures can be ways to build a better and
more peaceful world. We know, of course, that, as in
ancient Greece, sport and the Olympic Games cannot
on their own solve political problems or achieve peace.
Peacebuilding is a long process. Sport wants to be part of
that process. We are aware of our limits, but we want to
use the power of our values and symbols to promote the
positive, peaceful development of global society. Those

20/22

06/11/2013

symbols, and in particular the peaceful competition at
the Olympic Games, should inspire all people. They
should show that rivalries and disputes can be resolved
peacefully. They should show that people can transcend
all boundaries by agreeing on universal rules to govern
human competition and resolve conflicts. For that
reason, the Olympic Truce is of particular significance.
We set great store by that common endeavour, which is
such a splendid example of how, through partnership,
politics and sport can complement each other.
We are grateful to the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General for the fruitful cooperation that
has been built on trust. Together with the political
authorities, the IOC wishes to set an example for peace
and solidarity in the quest for a more humane society.
Our partnership clearly illustrates that Olympic
principles are United Nations principles. Let us work
together to make those universal principles a reality,
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 11.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.8.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Sporting events, and
above all the Olympic Games, provide us with a unique
opportunity to celebrate the supremacy of peace over
conflict and the pre-eminence of friendship over
hostility. The peaceful spirit and ritual in which the
Games were held in ancient Greece 28 centuries ago
still inspire and encourage all countries to be part
of such a special experience every four years. They
contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance, solidarity and
confidence among different peoples and nations.
It is precisely that noble character of the Olympic
Games that explains our decision today not to
undermine the consensual nature of the draft resolution
(A/68/L.8) introduced today. Yet, while we all have
once again reaffirmed our willingness to further the
role of sport in building a peaceful and safe world, we
need to acknowledge that, unfortunately, reality often
casts a shadow on our declared aspirations. Not only is
the very notion of the Olympic Truce being distorted,
the Olympics are also being used to divert attention

13-54989

06/11/2013

from acts of violence and military aggression and veil
abuses and violations of human rights and freedoms.
While we are looking forward to once again
reviving the Olympic Truce, we need to remember
that only 40 kilometres from Sochi, an occupation is
taking place; indeed, the country hosting the Games
continues to occupy 20 per cent of Georgia’s sovereign
territory in violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country. In addition, while in the
draft resolution we recognize that the Olympic Truce
provides humanitarian opportunities, it is important to
consider that, in fact, the occupied regions of Georgia
are still blocked for humanitarian access and the local
population is deprived of humanitarian assistance.
Despite the crucial political, security and
humanitarian context, the Government of Georgia
opted for the depoliticization of the Olympics, the
idea of which is founded on peace and should lead to
cooperation. In October 2012, the new Government of
Georgia made a difficult decision to stop boycotting
the Sochi Olympics. Furthermore, that decision showed
the Government of Georgia’s willingness to de-escalate
the existing crisis between Russia and Georgia and
normalize relations in humanitarian or people-topeople spheres.
Unfortunately, in January 2013, shortly after the
declaration of Georgia’s constructive decision, the
occupation forces began the large-scale installation
of barbed-wire fences and embankments along the
occupation line in the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions
of Georgia. Those illegal activities significantly affect
the livelihoods of the local population, divide families
and communities, prevent people-to-people contacts,
and deprive the people of their fundamental rights
and freedoms. We hope that the installation of the
aforementioned artificial obstacles will not be resumed
and will be reversed.
We further regret that, in response to the
Government of Georgia’s demonstration of goodwill,
Moscow decided to use the Olympic Games for
political purposes and opted for still more provocative
acts, including naming “the August war hero”, pilot
Ivan Nechaev — so called because of his excellence
in bombing Georgian villages — one of the Olympic
torchbearers. Such a politicized approach totally
disregards and contradicts the genesis of the draft
resolution.

A/68/PV.44

However, despite the difficult political context
and notwithstanding the destabilizing process and
provocative acts illustrated heretofore, Georgia remains
fully committed to its peaceful and constructive
approach, the spirit of the present draft resolution and
the common international interest. We are therefore not
going to break the consensus and remain in favour of
the draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the only speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.8, entitled “Sport for peace and
development: building a peaceful and better world
through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/68/L.8, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, the Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Haiti,
Iceland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Myanmar,
Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Seychelles,
the Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/68/L.8?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/9).
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): As the first
country to sponsor the text contained in resolution 66/5,
“Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal,”

13-5498921/22

A/68/PV.44

adopted by consensus in October 2011, and adopted
once again here today in resolution 68/9, Brazil is
committed to the promotion of sports as an instrument
for development and peace. Sports are deeply rooted
in Brazilian culture and society, and our Constitution
recognizes its practice as a fundamental social right.
We find ourselves at the beginning of a sportscentred decade. In the next few years, Brazil will
host important mega-events: the World Cup of the
International Federation of Association Football, in
2014, and the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016.
The decision to host those events took into account not
only their positive impact on disseminating the Olympic
ideals throughout Brazilian society, particularly
among youth, but also the promotion of sustainable
development and social inclusiveness. The preparation
process for those events includes sensitizing and
educating the public on the need to promote diversity
and to combat racism and discrimination.
At the twenty-fourth session of the Human Rights
Council in September, Brazil was a member of the
core group that presented resolution 24/1, entitled
“Promoting human rights through sport and the
Olympic ideal”, adopted by consensus with more than
130 sponsors. The resolution recognizes sport as a
universal language that can help educate people on the
values of respect, diversity, tolerance and fairness. It is
an important tool in the fight against discrimination of
any kind.
Brazil is a strong advocate for Human Rights
Council resolution 17/19 on human rights, sexual
orientation and gender identity, and an active member
of the LGBT core group at the United Nations. In
September, Brazil took a decisive stand in support of
the joint ministerial declaration on ending violence
and discrimination against individuals based on their
sexual orientation and gender identity. In the spirit of
building a peaceful world through sports and without
discrimination, we will welcome the world to our
country as host of the 2014 soccer World Cup and the
Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2016.

22/22

06/11/2013

The Acting President (spoke in French): One
representative has asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I would remind him that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are compelled to exercise our right to
reply to the statement made by Georgia. Only a few
minutes ago, the President of the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) said that we should refrain from the
political exploitation of sports. Unfortunately, that
appeal was not heard by the delegation of Georgia.
We regret that even as we discuss the theme of the
Olympic Truce, which is by definition is a uniter of
people, the Georgian delegation could not refrain from
its habitual attacks on Russia. That may be explained
by the fact that it was Georgia itself that, on the eve of
the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008, launched an attack
on the people of South Ossetia and even on Russian
peacekeepers.
Now, instead of showing the political will and desire
to normalize the situation in the region, and instead of
using this unique opportunity to show its respect for the
tradition of the Olympic Truce, the Georgian delegation
has once again resorted to fabricated reasons for
unjustified accusations against the Russian Federation.
We repudiate all of them. The Russian Federation has
always followed the ideals and principles of the Olympic
Charter and has strictly followed the rules of the IOC
regulating the organization of the Olympic Games.
To conclude, I would like to stress that, despite
Georgia’s attempts to wage political battle against the
Sochi Olympic Games, its athletes and fans will be
received in Sochi with all the respect that they deserve.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 11.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

13-54989
