Sixty-second plenary meeting

1272

SIXTY-SECOND PLENARY MEE1'ING
Held on Friday) 13 December 1946, at 8 p.m.

SOIXANTE-DEUXIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATrERES

Page

174. Approval of Trusteeship Agreements:

report of the Fourth Committee: resolutions (continuation of the discus.
1272
sion)
,
175. Principles governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments: report of the First Committee
1289
President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium).

13

13 December 1946

Tenue le vendredi 13 decembre 1946

CE

a20 heures.

an

fin
tal
he
thl
po

Pages

174. Approbation des Accords de tutelle.
Rapport de la Quatrieme Commission.
Resolutions (suite de la discussion).. 1272

175. Principes regissant la reglementation et
la reduction generales des armements.
Rapport 'de la Premiere Commission.. 1289
President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

174. Approval of Trusteeship Agreements: 174. Approbation des Accords de tutelle.
Rapport de la Quatrieme Commission.
report of the Fourth Committee: resoResolutions
(document A/258) (suite
lutions '(document Aj258) (continuade
la
discussion)
tion of the discussion)
Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons poursuivre la
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall continue the discussion of the report of discussion sur le rapport de la Quatrieme Comthe Fourth Committee on Trusteeship Agree- mission concernant les Accords de tutelle (annexe 72).
ments (annex 72).
La parole est a M. Nieto del Rio, representant
I call upon Mr. Nieto del Rio, representative
du Chili.
of Chile.
M. NIETO DEL RIO (Chili) (traduit de l'anMr. NIETO DEL RIo (Chile): By its adverse
vote in the Fourth Committee Chile wished to glais): En votant contre les resolutions, a la
indicate that the Agreements on trusteeship could Quatrieme Commission, le Chili desirait marbe improved by means of certain amendments quer que les Accords de tutelle presentes pouwhich the administering States did not seem in- vaient etre ameliores par certains amendements,
clined to accept. The result of.-the vote in the que les Etats charges de l'administration ne
Committee was influenced by this circumstance. semblaient d'aiIleurs pas disposes a accepter. Le
Chile's desire was identical to that of most Mem- resultat du vote a la Quatrieme Commission a
bers of the Assembly, namely that the Trustee- ete influence par ces circonstances. Le Chill
ship Council should be established now, which avait, comme la pIupart des Membres de I'Asmight well not have happened if those amend- semblee, le desir de voir constituer des maintements had been accepted by a majority of the nant le Conseil de tutelle, ce qui n'aurait peutCommittee. Chile wants to show now that its ~tre pas ete possible si les amendements
attitude was one of co-operation and not of auxquels j'ai fait allusion avaient ete acceptes
obstruction. Therefore, Chile will s,upport with par la majorite de la Commission. Le Chill
its vote the report made by the Rapporteur and desire prouver maintenant que son intention
the proposed draft agreements on trusteeship.
etait de cooperer et non de faire obstruction.
C'est pourquoi le Chill appuiera de son vote
le rapport presente par le Rapporteur· et les
projets d'accord de tutelle.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Aujoulat, representative of M. Aujoulat, representant de la France.
France.
Mr. AUJOULAT (France) (translated from
M. AUJOULAT (France): Pendant prcs de
French): For nearly thirty years, France has trente ans, la France a exerce sans heurt sur le
exercised without friction the mandates entrusted Togo et le Cameroun le mandat qu'elle avait
to her by the League of Nations over Togoland re~u de la Societe des Nations. Elle l'a rcmpli
and the Cameroons. She has perfonned this task avec le soud de repondre de son mieux aux
with the desire to fulfil, to the best of her ability, aspirations des populations autochtones; les tethe aspirations of the native populations; the moignages nombreux emanant'de la Commission
numerous testimonies from the Mandates Com~ des mandats et de la Societe des Nations ellemission and from the League of Nations itself meme rendent hommage a son effort.
pay tribute to her effort.
Faut-il rappeler qu'en 1939, a un moment
Need I recall that in 1939, at a critical period
critique
pour la France comme pour l'Europe,
for France and for Europe, spontaneous demondes
manifestations
spontanees eurent lieu a
strations took place at Yaounde, at Douala and in
different parts of the Cameroons in favour of the Yaounde, a Douala, et dans differents centres clu
continuance of the French mandate? There Cameroun, en faveur de la continuation clu
were impressive processions in which chiefs, mandat fran~ais. On put voir des defiles imnotables and natives took part. The French pressionnants auxquels participaients des chefs,
administration, however, refrained from taking des notables et des autochtones! L'administration
advantage of this enthusiasm to ask for any franc;aise, cependant, ne crut pas devoir profi~er
de cet enthousiasme pour demander une modifimodification of the mandate.
cation qudconque du regime du mandat.

roe
ser

SUI

ass
Co
th(
Tb
cor
ou1
tar
All
vol

Ca

del
ter:

Fn

int
onl
the
ero
Ge
onl

PO]

,~

wit
be
1
me
the
inb
de\

As

QCe

ula
a
nat
too:
thel
No!
soe1
trw
mg
the'
forI
lize
1
tior

ass(
In

mOl

ena
be •

"

tute
thol
a r,

13 decem bre 1946

RE

1273

Solxante-deuxleme seance plenlere

Moreover, when on 27 August 1940, the I Bien mieux, lorsque, le 27 aout 1940, le
Cameroons rallied to the cause of Free France Cameroun se rallia
la France libre, et
la
and of the Allied nations, General de Gaulle's cause des nations alliees, le premier geste du
first action was to send a telegram to the Secre- general de Gaulle fut d'envoyer au Secretaire
tary-General of the League of Nations, in which general de la Societe des Nations un telegramme
he bound himself to respect the' obligations of par lequelle chef de la France libre s'engageait
the mandate and to ensure the safety of the a respecter les obligations du mandat et a assurer
populations by defending these territories.
la sauvegarde des populations, en defendant ces
territoires.
At a meeting several weeks later on Came~
Reunissant, que1ques semaines plus tard, sur
roons territory, to which the chiefs and repre- la terre meme du Cameroun, les chefs et les
sentatives of the native populations had been representants des populations autochtones, le gesummoned, General de Gaulle reiterated the neral de Gaulle leur renouvelait l'assurance que
assurance that France would abide by the la France restait fidele a la Charte de la Societe
Covenant of the League of Nations and by des Nations et aux engagements contractes envers
the obligations assumed towards the League. la Societe. Cette attitude de simple loyaute trouva
This plainly loyal attitude was rewarded by the sa recompense dans le comportement confiant
confident behaviour of the populations through- des populations pendant toute la dUl'ee des hosout the duration of hostilities and by their spon- tilites et dans leur collaboration spontanee, en
taneous co-operation in the war effort of the ressources et en volontaires, a l'effort de guerre
Allied nations in providing resources and des nations alliees.
volunteers.
When liberation came, the inhabitants of the
La liberation venue, les habitants du CameCameroons and Togoland might well have won- roun et du Togo pouvaient se demander ce que
dered what status would be given to mandated deviendrait le statut des territoires sous mandat.
territories. By taking part in drafting the San En participant a l'etablissement de la Charte de
Francisco Charter, France clearly indicated her San-Francisco, la France a nettement indique
intentions towards those peoples. She was also dans queUe voie dIe entendait engager ces popuone of the first to declare her readiness to place lations. Elle fut egalement l'une des premieres
the French mandates of Togoland and the Cam- a faire connaitre qu'eIle etait prcte a placer sous
eroons under the Trusteeship System but, as Regime de tutelle le Togo et le Cameroun sous
Georges Bidault stated in London last January, . mandat fran~ais, mais a condition, avait precise
only on condition that the rights which her Georges Bidault a Londres en janvier dernier,
populations enjoyed during their association qU'il n'en resulte pour les populations aucune
with the French community would not thereby diminution des droits qu'elles tiennent de leur
be diminished.
association avec la communaute franc;aise.
Car la France n'a pas attendu que soient mis
France did not wait for Trusteeship Agree'ments to take definite form before promoting au point les Accords de tutelle pour favoriser le
the advancement, in all its various forms, of the progres, sous toutes ses formes, des poputations
inhabitants of Togoland and the Cameroons and togolaise et camerounienne et pour deve10pper
developing their capacity for self-government. leur capacite a s'administrer elles-mcmes. Des
As soon as France was liberated from enemy que la France a ete liberee de l'occupation enneoccupation, her first concern was to set up pop- mie, son premier souci a cte d'instituer dans les
ular assemblies in the mandated territories, with territoires sous mandat, des consultations popua view to giving them representation., The laires en vue de leur offrir une representation. Les
natives understood. The elections in which they autochtones ne s'y sont pas trompes. Les elections
took part, far from arousing anxiety among auxquelles ils ont participc, loin de susciter panni
them, on the contrary, gave rise to great hopes. eux des inquietudes, ont au contraire fait germer
Not only did those elections not prejudice what- de grands espoirs. Non seulement ces elections
soever the liberty which all populations under ne prejugent en rien la libertc qu'ont et qu'autrusteeship have and always will have of solicit- ront toujours les populations sous tutelle de
ing their autonomy or their independence, but solliciter leur autonomie ou leur independance,
they immediately offered an incomparable plat- mais eIles offrent - et sans attendre - a leurs
form for native representatives to voice and rea- representants une trib.une incompar.abl~ pour
faire entendre et aboutir leurs revendlcations.
lize their claims.
The essential reform which followed liberaLa reforme essentielle qui a suivi la liberation
tion consisted in the setting up of representative a consiste en l'institution d'assembIees repreassemblies, elected by direct universal suffrage sentatives elues au suffrage universel direct dans
in each territory. The electoral regime was, chaque territoire. Le regime .e!ectoral a ete
Inoreover, established under conditions which etabli d'ailleurs dans des condItIOns teUes que
enabled all ethnic sections of .the population to tous l~s elements' ethniques de la population peuvent etre representes au sein de ces assemblees.
be represented in these assemblies.
Naus ne nions pas que l'experience de cette
We do not deny that these institutions constitute an experiment as bold as it is generous, for institution soit aussi hardie que genereuse, car
those assemblies have been straightway given on a confie d'embIee aces assembIees un role q~i
role which is not merely: advisory. In fact, qui n'est pas de simple consultation. En faIt,

a

Cl.

12

,.e.

,.la

1-

'-

'.

"

:~'"

(
/

a

...

a

.'

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1274

13 Decem ber 1946

they have important prerogatives, for their rul- eUes disposent d'attributions importantes, car elles
ing on a large number of questions is final.. statuent definitivement sur de tres nombreuses
In any case, these assemblies are the best pos- questions. En tous cas, ces assemblees represensible answer to those who might reproach us tent la meilleure reponse possible a ceux qui
with envisaging, in our Trusteeship Agreements, voudraient nous reprocher de prevoir, dans nos
the administration of these territories as an in- Accords de tutelle, l'adnJ.inistration de ces territegral part of French territory.
toires comme partie integrante du territoire
franC$ais.
At a time when the Constitution of the ReA l'heure ou la Constitution de la Republique
public was setting up, for all overseas territories instituait pour chaque territoire d'outre-mer de
of the French Union, territorial assemblies whose l'Union Fran~aise des assemblees territoriales
powers might range from the deliberative to the dont le pouvoir peut aUer du deliberatif au
legislative, how could we make an exception for 1«~gislatif, faUait-il reserver le cas des territoires
mandated territories on the pretext that they sous mandat, sous pretexte qu'ils ne font pas
were not part of the French community? France partie de la communaute fran~aise? La France
did not see fit to delay granting the populations n'a pas cru devoir attendre pour accorder aux
of mandated territories the benefits of the prin- populations des territoires sous mandat le beneciples and advantages proclaimed by the Con- fice de principes ou d'avantages proclames par
stitution and adopted by the Government in sa Constitution ou adoptes par son Gouvernement
favour of nationals of the French Union. Thus en faveur des ressortissants de l'Union Fran~aise.
she has already extended to the mandated terri- C'est ainsi qu'elle a deja etendu aux territoires
tories: full liberty of expression, association and sous mandat: la liberte totale d'expression, cl'assomovement; suppression of the special native ciation, de deplacement; la suppression du reregime; suppression of the native penal code, gime de l'indigenat; la suppression du code penal
and unity of jurisdiction in penal matters; and indigene et l'unite de juridiction en matiere
the recognition in the case of all individuals pena1e; la reconnaissance a tous les individus,
without distinction of race or creed not only sans distinction de sexe, de race ou de religion,
of human rights but also of the citizen's right non seulement des droits de l'homme, mais aussi
to have his personal status respected.
du droit du citoyen au respect de son statut
personnel.
These are, briefly, the political arrangements
Telles sont, en definitive, les dispositions polinow applied to the Cameroons and to Togoland, tiques appliquees des rnaintenant au Cameroun
in the spirit of the United Nations Charter, that et au Togo, dans l'esprit de la Charte des Nais to say with a view to promoting the advance- tions Unies, c'est-a.-dire en vue de favoriser le
ment of the inhabitants and their development progres des populations et de les conduire aleur
towards maturity. In the present state of these maturite. Dans l'etat actuel de ces pays, il etait
countries, it was impossible to go further than impossible d'aller plus loin que nous l'avons fait.
we have done. But we also believe that the Mais nous croyons aussi que l'inspiration meme
very spirit of the reforms which we have accom- des reformes que nous avons accomplies repond
plished is in accordance with the end which we pleinement au but que nous poursuivons.
are pursuing.
Thus, although we rejoice to see at last the
end of our long discussions on the Trusteeship
System, we deeply regret that consideration of
these Agreements has occasioned unfavourable
and perfectly unjustified criticism of the mandatory Powers. If these Powers really had underlying designs, why did they accept so readily all
the exigencies of the Trusteeship System?

We have 'gone still further and given our draft
agreements wide publicity among the inhabitants concerned. The texts have been distributed officially; they have been discussed· at
length by the natives at public meetings; they
have received their support.
We do not therefore see how it will be possible to introduce any amendments into Our text
other than those which we accepted in committee. The three amendments which the
Fourth Committee has seen fit to retain seem
useless to us; they add nothing to our agreements. They really do not afford any guarantee
to the populations of the Trust Territories which
does not already appear in our text. For in-

C'est pourquoi, si nous nous rejouissons de
voir enfin I'aboutissement de nos longues discussions relatives au Regime de tutelle, n011S
demeurons profondement peines a la pensee que
l'etude de ces Accords ait pu fournir I'occasion
de remarques desobligeantes et parfaitement injustifiees a l'egard des Puissances mandataires.
Si elles avaient nourri des arriere-pensees suspectes, pourq uoi se seraient-elles pretees si volontiers a toutes les exigences du Regime de tuteIle.
Nous sommes alles plus loin encore. Nous
;:!.vons donne a nos projets d'accord une large
publicite aupres des populations interessees. Les
textes ont ete diffuses officiellement, ils ont ete
longuement discutes par les autochtones en reunions publiques; ils ont re~u leur adhesion.
Nous ne voyons done pas la possibilite d'apporter a. nos textes d'autres modifications que
celles que nous avons pu accepter en commission. Les trois amendements que la Quatrieme
Commission a cru devoir retenir nous paraissent
inutilesj ils n'ajoutent rien a nos accords; iIs
n'apportent vraiment aillc: populations sous tutelle aucune garantie qui ne figure deja dans
notre texte. Pa.r exemple, la fixation d'un terme

13 decembre 1946

1275

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

stance, the establishment of a definite time-limit precis a la validite des Accords de tutelle n'aurait
for the validity of Trusteeship Agreements would pas d'autre resultat que de compromettre la
have no other result than' to compromise free liberte de collaboration entre les Puissances adco-operation between the Administering Au- ministrantes et les populations. Des lors que nos
thorities and the inhabitants. So long as our accords reaffirment nettement les fins du Regime
agreements clearly reaffirm the purposes of the de tutelle, des loes qu'ils prevoient des consultaTrusteeship System, so long as they provide for tions populaires, des lors enfin qu'ils mentionthe consultation of the population, and so long nent la procedure de revision envisagee par la
as they mention the revision system envisaged Charte,. toute clause supplementaire risquerait
by the Charter, any supplementary clause would simplement de gener une administration qui a
merely risk hindering an administration which fait ses preuves sous le regime du mandat et,
has proved its worth under the mandate system, que nous nous preparons a continuer dans
and which we are prepared to continue in the l'esprit de la Charte.
spirit of the Charter.
We hope that the primary concern of the
Nou~ airnons a penser que le souci primordial
United Nations and of the Trusteeship Council de l'Organisation des Nations Unies comme du
will be to facilitate the task which will hence- Conseil de tutelle sera de faciliter la tache qui
forth fall upon the mandatory Powers. The incombe desormais awe Puissances mandataires.
label has changed, but the obligations have in- L'etiquette a change, mais les obligations se sont
creased and, consequently, we have a right to accrues, et par consequent nous sommes en droit
rely on the entire co-operation of the body which de compter sur la cooperation totale de 1'orwill now replace the Mandates Cominission. We ganisme qui va remplacer maintenant ]a Comlook forward to this co-operation with con- mission des mandats. Nous envisageons avec
fidence and optimism. We have behind us the confiance et avec optimisme cette cooperation.
substantial work already accomplished in the Nous avons derriere nous l'ceuvre substantielle
Cameroons and Togoland: we only ask to be deja accomplie au Cameroun et au Togo: nous
ne demandons qu'a la poursuivre.
allowed to continue it.
Daus ces territoires, nous avons fait germer
We have fostered an elite in these territories;
we have created an important administrative une elite; nous avons constitue des cadres imstaff, we have increased the number of African portants, nous avons multiplie le nombre des
physicians who have graduated from the School medecins africains sortis de l'Ecole de medecine
of Medicine at Ayos in the Cameroons and from d'Ayos, au Cameroun, ou de celle de Dakar;
the one at Dakar, and tomorrow it will be those et demain ce seront ces docteurs en mcdecine, ccs
doctors, professors and engineers at present professeurs, ces ingcnieurs, actuellement etudiants
studying in our metropolitan universities and dans nos universites ou nos ecoles metropolischools who will return to devote themselves to taines qui reviendront se devouer au service de
the service of their compatriots and their country ]eurs compatriotes et de leur pays d'origine.
of origin. We have also made every effort to edu- Nous avons apporte aussi tous nos soins a l'encate the masses. We are aware, of course, that seignement des masses. Nous savons, certes,
much remains to be done in this province. We qu'en cette matiere il reste beaucoup a. faire.
envisage, as the basis of the training schools, Nous prevoyons pour servir de base aux ecoles
technical schools and secondary colleges, whose normales, aux ecoles techniques et aux colleges
construction is part of our general plan, village secondaires dont l'edification fait partie de notre
schools extending into the remotest corners of plan d'equipement, des ecoles de villages multhe bush. Although the implementation of this tiplees jusque dans les coins les plus recules de la
plan may require time, at least there is no doubt brousse. Si la realisation de ce plan peut deas to the end which we wish to achieve: we shall mander du temps, du moins n'y a-toil pas d'hesinot be satisfied with a hundred thousand chil- tation sur le but a atteindre: ce n'est pas cent
dren, we hope that all the children of the Came- mille enfants sco]arises qu'il faut avoir, c'est la
roons and Togoland will pass tlu'ough our totalite des enfants du Cameroun et du Togo
que nous esperons faire passer par nos ecoles.
schools.
Parlerons-nous de tout ce qui a ete fait pour
Shall we speak of all that has been -done to
la condition de la femme? Nous pouvons
relever
improve the status of women? We can point, in
faire
etat,
sur ce point, de toute une legislation
this field, to a mass of general and local'legislation to protect young girls, promote marriages generale ou locale en vue de proteger les fillettes,
and emancipate widows. We realize all the sacri- de favoriser les mariages, de liberer les veuves.
fice and the devotion which has gone into this .Nous songeons a. tout ce que cet effort a suseffort. It is easy to speak of colonialism and .cite de sacrifices et de devouements. On a vite
exploitation, but can we forget those who have fait de parler de colonialisme ou d'exploitation.
given their time and sometimes even their lives Mais peut-on oublier ainsi, sans une mention
in order that the Cameroons and Togoland particuliere, ceux qui ont vraiment donne leur
might escape the scourge of great endemic dis- activite et parfois meme leur vie pour que le
eases? The name of a certain Dr. Janot is Cameroun et le Togo echappent au £leau des
revered in the Cameroons as that of a great grandes end6nies. Le nom d'un docteur Janot
benefactor. The results· of his work are in- est venere au Cameroun comme celui d'un
scribed, year by year, in statistics and also in grand bienfaiteur. Les resultats. de son ceuvre
facts, in' the confidence shown by the sick in s'inscrivent, d' annee en annee, clans les chiffres
I

Sixty-second plenary meeting

13 December 1946

1276

mais aussi dans les faits, dans cette confiance
que les malades tc~moignent envers la medecine
europeenne, comme envers les medecins qui
l'appliquent.
Tout cela peut d'autant moins etre oublie que,
All this cannot be forgotten, particularly because in the social sphere the Cameroons and meme sur le plan social le Cameroun et le
Togoland are not backward. A labour code has Togo ne sont pas restes en arriere. Un code de
been elaborated, and trade unions have been travail a ete mis au point et des syndicats se
organized. Trade unionism is playing an increas- sont organises. Le syndicalisme joue un role
ingly important part in the evolution of these de plus en plus important dans l'evolution de ces
countries: it is now among the recognized in- pays: il fait partie, des maintenant, des institustitutions, through which the natives are partici- tions reconnues grace auxquelles les autochtones
pating to an ever increasing extent in directing participent de plus en plus a l'orientation de leur
their own economy and in conducting their economie et a la gestion des affaires, car nous
business, for we recognize that it is mainly their reconnaissons qu'elles sont avant tout leurs
affaires.
business.
Enfin, nous sommes tout pr~Ol a dc5ve1opper
Finally, we are quite ready to develop to its
maximum extent the economic personality of au maximum la personnalite economique des terTrust Territories. They must not remain tribu- ritoires sous tutelle. 11 ne faut pas qu'i1s deme\ltaries of a selfish metropolis and of foreign rent etroitement tributaires d'une metropole facountries which might only regard them as con- cilement egoiste et pas davantage de pays etranvenient outlets for their manufactured products gers qui risqueraient de ne voir en ces territoires
or as sources of easily accessible raw materials. que des debouches commodes pour leurs produits
manufactures ou des sources .de matieres premieres facilement accessibles.
L'une des craintes exprimees par les notables
One of the fears expressed by native notables
is that trusteeship may promote the intensive indigenes est que le trusteeship ne favorise une
and pitiless exploitation of their natural re- exploitation intensive et sans pitie de leurs risources for the profit of aliens. "When the time chesses naturelles, au profit de l'etranger. "Ainsi,
comes for us to undertake the government of disaient-ils, quand l'heure sera venue pour nous
Our country," they say, "we shall inherit a land de prendre en mains la direction de notre pays,
which has been bled white." What is the use nous heriterons d'un territoire saigne a blanc."
of political independence without an economic A quoi bon alors une independance politique
basis? These fears are perhaps unjustified. qui n'aurait pas de substratum economique?
However, they are the motive for the refusal to . Ces craintes sont peut-ctre injustifiees. EUes
introduce into these territories any private mo- motivent en tout cas le refus d'introduire darn
nopoly of any kind. The chief thing required is ces territoires tout monopole prive de quelque
to provide equipment with a view to rational nature qu'il soit. Ce qu'il faut avant tout, c'est
exploitation in which the natives will have a proceder a l'equipement en vue d'une mise en
large share.
valeur rationnelle a laquelle les autochtones participeront largement.
We think, therefore, that the various terriNous croyons. donc que dans le cadre des
tories hitherto administered by mandate will pass accords qui nous sont proposes, les differents tersmoothly into the Trusteeship System within the ritoires jusque-l3. administres en vertu du mandat
framework of the proposed agreements. The passeront, sans secousse, sous le regime de tutelle.
inh~bitants are expecting these agreements, Les populations attendent ces accords qui sont
WhiCh are in accordance with their aspirations. conformes a leurs aspirations. 11 est aussi souIt is as desirable for them as for the administer- haitable pour elles que pour les Puissances ading authorities, that they should be offered an ministrantes que leur soit offerte une institution
institution which is not precarious and which qui ne soit pas precaire et qui leur permette une
allows for lasting co-operation. We do not un- cooperation durable. Nous ne mc5sestimons pas
derestimate the value of the approval which I l'importance que revet l'approbation que VOllS
ho~e, you w~ gi~e to these agreements, and 'by allez donner, je l'espere, a ces accords et par lawhIch you Wlll giVe them final sanction.
queUe VollS leur donnerez une consecration definitive.
An African representative introduced into the
Pour designer les territoires jusqu'ici sous
statutes of the French Union the expression mandat, un representant africain a introtluit
"associated territories", to indicate territories dans le statut de rUnion Fran~aise le terme de
hitherto under mandate. France will be able to "territoires associes". La France saura prouver,
prove ~hat the peoples under trusteeship will be que, de cette association, les peuples sous tutelle
the chIef beneficiaries of this association.
seront les grands beneficiaires.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M.
I caU upon Mr. Novikov, representative of the Novikov, representant de l'Union des RepuUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics.
bliques socialistes sovietiques.
Mr. NOVIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. NOVIKOV (Union des Republiques sodapublics (translated from Russian): At the listes sovietiques) (traduit du rum): Au debut
European medicine and in the doctors who
apply it.

j

13 decembre 1946

J<-

,
I

1277

beginning of the work of the General Assembly,
the former mandatory Powers - Great Britain,
France) Belgium, New Zealand and Australia
- submitted for the consideration of the Assembly draft trusteeship agreements for the
former mandated territories of the League of
Nations. The contents of these drafts were similar but contained substantial defects. The chief
defect of these agreements was the fact 1;hat their
basic provisions were contrary to the principles
of trusteeship as contained in Chapter XII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
As is known, these principles provide for the
progressive development of the peoples of the
trusteeship territories towards self-government
and independence. In the drafts submitted to
us we find a directly contrary tendency, which
is seen in the desire of the mandatory Powers
to create such conditions of trusteeship as would
in fact change the Trusteeship Territories into an
integral part of the trustee State. If such a tendency materialized it would be equivalent to
the annexation of the Trusteeship Territories by
the mandatory Powers, which would be a violation of the Charter.
At the very beginning of the work of the
Fourth Committee, the delegation of the Soviet
Union drew attention to these defects in the
draft agreements; the Soviet delegation took an
active part in the work of the Trusteeship Committee and its First and Second Sub-Committees
and strove to remove these defects.
With this aim in view the Soviet \delegation
proposed several substantial amendments to the
drafts. It proceeded from the basic principle
that the Trusteeship Territories are not the property of the administering Power, but must be
under international jurisdiction, the jurisdiction
of the United Nations which are carrying out the
international Trusteeship System. The amendments of the Soviet delegation aimed at bringing
the draft agreements into conformity with this
basic principle. From this point of view it is
necessary to note first of all that in one of its
amendments the Soviet delegation proposed to
delete {"rom the seven draft agreements the provision contained therein that "the administering
Power has the right to administer the Trusteeship
Territory, as an integral part of its own territory."
The delegation of the Soviet Union considers
unacceptable a provision which, in fact, means
the annexation of the Trusteeship Territories by
mandatory Powers; this is clearly contrary to
the principles of the Charter, which in Article 76
provides for the progressive development of trus~
teritories towards self-government or independence. In substance this attempt to annex a
mandated territory is similar to the one made
by the Union of South Africa in its endeavour
to annex the mandated territory of South-West
Africa. The only difference is that the Union
of South Africa presented its claims more
frankly, while the other mandatory Powers preferred. to do it in a veiled form. The majority
of the members of the Committee shared the
point of view of the Soviet delegation and accepted this amendment. However, the manda-

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

des travau'x de l'Assemblee generale, les anciennes
Puissances mandataires, a savoir la Grande-Bretagne, la France, la Belgique, la Nouvelle-Zelande
et l'Australie, ont soumis a l'AssembIee des
projets d'accords de tutelle pour les territoires
anciennement sous mandat de la Societe des
Nations. De contenu semblable, ces projets comportaient de graves imperfections. Leur principal
defaut consistait en ce que leurs dispositions
essentieIles etaient en contradiction avec les principes de tuteIle econces au Chapitre XII de la
Charte des Nations Unies.
On sait que ces principes prevoient l'evolution
progressive des peuples habitant les territoires
sous tuteIle vers l'autonomie et l'independarice.
Or, dans les projets qu'on nous a soumis, on peut
ooter une tendance nettement opposee, les Puissances mandataires s'effor~ant d'etablir des
conditions teIles que les territoires sous tuteIle
deviendraient, en fait, partie integrante de la
Puissance qui exerce la tuteIle. Le triomphe de
ces tendances equivaudrait a une annexion des
territoires sous tutelle par les Puissances mandataires, et constituerait une violation de la Charte.
Des le debut des travaux de la Quatrieme
Commission, la delegation sovietique a re1eve ces
imperfections dans les projets d'accords: elle a
pris une part active aux travaux de la Commission de la tutelle et des Sous-Comites 1 et 2, en
s'effor~ant d'eliminer ces imperfections.
A cet effet, la delegation sovietique a propose
plusieuIS amendements portant sur le fond de
ces projets. EIle s'en est toujours tenue au principe que les territoires sous tutelle ne sont pas la
propriete de I'Autorite chargee de l'administra.
tion. Ces territoires doivent etre places sous une
juridiction internationale, sous la juridiction de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies qui assure
l'application du Regime international de tutel1e.
Les amendements proposes par la delegation
sovietique avaient pour objet de mettre ces PlO'
jets d'accords en harmonie avec ce principe fCJ
damental. Dans cet ordre d'idees, il faut not .'
en premier lieu, que, dans l'un de ces amcnCl._
ments, la delegation sovietique proposait de
supprimer, dans sept des projets d'accords, la
disposition selop laqueIle: "1' Autorite chargee
de l'administration a le droit d'administrer le
territoire sous tutelle comme partie integrante
du territoire national". La delegation sovietique considere comme inacceptable une telle disposition qui signifie en fait l'annexion des
territoires sous mandat par les Puissances mandataires, en contradiction directe avec les principes de la Charte. En effet, l'Article 76 prevoit "I 'evolution progressive" des peuples sous
tutelle "vers la capacite a s'administrer euxmemes ou l'independance". En somme, nous
nous trouvons ici en presence d'une tentative
d'annexion d'un territoire sous mandat, tout a
fait analogue a celle qu'a fait l'Union Sud-Afri.caine 10rsqu'el1e a tente d'annexer le territoire
sous mandat du Sud-Ouest Africain. La seule
difference, c'est que l'Union Sud-Africaine a expose ses pretentions d'une fac;on ouverte, alors que

Sixty.second plenary meeting

1278

tory Powers, with the exception of New Zealand,
rejected it in spite of the decision of the Committee, thus leaving in the drafts provisions con~
trary to the Charter.

13 December 1946

les autres Puissances rnandataires preferent
operer sous une forme plus voilee. Se rangeant
a l'avis de la delegation sovietique, la majorite
des membres de la Commission a approuve cet
amendement. Mais les Puissances mandataires
a l'exception de la Nouvelle-lelande, ont rejet~
cet amendement, et maintenu ainsi dans les projets, des dispositions contraires la Charte.
A l'amendement sovictique dont nous venons
de parler, se rattache un autre amendement qui
est re1atif aux delais de revision dcs Accords
de tutelle. La delegation sovietique a remarque
qu'aucun de ccs Accords ne contenait d'indication quant a la duree de la tutelle, dont l'objet
est d'assurer l'autonomie et l'independance des
peuples sous tutelle. Aucun ne mentionnait non
plus les Mlais dans lesquels ces Accords devraient ctre revises pour tenir compte de l'evolution eventuelle des territoires sous tutelle vers la
capacite a s'administrer eux-memes ou l'indcpendance.

a

Another amendment, concerning the time
limit for revision of Trusteeship Agreements, is
connected with the above-mentioned amendment proposed by the Soviet delegation. The
Soviet delegation noted the fact that not a single
draft agreement contained any indication concerning either the duration of the trusteeship,
the aim of which is the attainment of self-government or independence by the trust territory, or
even concerning the time limits for a revision of
the agreements in accordance with the progress
which may be achieved by the trust territory
towards self-government or independence.
It is quite clear to us that such progress must
take place, because such are indeed the very
aims of trusteeship, but this means that those
clauses of the agreements which correspond to
the present level of development of the trust
territories, will no longer correspond to the level
which may be attained in a certain time. We
cannot allow the Trusteeship Agreements to remain unchanged for too long, because this would
in practice mean that the Administering Authority could exercise its trusteeship indefinitely,
without taking any steps to promote the development of the Trust Territories towards self-gm'ernment or independence. If we were to allow
this, we would create the objective possibility of
preserving artificially the present level of political,
economic and cultural development of the peoples of the Trust Territories.

The creation of the United Nations and the
establishment of an international Trusteeship
System gave rise to hopes among the peoples of
the Trust Territories that the way to development
in economic, cultural and political fields would
be open to them also. The Trusteeship System
must raise these at present backward territories
to such level that they should be able to take
their place in the family of nations as self-governing or independent peoples. The peoples of these
territories have an equal right to enjoy the benefits of contemporary civilization and to improve
their welfare. The possibilities for such development are to be found in the Trusteeship System,
and our first concern for the backward peoples
of Trust Territories is to ensure that all thc:,,(' pussibilities are realized. Only then shall we have
fulfilled the trusteeship tasks laid upon us. The
delegation of the Soviet Union would welcome
the possibility of cstablishing a time limit for
the termination of trusteeship over individual
Trust Territorics, if it were possible to determine
now at what period these territories would be
sufficiently mature to receive self-government or
independence. At the very least, however, periodical dates for the revision of Trusteeship Agree-

11 est parfaitement, clair, a nos yeux, que
cette evolution doit avoir lieu, car tels sont precisement les buts de la tutelle; mais cela signifie
que les clauses des Accords qui correspondent a
l'etat actucl de developpement dcs territoires
sous tutelle, ne correspondront pas au niveau
qu'ils auront peut-etre atteint d'ici quelque
temps. Nous ne devons pas permettre qu'un
Accord de tutdle wit conclu pour un temps trop
long et qu'il reste immuable, car cela signifierait, en fait, que l'Autoritc chargee de l'administration de ces territoires exercerait la tutelle
pour un temps indefini et sans s'occuper de
l'cvolution de ces territoires vers l'autonomie ou
l'independance. Si nous admettions cela, nous
etablirions un etat fie choses dans lequel les
peuples de:; territoires sous mandat pourraient
ctre maintenus artificiclJement a leur niveau
actuel de developpe:ment politique, economique
et culture!.
La creation de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies et 1'6tablissement du Regime international
de tutel1e a fait naitrc, chez les peuples des
territoires sous tutelle, l'espoir qu'eux aussi pourraient suivre la voie du progres economique,
culturel et politique. Le Regime de tutelle doit
clevelopper les pays retardataires et les amener
it un niveau qui leur pem1ette d'entrer dans la
famille des nations, atitre de peuples autonomes
CJU indcpcnd ants. Les peuples de ces territoires
ont le mcme droit que les autres de jouir des
bienfaits cle la ch'ilisation contemporaine et
d'amcJiorer leur nivcau de vie. Le Regime de
tlltelle rend un tel developpement possible.
Notrc premier devoir envers les pays arrieres
sous tutelle, est de veiller a cc que ccs possibilites
se rcaliscnt. Ce n'est qu'ainsi que nous nous
acquitterons des taches qui nous incomben~ en
maticre de tutelle. La delcgation sovietlque
serait heureuse de voir fixer la date a laquelle
prendrait fin la tutelle sur les differents te~ri.
toires, s'il etait possible de determiner, des mamtenant, le moment ou ccs territoires seront assez
developpes pour qu'on puisse leur acco~~~
l'autonomie ou l'independance. D'ores et deja,
il est possible et meme necessaire de fixer des

13 decembre 1946

1279

m~nts are certainly possible and necessary. For

this purp<;JSe the Soviet Union delegation proposed t~ mtro~uce in~o all. draft agreements a
new artIcle, fixmg a tlme limit for the
..
d
d'fi .
reVISIOn
an mo I catIOn of the agreements according
~o the. degree to which the purposes laid down
10 ArtIcle 76 of the Charter have been attained.
!he pr?posal of the Soviet delegation to fix
a time hmIt for the revision of Trusteeship AgreemeI?ts was adopte? by the Committee, which
decIded that all eIght Trusteeship Agreements
should be re~ised after a. lapse of ten years.
However; as III the precedmg case, the mandatory Powers showed a complete unwillingness
to take the Committee's decision into consideration, .and declared their refusal to accept the
establIShment of a time limit for the revision
of the Agreements.
Finally, the delegation of the Soviet Union
submitted a 'proposal which it considers to b~
extremely important. It concerns those articles
of the ~?I'ee?1ents whi7~ provide for the right
of AdmmIste~mgAu~hontIes to construct military,
nav~, a~d aIr bases m the trust territory, to build
foruficatlOns and keep their armed forces there.
The .right of the Administering Authority is not
restrIcted by any limits or obligations in the draft
agreements submitted. As a result, the trustee
Powers can use the Trust Territories for military
purposes, at their entire convenience, and treat
these territories as their own property.

Soixante~deuxil!me

seance pleniere

delais pour la revision periodique des Accords
~e tutelle. C'est pourquoi la delegation SQvietIque ~ propose d'inclure.dans tous ces Accords
un artIcle prevoyant un deIai pour la revision o~
la modification de ces accords, compte tenu des
progres accomplis vel'S la realisation des fins
e~:l.OnCees. par l'Article 76 de la Charte des Nabons Umes.
La Commission a adopte la proposition de la
delegation sovietique concernant les delais de
revisiOl: des Accords de tutelle, elle a decide que
les hmt Accords doivent etre revises dans dix
ans. ~ependant, comme dans le cas precedent,
les Pmssances mandataires n'ont pas voulu tenir
compte de l'avis de la Commission et ont refuse
d'approuver sa decision quant aux delais de
revision des Accords.

Enfi?: la d~legation sovietique a fait une
propOSItIOn qu elle considCre comme tres importante. Cette proposition concerne les articles
des Accords qui prevoient, pour l'Autorite
chargee de l'administration, le droit d'etablir
sur le territoire sous tutelle, des bases militaires,
navales' ou aeriennes, d'y elever des fortifications
et d'y maintenir ses propres forces armees. Dans
les pr~jets. d'.accord qui nous ont ete presentcs,
le drOIt amSI accordc a l'Autorite chargee de
l'~dt;Iinist~ati0!1 n.e comportc pour eUe ni restnctIOn m.obhgatIon. Par consequent, les Puissances qUI exercent la tutelle peuvent utiliser
comme bon leur semble a des fins militaires les
territoires sous tutelle i en d'autres termes, elles
p.eu~ent e? disposer comme de leur propre terntorre natIOnal.
Nous ,savons tous que le regime institue par
As we all know, the for·mer system of the
League of Nations mandates neutralized the la Societe des Nations prevoyait la neutralisation
mandated territories and prohibited their utiliza- des territoires sous mandat, et en interdisait
tion for military purposes. No military bases or l'utilisation a des fins militaires. Il ne devait
fortifications could be constructed in such ter- y avoir, dans ces territoires, ni bases militaires
ritories and their population could not be utilized ni fortifications, et leur population ne pouvait
for military purposes. Now we have a different etre utilisee a des fins militaires. Mais
situation, because Articles 76 and 84 of the aujourd'hui, il en est tout autrement: en efIet,
Charter provide that the Trust Territories may les Articles 76 et 84 de la Charte prevoient que
play a definite part in the maintenance of inter- les territoires sous tutelle peuvent jouer un cernational peace and security, while under Articles tain role dans le maintien de la paix et de la
82 and 83 strategic areas may be designated in securite internationales, et les Articles 82 et 83
permettent que l'on determine des zones stratethe Trust Territories.
giques dans ces territoires.
Les territoires sous tutelle ne peuvent contriBut the utilization of Trust Territories for the
buer
au maintjen de la paix et de la securite
maintenance of international peace and security
internationales
que si les Autorites chargees de
is only admissible where the Administering
l'administration
contractent des obligations a
Authority assumes this obligation before the
l'egard
du
Conseil
de securite dont la compeSecurity Council, which is the competent body
for these most important questions. Therefore, tence s'etend a ces questions d'importance
if conditions require the establishment of military primordiale. Si, en des circonstances determinees,
bases and the maintenance of the armed forces il devenait necessaire d'etablir dans un territoire
of the Administering Authorities in the Trust Ter- sous tutelle des bases militaires, et si l'Autorite
ritories, then we will have the situation provided cHargee de l'administration devait y entretenir
for in Articles 82 and 83 because the erection des forces armees, nous nous trouverions en preof fortifications and the establishment of military sence du cas prevu par les Articles 82 et 83,
puisqu'en fortifiant les territoires sous tutelle et
bases in trust territories by the Administering
en
y etablissant des bases militaires, l'Autorite
Authority will thus transf<;>fll'l these territories
chargee
de l'administration transformerait ces
into strategic regions. There can be no doubt
territoires en zones strategiques. Il n'y a pas de
that the approval of any Trusteeship AgreeI?e?t
relating to such strategic areas will be WIthm doute que tout Accord de tutelle relatif aux

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1280

the competence of the Security Council under
Articles 82. and 83 of the Charter.
Should the Assembly agree that the Administering Authorities should have the right to establish military bases in Trust Territories and to
fortify such territories without the consent of
the Security Council, this would mean that these
Powers may utilize Trust Territories for their
military purposes without being subject to any
control on the part of the United Nations.
The grant of such a right would not serve
the interests of international peace and security,
but merely the narrow egoistic interests of certain
countries. Thus a statute would be enacted in
favour of these countries which would be worse
than the oid system of mandates, because even
that system did not peJ;mit mandated territories
to be utilized for military purposes by the mandatory Powers.
Bearing in mind all these considerations, the
delegation of the Soviet Union submitted a proposal relating to the articles mentioning the
establishment of bases in Trust Territories, which
was more or less the same for all the draft agreements. This proposal provided that the construction of naval, military and air bases and the
maintenance of the armed forces of the Administering Authority in trust territory should be carried out only on the basis of the obligations of
the Administering Authority to the Security
Council, as defined in a special agreement concerning strategic areas which is subject to the
approval of the Security Council in confonnity
with Article 83 of the Charter.
This amendment, which embodies a very important principle, was rejected in the Committee
by eighteen votes to fourteen. The results of
the voting of this amendment show that many
delegations are not in agreement with the present
provisions of the drafts, which give the Administering Authority the possibility of utilizing trust
territories arbitrarily for its military aims.

13 December 1946

zones strategiques doive etre approuve par le
Conseil de securite, en vertu des Articles 82 et
83 de la Charte.
Si l'Assemblee consentait a accorder aux
Autorites chargees de l'administration le droit
d'etablir des bases militaires dans les territoires
sous tutelle et de fortifier ces territoires sans
l'approbation du Conseil. de securite, cela signi.
fierait que les Puissances .en question pourraient
leurs propres fins militaires les ternutiliser
toires sous tutelle, ceci sans que les Nations
Unies exercent aucun controle.
En leur accordant ce droit, nous servirions,
non pas les interets de la paix et de la securite
internationales, mais seulement les interets
etroitement egoi'stes de certains pays. On· creerait ainsi pour ces territoires un statut qui serait
pire que l'ancien regime des mandats, puisque
celui-ci avait au moins le merite d'interdire aux
Puissances mandataires l'utilisation de ces territoires des fins militaires.
Pour toutes ces raisons, la delegation sovietique a propose de modifier les articles ou it est
question d'etablir des bases dans les' territoires
sous tutelle, en y introduisant des amendements
qui ne differeraient pas sensiblement d'un projet
un autre. Cette proposition pred'accord
voyait que les Autorites chargees de l'administration ne pourraient, en territoire sous tutelle,
etablir de bases militaires, navales et aeriennes,
ou entretenir des forces armees qu'a seule fin de
remplir les obligations contractees envers le
Conseil de securite et definies par des accords
speciaux portant sur les zones strategiques.
D'ailleurs, selon l' Article 83 de la Charte, ces
accords doivent etre approuves par le Conseil
de securite.
Ce projet 'd'amendement, qui a une grande
importance de principe a ete ecarte en corn·
mission, par dix-huit voix contre quatorze. Le
resultat du vote montre que de nombreuses delegations n'appro'uvent pas les projets d'accords,
dans leur texte actuel qui donne aux Autorites
chargees de l'administration, la latitude d'utiliser
leur gre les territoires sous tutelle leurs propres fins militaires.
D'autre part, il ne faut pas oublier la composition un pel,l speciale de la majoritc qui a
rejete notre projet d'amendement. Parroi les
dix-huit membres de la Commission qui ont vote
contre la proposition sovietique, il y avait six
Puissances mandataires j cinq de ces Puissances
ont presente des projets d'accord pour huit
territoires sous tutelle, et la sixieme, l'Union
Sud-Africaine, n'a pas encore presente de projet
pour le territoire du Sud-Ouest Africain anciennement sous mandat. Il y avait donc au sem de
ce groupe un bloc compact de six Puissances
mandataires, qui ont des interets solidaires en
ce qui concerne les an.ciens territoires sous
mandat. Cette solidarite s'est manifestee assez
clairement dans le soutieIJ. mutuel que ces Puissances se sont prete a toutes les occasions, en ~e
prononc;ant contre toute proposition qui tendalt
dOI).ner au Regime de la tutelle un caractere
redlement international et a empecher que les

a

a

a

a

a

On the other hand, we should bear in mind
the specific composition of the majority which
rejec~el;l the above-mentioned proposal of the
Soviet Union delegation. Among the eighteen
members of the Committee who voted against
the Soviet Union amendment were six mandatory Powers, five of which had submitted their
draft agreements for eight Trust Territories, and
one of which - the Union of South Africa has not yet submitted the draft agreement for
the former mandated territory of South-West
Africa. Thus this group contained a compact
block of six mandatory Powers, who have a
common interest as regards the former mandated
territories. This circumstance was thrown into
clear relief by the fact that the mandatory
Powers. always supported one another against
any proposal to lay down conditions of trusteeship such as would make the Trusteeship System
a truly international institution, and not merely
a screen behind which the Administering. Autorites chugees de l'admllUstration ne se ",.

a

\

1
•

13 decembre 1946

1281

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

Authorities could deal with the Trust Territories
at their will.
'

vent de. ce regime comme d'un simple pretexte
pour dlsposer a leur gre des territoires sous
tutelle.
Certain other countries, connected with these
Certains autres pays, 'lies aux Puissances
mandatory Powers by political ties or certain mandataires par des liens politiques ou par des
spe~al interests...co-operated with them closely. interets speciaux, ont collabore etroitement avec
It 18 not surpnsmg that in such circumstances ces Puissances. Dans ces conditions, il n'est pas
the above-mentioned proposal of the Soviet surprenant que le projet d'amendement soumis
Union delegation was rejected owing to the par la delegation sovietique ait ete rejete, et
influence of the group of mandatory Powers and ceci sous l'influence du groupe des Puissances
the representatives of certain other countries.
mandataires et des representants de certains
autres pays.
. These. ~ircumstancos also influenced the negaCes memes circonstances ont determine la
tive declSlon of the Committee in another ex- Commission a prendre une decision negativ~ au
c.eedingly import~~t. question, namely the ques- sujet d'une autre question extremement impornon of so-called directly concerned" States as tante, celle des Etats dits "directement interesses"
.
.
'
proVlded ID the Charter with respect to trust aux termes des dispositions de la Charte qui se
territories. The fact is that the draft trusteeship rapportent a la tutelle. En efIet, les projets d'acagreements submitted to the General Assembly cords de tutelle soumis a l'Assemblee n'ont pas
were not agreed upon by the States directly con- fait I'objet d'un accord entre les Etats directecerned as should have been done in accordance ment interesses, comme cela aurait di'l. etre fait
with Article 79 of the United Nations Charter. en vertu de l'Article 76 de la Charte des Nations
This Article, however, provides that the terms Unies. Pourtant, cet Article precise clairement
of trusteeship for each Trust Territory shall be que les conditions du regime de tutelle pour
agreed upon by the States directly concerned, chacun des territoires vises doivent etre fixces
including the mandatory Power in the case of par des accords conclus entre les Etats directeterritories held under mandate by a Member of ment interesses, y compris la Puissance mandathe United Nations.
taire, dans le cas des territoires qui se trouvent
sous le mandat d'un Membre des Nations Unies.
During the entire period between the first and
Pendant tout le temps qui s'est ecoule entre
second parts of the first session of the General la premiere et la seconde partie de la premiere
Assembly no attempt was even made to read an session de l' Assemblee generale, on n'a meme
agreement as to which States should be con- pas tente d'aboutir a un accord qui definisse ce
sidered "directly concerned". At the same time, qu'on entend par "Etats directement interesses".
in certain cases the question as to which States Dans certains cas, les Puissances mandataires ont
were directly concerned in regard to one or the meme decide arbitrairement et unilateralement
other of the mandated territories to be included quels etaient les Etats directement interesses a
in the Trusteeship System, was decided unilater- tel ou tel territoire sous mandat. Une telle situaally and arbitrarily by the mandatory Powers, tion est contraire aux dispositions de l'Article
themselves. Such a state of things is contrary to 79 de la Charte des Nations Unies.
the provisions of Article 79 of the Charter.
Au cours des travaux du Sous-Comite 1 de la
During the work of Sub-Committee 1 of the
Trusteeship Committee, the delegation of the Corrimission de la tutelle, la delegation sovietiSoviet Union proposed to define the States which que a propose d'etablir quels etaient les Etats
were considered directly concerned according to qu'on pouvait considerer comme directement
the sense of Article 79 of the Charter. This interesses, au sens de l'Article 79 de la Charte.
Article lays down that the mandatory Powers Cet Article stipule que les Puissances mandaare included in the States directly concerned, taires sont comprises parmi les Etats directcment
but does not indicate what Powers, except the interesSes, mais il n'indique pas quels sont les
mandatory Powers are to be considered as States Etats qui peuvent etre consideres comme direct~­
directly concerned. This is a matter to be d~­ ment interesses en dehors des Puissances mandacided by the United Nations in order that It taires. 11 faut que I'Organisation des Nations
should not become the subject of a private ar- Unies tranche cette question, afin, d'eviter que
rangement between the mandatory Powers ~nd les Puissances mandataires ne se mettent a
individual States behind the back of the Umted conclure, a l'insu de l'Organisation des Nations
Nations. That would be an infringement of the Unies, des arrangements particuliers avec telle
ou telle puissance - ce qui constituerait une
Charter.
violation de la Charte.
La delegation sovietique estime que, parmi
The delegation of the Soviet Union believes
les
Etats directement interesses, il faut ranger
that the five great Powers should be included
first of all among the States directly concerned. en premier lieu les cinq grandes Puissances. Cela
The reason for this is primarily the fact that the tient tout d'abord a Cf que les Etats-Unis d'AUnited States of America, United Kingdom, merique, le Royaume-Dni, l'Union des RepuUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics, and France bliques sociaHstes sovietiques et la France sont
are permanent members of t~e Trust~e~~p membres permanents du Conseil de tutelle,
Council, and this emphasizes theIr responsIbilI~y ce qui met en evidence'leur responsabilite a
for all Trust Territories. It must also be borne III l'egard de tous les territoires sous tutelle. D'autre

},I

I1

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1282

13 December 1946

mind that, according to Articles 76 and 84 of part, il ne faut pas oublier que, conformement
the Charter, Trust Territories shall play their aux Articles 76 et 84 de la Charte, les territoires
pallt in the maintenance of international peace sous tutelle sont appeles a contribuer au mainand security in the general system of measures tien de la paix et de la securite dans le cadre
falling within the competence of the Security general des mesures que le Conseil de securite
Council and designed to give effect to this aim. est charge de prendre a cet egard. Il est clair
This fact, of course, must be taken into account qu'il faut ternr compte de ce fait lorsqu'il s'agit
in deciding the question concerning States de trancher la question des Etats directement
interesses.
directly concerned.
Aussi, compte tenu de ces considerations, la
With these considerations in mind, the delegation of the Soviet Union believed, and still delegation sovietique n'a-t-elle pas cesse d'afbelieves, that it is important to reach an agree- firmer qu'il etait important de convenir que
ment, giving each of the States which are perma- chacun des Etats qui sont membres permanents
nent members of the Security Council and du Conseil de securite et du Conseil de tutelle,
Trusteeship Council the right to declare itself a a le droit de se declarer directement interesse,
State directly concerned in regard to the Trust lorsqu'il s'agit de territoires a placer sous tutelle.
Territories. This, however, would not mean that Toutefois cela ne signifie pas que chacun de ces
each of these States should make such a decla- Etats doive faire cette declaration pour l'ensemble des territoires sous tutelle.
ration in regard to all the Trust Territories.
La delegation sovietique considere que les
The delegation of the Soviet Union considers
that provision should be made for the possible petits Etats doivent avoir la possibilite de partiparticipation also of small countries as States ciper a ces accords en tant que parties directedirectly concerned. We must bear in mind that ment interessees. Il ne faut pas oublier que pour
small countries can also claim to be recognized certains territoires sous tutelle, de petits ,Etats
as directly concerned with regard to certain peuvent eux aussi pretendre a la qualite d'Etats
directement interesses.
Trust Territories.
Une entente sur cette question nous aidlM'ait
An understanding on this question would
further the fulfillment of the terms of Article 76 a remplir les obligations enoncees a l'Article 76
and would thereby enable Trusteeship Agree- et nous permettrait de conclure des accords
ments to be concluded in full conformity with entierement conformes a la Charte.
the Charter.
Mais le Sous-Comite et la Commission - en
However, the Soviet Union proposal concerning the conclusion of agreements on the question raison surtout de l'opposition manifestee par les
of States directly concerned was not adopted by Puissances mandataires - ont rejete la proposi.the Sub-Committee and Committee, primarily tion sovietique, qui etait de s'entendre sur la
because it met with opposition from the manda- question des Etats directement interesses. Certory Powers. The opposition of the mandatory taines autres delegations ant soutenu activement
Powers received the active support of certain les Puissances mandataires dans leur opposition.
other delegations.
As a result of this state of affairs, the draft
En raison de cet etat de choses, les projets
trusteeship agreements submitted to the Assem- d'accords de tutelle soumis a l'Assemblee cornbly constitute an infringement of the basic terms portent une violation des principes de la Charte
of the Trusteeship System in the United Nations relatifs au Regime de la tutelle. En fait, il est
Charter. In fact they cannot even be considered impossible de considerer ces accords comme
to be Trusteeship Agreements, because Arti- des Accords de tutelle, puisque, selon l'Article 79
cle 79 of the Charter states that the terms of de la Charte, les conditions du Regime de tutelle
trusteeship shall be agreed upon by the coun- doivent faire l'objet d'un accord entre les Etats
tries directly concerned, whereas so far it has directement interesses. Or, on n'a meme pas
not been determined which countries are etabli jusqu'ici quels etaient ces "Etats directe"directly concerned."
ment interesses".
"
The delegation of the Soviet Union, considerConsiderant, en vertu des raisons ci-dessus,
ing the draft agreements to be unacceptable for que ces projets sont inacceptables, la delegation
the above-mentioned reasons, submits the fol- sovietique soumet a l'Assemblee generale le prolowing draft resolution for the consideration of jet de resolution suivant:
the General Assembly:
"The General Assembly considers that the
"L'Assemblee generale estime que les profollowing draft trusteeship agreements, subjets d'accords de tutelle qui lui ont ete soumis
mitted for its consideration by the United
par le Royaume-Uni pour le Tanganyika, le
Kingdom for Tanganyika, Togoland and the
Togo et le Cameroun, par la France pourllJ.e
Cameroons, France for Togoland and the
Togo et le Cameroun, par la Belgique pour
Cameroons, Belgium for Ruanda-Urundi,
le Ruanda-Urundi, par l'Australie pour la
Australia for New Guinea, and New Zealand
Nouvelle-Guinee, et par la Nouvelle-Zelande
for Western Samoa, have been drafted conpour le Samoa Occidental, sont rediges en
trary to fundamental requirements of the
violation des dispositions fondamentales de la
United Nations Charter regarding the TrusCharte des Nations Unies en ce qui conce~le
teeship System, that is:
le Regime de tutelle, a savoir:

13 decembre 1946

1283

"First, the propo~ed draft trusteeship agreements f~.r the above-mentioned territories
cannot ?e cons~dered as Trusteeship Agreements, SInce Art1s1e 79 of the Charter provides
that the terms of trusteeship shall be agreed
upon by the States directly concerned whereas
so far it has not generally been de~ermined
which countries should be considered as di.
rectly concerned.

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

"1. To reject the draft agreements submitted for the above-mentioned territories under
mandate as being inconsistent with the Charter;
"2. To recommend to the Governments of
the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Australia and New Zealand to submit for the consideration of the General Assembly new draft
trusteeship agreements for the above-mentioned territories under mandate, drawn up in
conformity with the Charter."
The Soviet Union delegation hopes that the
Assembly will adopt this resolution and, by so
doing, express its disapproval of the terms contained in the draft trusteeship agreements which
are contrary to the interests of the peoples of
the Trust Territories, and can only serve the
interests of certain countries in their endeavour
to increase their colonial possessions at the expense of the Trust Territories. This would be a
flagrant contravention of the principles of the
United Nations Charter. The Trusteeship
System should be set up in full conformity ~it~
the United Nations Charter. Only thus WIll It
be possible to fulfil the fundamental task o~ a
Trusteeship System, which consists in pron:0tl~g
the progressive development of Trust Terntones
towards self-government or independence.

"Premierement, il est impossible de
considerer les projets d'accords relatifs aux
territoires susmentionnes comme des Accords
de tutell~, puisque la Charte (Article 79)
prevoit que les termes du Regime de tutelle
feront l'objet d'un accord entre lcs Etats
directement interesses. Or, on n'a meme pas
encore etabli quels etaient les Etats qui doivent etre consideres comme "directement
interesses".
.
"Deuxiemement, les projets d'accords contiennent une disposition en vertu de laquelle
les territoires sous tutelle seront administres
comme partie integrante du territoire de
l'Autorite chargee de l'administration ce qui
equivaut en fait a une annexion des t~rritoires
sous tutelle par les Puissances exer!tant la
tutelle. Or, selon la Charte (Article 76), le
Regime du tutelle doit favoriser l'evolution
progressive des peuples sous tutelle vers la
capacite a s'administrer eux-memes ou l'independance.
"Troisiemement, les projets qui ont ete
presentes prevoient, entre autres, que des
bases militaires, navales et aeriennes pourront
etre etablies dans les territoires sous tutelle,
sans le consentement du Conseil de securite,
ce qui est contraire a la Charte (Article 83).
En efIet, celle-ci stipule que l'etablissement
des bases militaires, navales et aeriennes dans
ces territoires doit etre approuve par le
Conseil de securite.
"Ppur ces raisons, l'AssembIee generale
decide:
"1. De rejeter les projets d'.accords qui lui
ont ete presentes pour les territoires sous
mandat susmentionnes, comme n'etant pas
conformes a la Charte;
"2. De recommander aux Gouvernements
du Royaume-Uni, de la France, de la Belgique, de l'Australie et de la Nouvelle-Zelande,
de presenter a l'Assemblee de nouveaux projets d'accords de tutelle visant l~ territoires
susmentionnes et dont la teneur soit conforme
a la Charte."
La delegation sovietique espere que l'AssembIee generale adoptera cette resolution et que
par la meme elle desapprouvera ceux des terrnes
des accords qui sont contraires aux interets des
populations so~s tutelle et qui ne peuvent servir
que les interets d'un nombre limite de pays
desireux d'arrondir leur domaine colonial au
detriment des territoires sous tutelle - ce qui
serait en flagrante contradiction avec les principes de la Charte des Nations Unies. Le Regime
de tutelle que 1'0n se propose de creer doit se
confonner entierement aux principes de la
Charte. C'est la seule fa!ton d,assurer qu.e le
Regime de la tutelle remplisse sa fonction principale qui est de favoriser l'evolution progressive
des peuples sous mandat vers l'autonomie ou
l'independance.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We must settle our work for this evening. We
must, in fact, know what we intend to do. If
we wish to deal with questions relating to dis-

Le PRESIDENT: n s'agirait de regler les travaux de notre soiree. Nous devons, en effet,
savoir ce que nous voulons faire. Si nous voulons
aborder, ce soir encore, les questions relatives au

"Second, the draft agreements include the
provision whereby the territory in trust shall
be admin~tered as an integral part of those
States WhlCP. are Administering Authorities
which, in fact, amounts to annexation of the
territories in trust by the said States whereas
Article 76 of the Charter provides'that the
~rusteeship System shall promote the progresSIve development of the trust territories towards self-government or independence.

•

"Third, the proposed draft agreements
provide as one of the terms for the establishment in Trust Territories of military, naval
and air bases, without the Security Council's
consent, which is contrary to Article 83 of the
Charter, which requires the consent of the
Security Council for the establishment of military, naval and air bases in Trust Territories.

"The General Assembly, therefore, resolves:

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1284

armament and armed forces on foreign territory
• tonight, we must make arrangement accordingly.
If we now have the English interpretation ·of
the Soviet Union representative's speech, the
meeting will go on until 10.30 p.m. I still have
two speakers on my list and I must call upon
the Rapporteur. These speeches will take up
the whole evening. If we also wish to deal with
the question of disarmament, we must take
measures accordingly.

desarmement et aux forces annees sur territoires
etrangers, nous devons regler nos travaux et
prendre des dispositions. Si nous procedons
maintenant a la traduction en anglais du diJ..
cours du representant de l'Union sovietique, la
seance durera jusqu'a 10 h. 30; d'autre part, j'ai
encore deux orateurs inscrits et le Rapporteur
doit prendre la parole. Ces interventions necessiteront toute la soiree. Si nous voulons encore
aborder la question du desarmement, nous avons
des mesures a prendre.

Mr. Perez CrsNERos (Cuba) (translated
from French): I understood that the Assembly
had decided about two hours ago that after
dealing with item 7, we would take up items 3,
4 and 5, which constitute all the proposals submitted by the Committee dealing with trusteeship questions.
I should like to know if this is really the case.
Several delegations have made arrangements to
allow some of their members to rest, and they
have left here representatives who are competent
to deal with trusteeship questions. Consequently,
they are not prepared to discuss the problem of
disarmament.

M. PEREZ CISNEROS (Cuba): Je crois bien
avoir compris que l'AssembIee avait decide, il
y a a peu pres deux heures, qu'apres le point 7,
nous traiterions les points 3, 4 et 5, qui constituent l'ensemble des propositions transmises par
la Commission qui s'est occupee des questions de
tutel1e.
Je voudrais savoir s'il en est bien ainsi. Plusieurs delegations ont pris des dispositions pour
permettre a une partie de leurs membres de se
reposer, et elles ont laisse ici les representants
susceptibles de traiter des questions de tutelle.
Elles ne sont, par consequent, pas preparees a
discuter ·le probleme du desarmement.

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Sdcialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, the Soviet delegation does not object
to your proposal and to there being no English
interpretation of my speech, but we would like
the English translation of the draft resolution on
the trusteeship question which was read by our
representative.

M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur
le President, la delegation sovietique ne s'oppose
pas a votre proposition. Nous acceptons qu'il
n'y ait pas d'interpretation anglaise de notre discours; toutefois, nous vous prions de faire tra·
duire le projet de resolution sur la question de la
tutelle que notre representant vient de lire.

The English text was then read.

,

13 December 1946

Il est donne lecture de la traduction anglaise
de ce texte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Bartos, representative of Yugoslavia.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole aM. Bartos, representant de la Yougoslavie.

Mr. BARTOS (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French) : The Yugoslav delegation feels it neces-

M. BARTOS (Yougoslavie): La delegation
yougoslave est obligee de faire une courte declaration concernant la question de la tutelle. Notre
delegation considece que le Regime de tutelle
represente un progres dans le domaine du droit
international, une etape vers la liberation definitive des peuples colonises, vers leur independance,
vers la realisation du principe du droit des peu-'
pIes a disposer d'eux-m@mes. Cette acquisition
est due a la Charte de notre Organisation, cet
instrument de paix, de securite et de collaboration intemationale fonde sur les buts eIeves de
la civilisation d'aujourd'hui.
Mais, si nous voulons que cette acquisition
soit complete, nous devons appliquer notre
Charte, notre constitution. Les dispositions de
la Charte concernant la tute1le constituent le
minimum de garantie qui puisse ctre donne aux
peuples ne jouissant pas encore d'une pleine in~
dependance. 'Ces garanties, solennellement proclamees, sont dues aux peuples sous tutelle et
nous courrions le risque de compromettre les
prbmesses solennellement donnees si nous nous
permettions, des le debut du Regime de tutelle,
de faire une application fausse des dispositions
qui s'y rapportent.

sary to make a short statement on the trusteeship question. Our delegation considers that the
Trusteeship System constitutes progress in the
field of international law, a step towards the
final liberation of colonial peoples, towards their
independence, and towards realizing the principle of the right of self-determination. This
achievement is due to the Charter of our Organization, that instrument of peace, security
and international co-operation based on the high
aims of modern civilization.
However, if we wish this achievement to be
complete, we must implement our Charter, our
constitution. The provisions of the Charter which
relate to trusteeship are the minimum guarantees which can be given to peoples who do not
yet enjoy full independence. These solemnly
declared guarantees are the due of peoples under
trusteeship, and we would run the risk of breaking solemn promises if we allowed ourselves to
make a false application of the provisions relating to the Trusteeship System at the very outset.

.-

~.

13 dlkembre 1946

1285

We ha;ve before us this evening the first
Truste;ship Ar-eements. This is a step forward;
but this step, lI~stead of ensuring to the peoples
under trusteeshIp the benefits which have been
guaranteed to the~, proves on the contrary that
the Powers responsIble for the administration of
these territories have reserved rights which deprive ~andated peoples of the guarantees laid
down m the Charter. Indeed, in contravention
of the Charter, the mandatory Powers have excluded ?ther States from these agreements, thus
preventmg them from influencing the future
administration of the mandated territories in
favour of the peoples under trusteeship.
Instead of effecting an international system,
the agreements under discussion violate Article
79 of the Charter and consecrate the exclusive
domination of the mandatory Powers. We have
here a situation which is clearly opposed to the
letter and spirit of the Charter.
Instead of fulfilling the high purposes of
Article 76 of the Charter, namely to draw up
for each of the countries concerned a plan of
political, economic, social and educational advancement, to ensure the full co-operation of
the inhabitants themselves, and to establish international supervision, these agreements are confined to vague, general and obscure formulae, in~
definite formulae which reserve for the Trusteeship Authorities the right to govern these countries fully and freely, giving them almost free
disposal of the Trust Territory, that is to say,
treating it almost as a colony.
Article 84 of the Charter strictly confines to
national defense the utilization of these territories
for military purposes. All strategic use of trust
territories is placed under the control of the
Security Council, in accordance with the stipulations of Articles 83 and 85 of the Charter.
Instead of applying these two principles, the
agreements before us recognize the right of
mandatory Powers to utilize trust territories for
military· purposes, regardless of the interests of
the inhabitants and of the principles laid down
by the Charter.
The Yugoslav delegation, respecting the principles laid down by the Charter and expressing·
its sympathy with the peoples of Trust Territories, considers that the guarantees provided by
the Charter constitute a minimum, and finds its
impossible to vote in favour of agreements which
do not even afford this minimum guarantee. Our
delegation also warmly supports the resolution
submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Union.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. MacEachen, representative of
Uruguay.
Mr. MAcEACHEN (Uruguay) : This propol3ed
amendment is in direct opposition to the position
which was taken by a majority of thirty-five
out of forty~three representatives pre~ent and
voting in the Committee, a vote which commanded nearly two-thirds of the Assembly, even
without eleven Members present.

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

.Nous nous trouvons ce soir devant les premIers acc~rds de tutelle. C'est un pas en
avant; malS ce pas est tel qu'au lieu d'assurer
aux peuples sous tutelle les benefices qui leur
ont ete garantis, i1 opporte au contraire la preuve
que les Puissances chargees de l'administration
de. ces territoires se sont reserve des droits qui
pnvent les peuples sous mandat des garanties
reconnues par la Charte. Contrairement a la
Charte, en effet, les Puissances mandataires ont
exclu les autres pays de ces accords et les ont
empeches ainsi d'influencer, en faveur des peupIes sous tutelle, l'administration future des territoires sous mandat.
Au lieu de realiser un systeme international, les
accords en question, violant l'Article 79 de la
Charte, consacrent le pouvoir exc1usif des Puissances mandataires. C'est la une situation nettement contraire a la lettre et a l'esprit de la
Charte.
Au lieu de repondre aux objectifs eleves de
l'Article 76 de la Charte, d'etablir, pour chaque
pays interesse, un plan de deveIoppement polio
tique, economique, social et culturel, d'assurer la
pleine collaboration de ces peuples eux-memes,
d'etablir un controle international, les accords
en question se contentent de formules vagues et
generales, de formules imprecises, laissant aux
Puissances tutelaires le droit d' administrer pleinement et librement ces pays-Ieur laissant presque
la libre disposition du territoire sous tutclle,
c'est~a-dire traitant ce territoire presque comme
une colonie.
L' Article 81, de la Charte limite strictement,
a la defense nationale, l'utilisation a des fins
militaires de ces temtoires. Toute utilisation
strategique des territoires sous tutelle est placee
sous le controle du Conseil de securite ainsi que
le stipulent les Articles 83 et 85 de la Charte.
Au lieu d'appliquer ces deux principes, les accords qui nous sont soumis ant reconnu aux
Puissances mandataires le droit d'utiliser les
territoires sous Regime de tutell~ 'a des fins milltaires, sans tenir compte des interets des habitants et des principes poses par la Charte.
La delegation yougoslave, respectant les principes poses par la Charte et exprimant sa sympathie aux peuples des pays sous tutelle, considere
que les garanties offertes par la Charte sont
minimes, et qu'elle se trouve dans l'impossibilite
de voter en faveur d'accords qui ne donnent
meme pas ce minimum de garantie. Notre delegation appuie egalement chaleureusement la resolution presentee par la delegation de l'Union
sovietique.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. MacEachen, representant de l'Uruguay.
M. MACEACHEN (Uruguay) (traduit de
l'anglais): L'amendement qui nous est propose
va· entierement a l'encontre du vote emis a la
Commission a une majorite de trente.cinq representants sur quarante-trois presents et votants; un te! vote engage prcs des deux tiers des
Membres de I'AssembIee sans memetenir compte
~es onze Membres presents qui n'ont pas vote
a la CommIssion.

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1286

.

13 December 1946

There is no doubt that this proposed amendment reflects the consistent and commendable
views of the delegation of the Soviet Union, and
I am sure we all feel that the question has been
thoroughly discussed, precisely because we had
such a persistent, solid, sound and logical opposition from the delegation of the Soviet Union and
especially from Ambassador Novikov and Ambassador Stein. But in view of the fact that the
vote of the Committee had such a tremendous
majority, it would seem to me that the Assembly
might accept to close the discussion and pass on
to a vote on the amendment.

Cet amendement reflete, il est vrai, l'attitude
louable et constante de la delegation de l'Union
sovietique. Et c'est assurement ce qui nous
donne a tous l'impression que nous avons discute
la question a fond, en raison meme de l'opposition tenace, ferme, solide et logique menee par
la delegation de l'Union sovietique, notamment
par les Ambassadeurs Novikok et Stein. Etant
donne la majorite ecrasante qui s'est manifestee
au sein de la Commission, il me semble que l'Assemblee pourrait accepter de clore la discussion
et de passer au vote sur l'amendement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall indeed be able to proceed to a vote.
The resolution of the Soviet Union, which is
opposed to that of the Committee, must be put
to the vote first. You have all heard the French
and English texts of this resolution, and I take
it that it is not necessary for it to be read again.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons, en effet, pouvoir passer au vote. La resolution de l'Union
sovietique, qui s'oppose a celle de la Commission, doit etre mise aux voix la premiere. Vous
avez tous entendu la lecture du texte fran<;ais et
du texte anglais de cette resolution, et je suppose
qu'il n'est done plus necessaire de la lire.

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) I request
a vote by roll-call.

M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je demande un vote par appel nominal.

A roll-call vote was taken.

II est procBde au vote par appel nominal.

Votent pour: Republique socialiste sovietique
V otes for: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian de Bielorussie, Tchecoslovaquie, Pologne, RepuSoviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Social- blique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des
ist Republics, Yugoslavia.
Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Yougoslavie.
Votes against: Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Votent contre: Argentine, Australie, Belgique,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Bolivie, Bresil, Chill, Chine, Costa-Rica, Cuba,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Danemark, Republique Dominicaine, Salvador,
France, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, Lebanon, France, Grece, Honduras, Islande, Liban,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zeal- Luxembourg, Mexique, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-zeand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, lande, Nicaragua, Norvege, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Sweden, Syria, Turkey, Union of South Perou, Suede, Syrie, Turquie, Union SudAfrica, United Kingdom, United States of Africaine, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'AmeriAmerica, Uruguay, Venezuela.
que, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Abstentions: Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt,
S'abstiennent: Colombie, Equateur, Egypte,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Iran, Iraq, Liberia, Ethiopie, Guatemala, Inde, Iran, Irak, Liberia,
Philippine Republic, Saudi Arabia.
Republique des Philippines, Arabie saoudite.
Decision: The draft resolution of the Union
Decision: Le projet de resolution de l'Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics was rejected by des Republiques socialistes sovietiques est rethirtJI-four votes to six with eleven abstentions. pousse par trente-quatre voix contre six, et onze
abstentions.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall proceed to a vote, taking as our basis
the Committee's resolution. I say "taking as our
basis t~e Conuruttee's resolution", because this
resolutlOn calls for a separate vote on each trusteeship agreement. We shall therefore vote eight
times by roll-call.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons proceder au vote
en prenant comme base la resolution de la
Commission. Je dis hien "en prenant comme
base la resolution de la Commission" parce que
celle-ci demande qu'il y ait un vote separe pour
chacun des Accords de tutelle. Nous procederons
done huit fois a l'appel nominal.

Mr. MACEACHEN (Uruguay): May I suggest, Mr. President, an informal procedure: that
we have a roll-call vote on the first agreement
and th.en enquire whether there are any changes
regardmg votes on the other agreements. Any
such changes could be indicated by representatives from the floor.

M. MACEACHEN (Uruguay) (traduit de
l'anglais): Puis-je me permettre, Monsieur le
President, de suggerer qu'au lieu de recourir a
la procedure reguliere, l'on emploie la methode
qui consisterait a voter par appel nominal sur
le premier accord et a demander ensuite aux
representants s"ils desirent modifier leur vote sur
les accords suivants, ce qu'ils pourraient signaler
de leur place.
La procidure proposee par le representant de
l'Uruguay est adoptee.

The procedure suggested by the representative
.
of Uruguay was adopted.

t

13 decembre 1946

1287

Proposed agreernent for New Guinea submitted
by the Government of Australia

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

Accord de tutelle pOUf la Nouvelle-Guinee
soumis par le Gouvernement de l'Australie
D Accord de tutelle est mis aux voix par appel

A roll-call vote was then taken on the Trusteeship Agreement.
nominal
Votes for: Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Votent pour: Argentine, A~stralie, Belgique,
Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Bolivie, Bresil, Canada, Chili, Chine, CostaRica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Rica, Cuba, Danemark, Republique DominiEgypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, caine, Egypte, Salvador, Ethiopie, France,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Le- Grece, Guatemala, Honduras, Islande, Iran,
banon, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Irak, Liban, Luxembourg, Mexique, Pays-Bas,
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Para- Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaragua, Norvege, Panama,
guay, Peru, Philippine Republic, Saudi Arabia, Paraguay, Perou, Republique des Philippines,
Sweden, Syria, Turkey, Union of South Africa, Arabie saoudite, Suede, Syrie, Turquie, Union
United Kingdom, United States of America, SUd-Africaine, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'AmeUruguay.
rique, Uruguay.
Votes against: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Votent contre: Republique socialiste sovi6Republic, Liberia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet So- tique de meJ.orussie, Liberia, Pologne, Repuciali:5t Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Re- blique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des
publics, Yugoslavia.
Republiques socialistes :5ovietiques, Yougooavie.
Abstentions: Colombia, Czechoslovakia, EcuaS' abstiennent: Colombie, Tchecoslovaguie,
dor, India, Venezuela.
Equateur, lnde, Venezuela,
Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Decision: DAccord de tutelle pour la NouNew Guinea was adopted by forty-one votes to velle-Guinee est adopte par quarante et une voix
six with five abstentions.
, contre six) et cinq abstentions.
Proposed agreement for Ruanda-Urundi submitted by the Government of Belgium

Accord de tutelJe pour le Ruanda-Urundi soumis
par le Gouvernement de la Belgique

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The delegations which wish to change the votes
they have just cast are asked to say so.

Le PRESIDENT: Les delegations qui YOUdraient modifier le vote qu'elles viennent d'cmettre sont prieC:5 de le manifester.

Mr. LISICKY (Czechoslovakia) (translated
from French): I wish to speak, not in order to
change my vote but, in my capacity as Rapporteur, to draw the Assembly's attention to
page 14 of our report, where the preamble to
the agreement for Ruanda-Urundi is mentioned.
It must be understood that the vote on the draft
agreement for Ruanda-Urundi will also include
a vote on the Fourth Committee's proposal regarding the preamble (page 14 of the French
text of the report, page 13 of the English text).

M. LISICKY (Tchecoslovaquie): Je demande
la p!.role, non pas pour modifier mon vote mais
pour attirer 1'attention de l'Assemblee, en ma
qualite de Rapporteur, sur la page 14 de notre
rapport ou l'on parle du preambule a l'Accord
sur le Ruanda-Urundi. 11 doh ~tre entendu que
le vote sur le projet d'accord du Ruanda-Urundi
comprendra egalement le vote sur la proposition
de la Quatrieme Commission au sujet du preambule (page 14 du texte franc;:ais du rapport,
page 13 du texte anglais).

The PRF,SIDENT (translated from French):
. This means that in voting on the agreement for
Ruanda-Urundi, the Assembly recommends that
this agreement should be preceded by a preamble similar to that of the agreement for
Tanganyika.
Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Ruanda-Urundi was adopted by forty-one votes
to six) lVith five abstentions.

Le PRESIDENT: Cela revient a dire qu'en votant l'Accord sur le Ruanda-Urundi, l'Assemblee
recommande que cet accord soit precede d'un
preambule semblable a celui de l'Accord sur le
Tanganyika.
.

Decision: L'Accord de tutelle pour le Ruanda-Urundi est adopte par quarante et une
voix contre six, et cinq abstentions.

Proposed agreement for the Cameroons under
French mandate submitted by the Government
of France

Accord de tutelle pour le Cameroun sous mandat
fran~ai5 soumis par le Gouvernement de la
France

The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc~):
The remark which has just been made regardmg
the preamble to the Trusteeship Agreement for
Ruanda- Urundi also applies to the agreement
for the Cameroons under French mandate.
Mr. LAN"G-E (Poland): I want to register an
abstention.

Le PRESIDENT: L'observation qui vient d'Ctre
faite concernant le preambule de l' Accord de
tutelle sur le Ruanda-Urundi s'applique egalement a l'Accord concernant le Cameroun sous
mandat franc;:ais.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je demande que mon abstention soit mentionnee
au proces-verbal.
Decision: L'Accord de tutelle pour le
Cameroun sous mandat franfais est adopee par
quarante et tlne voix contre cinq) et six abstentions.

Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for the
Cameroons under French Mandate was adopted
by forty-one votes to five with six abstentions.

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1288

Proposed agreement for Togoland under French
mandate submitted by the Government of
France

Mr. LANGE (Poland): Abstention.

13 December 1946

Accord de tutelle pour le Togo sous mandat
soumis 'par le Gouvernement de la
France

fran~ais

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je m'abstiens.

Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Togoland under French mandate was adopted
by forty-one votes to five with six abstentions.

Decision: L'Accord de tutelle pour le Togo
sous mandat franfais est adopte par quarante et
une voix contre cinq, et six abstentions.

Proposed agreement for Western Samoa submitted by the Government of New Zealand

Accord de tutelle pour le Samoa occidental
soumls par le Gouvernement de la NouvelleZelande

Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Western Samoa was adopted by forty-one votes
to six with five abstentions.

M. LANGE. (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je vote contre.
Decision: L'Accord de tuteUe pour le Samoa
occidental est adopte par quarante et une voix
contre six, et cinq abstentions.

Proposed agreement for Tanganyika submitted
by the Government of the United Kingdom
Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Tanganyika was adopted by forty-one votes to
six with five abstentions. .

Accord de tutelle pour le Tanganyika soumis par
le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
Decision: L'Accord de tuteUe pour le Tanganyika est adopte par quarante et une voix contre
six, et cinq abstentions.

Proposed agreement for the Cameroons under
British mandate submitted by the Government
of the United Kingdom
Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for the
Cameroons under British mandate was adopted
by forty-one votes to six with five abstentions.

Accord de tutelle pour le Cameroun sous mandat
brltannique soumis par le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni
Decision: L'Accord de tutelle pour le Cameroun sous manda,t britannique est adopte par
quarante et une voix contre six, et cinq abstentions.

Proposed agreelnent for Togoland under British
mandate submitted by the Government of the
United Kingdom
Decision: The Trusteeship Agreement for
Togoland under British mandate was adopted by
forty-one votes to six with five abstentions.

Accord de tutelle pour le Toga sous mandat
britannique soumis par le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni
Decision: L'Accord de tuteUe pour le Togo
sous mandat britannique est adopte par quarante et une voix contre six, et cinq abstentions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We have a second resolution of the Committee,
which provides for a vote on Annex 2 of the
Fourth Committee's repprt. In the opinion of
the President and the Secretary, we should postpone our vote on this question until tomorrow.
(It was so agreed).
We have now to decide whether we should
continue to deal with questions reported on by
the Fourth Committee, or if we should reverse
the decision which we took just now. If some
delegations wish that we should now deal with
the questions of disarmament and the ,presence
of troops of members of the United Nations on
foreign territory, I am at the Assembly's disposal
and have no preferences.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous avons une deuxieme
resolution de la Commission c(ui prevoit un vote
sur l'annexe 2 du rapport de la Quatrieme Commission. Le President et le Seeretaire sont d'avis
que nous devrions remettre ~ demain notre vote
sur cette question. (It en est ainsi decide.)

Mr. LANGE (Poland): I vote against.

Nous devons decider maintenant si nous
entendons continuer ~ nous occuper des questions rapportees par la Quatrieme Commission
ou si nous voulons revenir sur la decision que
nous avions prise tout al'heurc. Si certaines delegations desirent que nous abordions maintenant
les questions du desarmement et de la presence de
troupes de Membres des Nations Unies sur des
territoires etrangers, je suis a la disposition de
l'AssembIee, et je ·n'ai pas de preference.

Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The
Soviet delegation prefers that We proceed now
to discuss the question of disarmament and the
regulation of armaments, and, of course, of
troops. I mean the presence of United Nations
troops on foreign territory.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Rcepubliques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): La
delegation sovietique prefere que nous passions
a la discussion de la question du desannement,
de la reglementation des armements et - bien
entendu - des troupes. Je precise: il s'agit de
la presence de troupes de Membres des Nations
Unies en territoire ctranger.

Mr. NICHOL~S (Union of South Africa): I
hope that we WIll adhere to our previous decision

M. NWHOLLS (Union Sud-Africaine) (traduit de l'anglais): J'espere que nons nous en

I

.;;

13 decembre 1946

Soixante~deuxieme seance

1289

pleniere

and continue with the questions in the order on
the agenda.

tiendrons a la decision precedemment adoptee
et que nous poursuivrons la discussion des questions dans l'ordre indique par l'ordre du jour.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The danger of the kind of proposal r have just
made is that it may give rise to long discussions
on procedure. I shall put the question to the
vote at once.

Le PRESIDENT: C'est ,6videmment le danger
du genre de proposition que je viens de faire
que de provoquer de tres longues discussions sur
la procedure. Je vais mettre la question aux
voix tout de suite.

Decision: The Assembly decided by show of
hands to proceed to the discussion of the general
regulation and reduction of armaments.

Decision: L'Assemblee decide, main levee,
de prodder la discussion des principes regissant la n}glementation et la reduction generales
des armements.

175. Principles governing the general
regulation and reduction of armaments: report of the First Committee
(document A/267) .

175. Principes regissant la reglementation
et la reduction generales des arme~
ments. Rapport de la Premiere Commission (document A/267)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Byrnes representative of the
U)1ited States of America.

Le PRESIDENT: La parole est a M. Byrnes,
representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

a

a

M. BVRNES (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Les Etats-Unis d'Amerique
appuient chaleureusement le projet de resolutionl qui nous est soumis. Je tiens d'abord a
feliciter les membres de la Commission d'avoir
conci1ieS leurs divergences de vues afin de presenter cette resolution. lis ont rendu un' tres
grand service a la cause de la paix. J'ai su aussi
combien avait ete precieuse l'aide que l'excellent
President de l'Assemblce a apportce a la Commission; je sais que vous vous joindrez tous a
moi pour rendre hommage aux efforts de l'eminent representant de la Belgique, M. Spaak.
Des la fin des hostilites, la politique des Etatl\Ever since the close of hostilities, it has been
the policy of the United States to hasten the Unis a consiste a h~ter le l'etablissement de la
return of conditions of peace. We want to paix. Nous voulons permettre aux combattants
enable the fighting men of the United Nations des Nations Unies de rentrer dans leurs foyers,
to return to their homes and their families. We dans leur familles. Nous voulons donner a taus
want to give the people of all lands the chance les peuples la possibilite de reconstruire ce que
to rebuild what the war has destroyed. There la guerre a demoli. 11 n'y a pas lieu de douter
need be no concern about the .willingness of the de la ferme volonte du peuple americain de
American people to do everything within their faire tout le possible pour se liberer et pour
power to rid themselves and the world of the· liberer le monde du fardeau des armements
excessifs.
burden of excessive armaments.
Ce qui, ces dernieres annees, inquietait les
In the recent past, the concern of peace-loving
nations has not been that America maintained nations pacifiques ce n'etait pas de voir les
excessive armaments. The concern has been Etats-Unis trop armes, mais bien au contraire,
that America failed to maintain adequate arma- de constater que ce pays ne possedait pas des
ments to guard the peace. When Hitler started armements suffisqnts pour sauvegarder la paix.
the world war in September 1939, 'Germany had Lorsqu'en septembre 1939, Hitler declcncha la
been preparing for war for more than five years. guerre mondiale, il y avait plus de cinq ans que
But at that time, there were in the active service l'Allemagne se preparait a la guerre. Or, a ce
of the United States Army, Navy and Air Force, moment~la, le total du personnel en service actif
only 330,000 men. It was our military weak- dans l'armee, la marine; et les forces aeriennes
ness, not our military strength, that encouraged des Etats-Unis ne depassait. pas 330.000
hommes. C'est notre £aiblesse, et non notre
-Axis aggression.
force militaire, qui a encourage l'agression de
l'Axe.
Apres la premiere guerre mondiale, le J apon
After the ,first world war, Japan was given
a mandate over strategically important islands rec;:ut un mandat sur des iles du sud-ouest du
in the South-West Pacific which bound her to Pacifique ayant une importance strategique,
keep those islands demilitarized. Although the contre l'engagement que ees lles resteraient
evidence showed that Japan was violating the demilitarisees. Bien qu'il fut evident que le
terms of the mandate, the United States delayed Japan violait les termes du mandat, les EtatsMr. BYRNES (United States of America):
The United States supports wholeheartedly the
proposed resolutions\ I first wish to congratulate the members of the Committee on reconciling their differences and reporting the resolutions. They have made a splendid contrib"ution
to the cause of peace. I have learned too of the
splendid assistance rendered the Committee by
the accomplished President of the Assembly, and
I know you will all join me in expressing
appreciation of th~ efforts of the distinguished
representative of Belgium, Mr. Spaak.

1

Annex 73.

1

Annexe 73.

Sixty~second

plenary meeting

1290

in building bases on islands under her sovereignty in the Pacific. The result was that when
the United States was treacherously attacked
at Pearl Barbor, she had no adequately fortified base in the Pacific between Pearl Barbor
and the Philippines. Japan's covenant not to
use the mandated territories as military bases
contained no safeguards to ensure compliance.
Japan's covenant misled the United States, but
it did not restrain Japan. That was our mistake,
and we do not intend again to make that
mistake.

While before the second world war the peaceloving nations were seeking peace through disarmament, aggressor nations were building up
their armaments. And all the while aggressor
nations were building up armaments, they were
claiming that they were being smothered and
encircled by other nations. While we scrapped
battleships, Japan scrapped blueprints. While
we reduced our Army to the size of a large police
force, Germany trained its youth for war.

,\

Too late, those who had taken a leading part
in the struggle for general disarmament before
the second world war discovered that Axis agents
were deliberately organizing and supporting disa.rmament moven1ents in non-Axis countries in
order to render those countries powerless to resist
their Ilggr~ion. Too late, those who had taken
a leading part in the struggle for general disarmament discovered that it was not safe to rely
upon any diSarmament which is not collectivel;y
enforced and made a part of a system of collective security. It will take time, patience and
goodwill to achieve really effective disarmament.
The difficulties are great and the complexities
many. The defence needs of States vary greatly.
The elements which make up the military
lltrength of States likewise vary greatly and
cannot readily be compared or appraised.

Effective disarmament cannot be secured by
any simple mathematical rule. Demobilized divisions can be speedily recalled to the colours. But
a scrapped plane or a scrapped battleship can
never be recommissioned. Disarmament, to be
effective, must look to the future. It is easy for
us now to see what folly it would have been,
when gunpowder was discovered, to start disarming by limiting the use of the bow and arrow.
. ;
·,i

"
:1

We must see to it that disarmament starts with
the major weapons of mass destruction. We must
see to it that disarmament is general and not
unilateral. We must see to it that disarmament
rests not upon general promises which are kept
by some Sta.tes and ignored by other States. We

13 December 1946

Unis tarderent a construire des bases dans des
iles du Pacifique placees sous leur souverainete.
Il en est resulte que, lorsque les Etats-Unis
furent traitreusement attaques a Pearl Barbor,
ils ne disposaient, dans le Pacifique, d'aucune
base suffisamment fortifiee entre Pearl Barbor
et les Iles Philippines. Le pacte par lequel le
Japon s'etait engage a ne pas utiliser les territoires places sous son mandat comme bases
militaires, ne contenait aucune garantie qui en
assurat l'application. Ce pacte fit commettre une
erreur aux Etats-Unis, mais n'arreta pas le
Japon dans ses entreprises. Nous avons commis
la une £aute, et nous entendons ne pas la repeter,
a l'avenir.
Durant la periode qui a precede la secollde
guerre mondiale, alors que les nations pacifiques
cherchaient, par le desarmement, a assurer la
paix, les pays agresseurs accroissaient leurs armements. Et, dans le meme temps Oll ils accroissaient leurs armements, ces pays agr~seurs pretendaient que les autres nations les etouffaient
et les encerclaient. Tandis que nous mettions
au rebut des cuirasses, le J apon mettait au rebut
quelques plans de construction. Tandis que
nous reduisions notre armee a n'etre plus qu'une
importallte force de police, l'Allemagne entralnait ses jeunes gens en vue de la guerre.
Avant la seconde guerre mondiale, lorsque
ceux qui menaient le mouvement en vue du desarmement general, comprirent que les agents
de l' Axe etaient en train d'organiser et de soutenir, dans les pays hors de l'Axe, des campagnes
en faveur du desarmement, afin de diminuer le
potentiel de resistance de ces pays a W1e agression de l'Axe: il etait trap tard. Trop tard encore ceux qui menaient le mouvement en vue du
desarmement general comprirent qu'on ne peut,
sans danger, se fier a un desarmement dont l'execution n'est pas surveillee par un contr&le collectif et qui n'est pas associeS a un systeme de
securite collective. Il faudra du temps, de la
patience et de la bonne volonte pour parvenir a
un desarmement vraiment effectif. Les difficultes sont considerables, les problemes complexes
abondent. En matiere de defense nat,ionale, les
besoins des Etats different grandement; les elements constitutifs de la puissance militaire des
Etats different grandement: il n'est pas facile
d'etablir des estimations et des comparaisons.
Un desarmement effectif ne peut pas ctre assure par l'application de simples formules mathematiques. .Des divisions d6mobilisees peuvent
etre rapidement rappelees sous les drapeaux,
mais un avian ou un navire de guerre mis au
rebut ne peut jamais plus ctre remis en service. Pour desarmer reellement, il faut considererl'avenir. Nous voyons trop bien aujourd'hui
comme il aurait ete absurde, lorsque la poudre a
canon a ete inventee, de commencer le desarmement en limitant l'emploi des arcs et des :f1eches.
Il faut nous assurer que le desarmement commence par les principaux engins de destruction
massive. Il faut nous assurer que le desarmement soit general et non unilateral. Il faut nous
assurer que le desarmement ne depende pas de
promesses de caractere general que certains Etats

13 decembre 1946

1291

must see. to it that disarmament is accompanied
by effective safeguards by way of inspection and
other means under international control whiCh
will protect complying States against the hazards
of violations and evasions.

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

tiendront et que d'autres voudront ignorer. Il
faur nous assurer que le desarmement soit
a~.compapne de garanties reelles sous la forme
mspec~lOns et d'autres mesures sous contr8le
mternatlOnal, a~n ~e proteger les Etats qui executent,.leurs ~bhgatIons, contre les risqucs resultant d mfractlOns et de subterfuges.
We must see to it that these safeguards are so
Il faut .nous assurer que ces garanties sont
clear a~d explicit tha~ there will be no question ~ssez p.recIses et explicites pour que ne puisse
of the rIght of complymg States-veto or no veto etre mls, en doute-veto, ou non-le droit des
-to take immediate action in defense of the rule Etats e~ecu:ant ~eurs obligations, d'entreprenclre
of law. No disarmament system which leaves une act~on Imme,diate pour faire respecter la loi.
law-abiding States weak and helpless in the face Un systeme de desarmement qui laissera les Etats
of aggression Can ever contribute to world peace r,espect~nt la loi, f~ib1es et impuissants devant
and security.
I agresslOn, ne contnbuera jamais a la paix et 1la securitc internationales.
'
But in meeting the problems of disarmament
Mais, lorsqu'on s'occupe de desarrnement il
first things should come first. The first
fa~t co~men~er par le commencement. La prewhich must be undertaken is the control of mIere tache a' entreprendre c'est le controlc de
atomic energy to ensure that it will be used only ~'ener.gie atomiq~~ afin ,d~ s'assurer que cette
for human welb,re and not for deadly warfare. energle ne sera utIhsee qu en vue du bien-etre des
There are other weapons of mass destruction, ~om~es et, non pour l~ur faire 'une guerre amort.
but unless we can meet the challenge of atomic 11 eXIste
. . d autres engms de. destruction massive,
warfare-the most dreadful weapon ever de- maIs SI nous ne pouvons tl'lompher de la menace
vised-we can never meet the challenge of these de .la ~ombe atomique-l'arrne la plus terrifiante
other weapons.
qUI sOlt-nous ne pourrons jamais venir a bout
des problemes que posent ces autres engins.
De mcme que la Grande-Bretagne et le CaThe United States, with Britain and Canada,
have demonstrated their awareness of the grave nada,. les Et~ts-Unis ont montre qu'ils avaient
responsibility inherent in their discovery of the conSCIence de la grave responsibilite qui leur inmeans of applying atomic enerID". In· a world of combait du fait qu'ils avaient decouvert les
uncontrolled armaments, atomic energy. would. moyens d'utiliser 1'energie atomique. Dans un
be an advantage to the United States for many monde ou les armements ne seraient pas regleyears to come. But it is not the desire of the n1entes, l'energie atomique constituerait un
United States to be the leader in an armament avantage pour les Etats-Unis pendant de longues
race. We prefer to prevent, rather than to win, annees; mais les Etats-Unis ne se soucient pas
de tenir la premiere place dans une course al1X
the 'next war.
armements. Nous preIerons prevenir la prochaine guerre plut6t que de la gagner.
Aussi, des que le President Truman a su que
That is why President T~uman announced as
soon as he knew that the atomic bomb would la bombe atomique etait au point, il a annonce
work, that it was our purpose to collaborate with que notre intention etait de collaborer avec les
other nations to ensure that atomic energy autres nations pour faire en sorte que l'energie
atomique ne puisse devenir une menace pour la
should not become a threat to world peace.
paix du monde.
Peu apres, les chefs des trois Gouvernements
Shortly thereafter, the heads of the three Govauxquels
on doit la decouverte de 1'cnergie
ernmentll responsible for the discovery of atomic
energy, met at Washington and urged that the atomique, se sont reunis a Washington et ont
United Nations set up a commission to recom- demande instamment que les Nations Unies
mend proposals for the effective intemational constituent une commission chargee de faim des
control of atomic energy and all other weapons propositions en vue d'un controle international
effectif de l'energie atomique et de tous autres
adaptable for mass destruction.
engins pouvant etre utilises pour des destructions
massives.
Un des objectifs essentiels de n10n voyage a
One of the primary reasons for my trip to
:Moscow in December 1945 Was to ask the Soviet Moscou, en decembre 1945, etait de demander
Union to join with Britain and Canada in spon- a 1'Union sovietique de se joindre a la Grandesoring a resolution to this effect before the Gen- Bretagne et au Canada pour appuyer une resolution dans ce sens a l'Assemblee generale.
eral J\ssen1bly.
Des que le Gouvernement de 1'Union sovi&
As soon as the agreement of the Government
tique
eut pron1is cet appui, la France et la Chine
of the Soviet Union was obtained, France and
furent
egalemcnt sollicitecs et ell.es accentcre?t,
China were also asked and they agreed to join in
sponsoring the resolution. These efforts resulted elles aussi d'appuyer cette resolutIOn. A la Sl1lte
in the unanimous passing of the resolution by de ces efforts la resolution a etc adoptee a
the General Assembly in January, 1946, only l'unanimite p~r l' Assemblee generale, en janvier
six months after the discovery of the aton1ic 1946, soit six mois seulement apres la decouverte
de la bombe aton1ique.
bomb.

task

?

"".';:;::

*", iii!if",,"c

~

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1292

Long discussion in the United Nations and
public debate on the details of United States
proposals have perhaps blurred the real significance and magnitude of United States initiative.
The resolution was no idle gesture on our part.
Having the knowledge of atomic energy and possession of the atomic bomb, we did not seek to
hold it and to threaten the world. We did not
sit back and play for time. We came forward
with concrete proposals designed fairly, effectively and practically to carry out the tasks assigned
to that Commission.

Our proposals, when fully operative, would
leave with the States responsible for the discovery of atomic energy no rights which would not
be shared with other Members of the United
Nations. Our proposals outlaw the use of atomic
weapons and contemplate the disposal of existing
atomic weapons. They set up an international
authority with power to prevent the national
manufacture and use of atomic weapons for war
purposes, and to develop atomic energy for human welfare.

Our proposals also provide effective and practical safeguards against violations and evasions.
They enable States that keep their pledges to
take prompt and collective action against those
who violate their pledges~

,

We do not suggest any diminution of the right
of veto in the consideration of the treaty governing this subject. We do say that once the
trea,ty has become effective, then there can be
no recourse to a veto to save an offender from
punishment.
We are willing to share our knowledge of
ato1p.ic weapons with the rest of the world on the
condition, and only on the condition, that other
nations submit, as we are willing to submit, to
, internationally controlled inspection and safeguards. From the statements made in the
Committees and in the Assembly we have been
encouraged to believe that others are willing
likewise to submit to international inspection.
If other nations have neither bombs nor the
ability to manufacture them, it should be easy
for them to agree to inspection. But the world
should understand that without collective safeguards there can be no collective disarmament.

The resolution we proposed here urges the
expeditious fulfilment by the Atomic Energy
'Commission of 'its terms of reference. Those
terms include the control not only of atomic
energy but the control of other instruments of

13 December 1946

Les longues discussions qui ont eu lieu au sein
de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et les controverses publiques sur les details des propositions americaines ont peut-etre dissimule la signification reelle et l'ampleur de l'initiative prise
par les EtatS-Unis. Cette resolution n'etait pas
un geste futile de notre part. Nous avons
acquis la connaissance de 1'energie atomique et
nous possedons la bombe atomique, mais nollS
n'avons pas cherche a en garder le secret et a
menacer le monde. Nous ne nous sommes pas
retranchCs dans une attitude passive, en cherchant a gagner du temps. Nous sommes venus
apporter des propositions concretes COlll;Ues de
fa~on a permettre a la Commission en question
de remplir sa tache d'une maniere equitable,
effective et pratique.
Le jour OU elles seraient vraiment appliquees
nos propositions ne laisseraient aux Etats qui
ont decouvert l'energie atomique d'autres droits
que ceux qu'ils auraient en commun avec les
autres Membres des Nations Unies. Nos propositions prohibent legalement l'emploi des armes
atomiques et prevoient la destruction des armes
atomiques existantes. Nos propositions prevoient l'institution d'une autorite internationale
qui aurait le pouvoir d'empecher, dans chaque
pays, la fabrication et l'utilisation d'armes
atomiques en vue de la guerre, et qui serait
chargee de developper l'utilisation de l'energie
atomique pour le bien de l'humanite.
Nos propositions prevoient egalement des
garanties pratiques et efficaces contre les violations et les subterfuges. EIles permettent aux Etats
respectueux de leurs obligations de prendre
promptement des mesures collectives contre les
Etats qui violent les leurs.
Nous ne suggerons nullement de restreindre
l'exercice, du droit de veto durant l'examen de
1'instrument diplomatique re1atif a la reglementation des armements, mais nous dec1arons formellement qu'une fois que cet instrument sera
entre en vigueur, il ne pourra plus y avoir de
recours au veto pour epargner le cMtiment a
un Etat qui viole ses obligations.
Nous sommes prets a partager avec le reste
du monde nos connaissances en maticre d'armes
atomiques a la condition-et il s"agit d'une condition sine qua non-que les autres nations se
soumettent, comme nous sommes nOUS-melnes
prets a le faire, a un systeme international de
controle, d'inspection et de garanties. Les
declarations faites dans les commissions et a
l' Assemblee nous ont donne bon espoir que les
autres Etats sont comme nollS prets a se soumettre a une inspection internationale.
Si d'autres nations ne possedent pas de
bombes et n'ont pas non plus la possibilite d'en
fabriquer, elles devraient pouvoir sans peine
accepter l'inspection. En tout cas, le monde
devrait comprendre que, sans garantie collective,
il ne saurait y avoir de desarmement collectif.
La resolution que nous avons presentee demande instamment que la Commission de
l'energie atomique s'acquitte sans retard du
mandat qui lui est confie. Ce mandat comprend
le contrale, non seulement de l'energie atomique,

~

'T

13 decembre 1946

1293

~ass destruction. With its specific studies and
Its accumulated experience that Commission is
b<;st equ~pped to fonnulate plans for dealing
wlth major problems of disarmament.

Soixante-deuxieme seance plenie,.

~ais des autres instruments de destruction masSIve. Du fait des etudes particulieres auxquelles
ell~ s'est Hvde et de l'experience qu'eile a acqUlse, , ce~te Commission est l'organisme le plus
ap~e a elaborer des plans quand il s'agit de
traIter les principales questions de desarmement.
Let us ~o~centrate upon ~hose major weapons
.Co~centrons notr~ attention Sur les armes
and not dISSIpate our energIes on the less impor- prmClpales et ne dispersons pas notre cnergie
tant problems of controlling pistols and hand sur des questions de moindre importance telles
grenades.
qu~ le controle des revolvers et des grenades a
mam.
'
If we are really interested in effective disannaSi nous tenons vraiment a voir se realiser le
ment ~d not merely in talking about it, we dcsarmement et pas seulement a discourir sur ce
should Instruct our representatives on the Atomic probleme, 110US devrions inviter nos represcnEnergy Commission to press forward now with tants a la Commission de l'energie atomique a
its constructive proposals. The Commission has pousser a~tivement l'elaboration des propositions
been at work six months. They can file an constructIves que cette Commission doit preinterim report next week. I do not want the senter. Il y a deja six mois que la Commission
work of that Commission to be side-tracked or travaille; eile peut deposer un rapport provisoire
sabotaged.
la semaine prochaine: je ne voudrais pas voir
les travaux de la, Commission ajoumes indefiniment ou sabotes.
I am glad that the proposed resolution raises,
Je suis heureux que la resolution proposee
in connection with the problem of disarmament, cvoque, au sujet du probleme du desarmement
the question of the disposal of troops and the la question du stationnement des forces arme~
justification of their presence on foreign soil. et de la justification de la presence de telles
Disarmament necessarily raises the question of forces sur des territoires etrangers. Au probleme
the use which may be made of arms and anned du desarmement se trouve liee la question de
forces which are not prohibited. Reducing arma- l'usage qui peut etre fait des armes et des forces
ments will not bring peace if the arms and armees qui restent autorisees. La reduction des'
armed forces that remain are used to undermine armements n'amenera pas la paix si 1'on emcollective security.
ploie les annes et les forces armees qui subsistent
a saper la securite collective.
Les Etats-Unis ont demande avec persistance
The United States has persistently pressed for
the early conclusion of peace treaties with Italy que les traites de paix avec l'Italie et les anciens
and the ex-satellite States. We want to make satellites de l'Axe soient rapidement conclus.
possible the complete withdrawal of troops from Nous voulons rendre possible le retrait complet
those states. The United States has also per- des forces armees stationnees dans ces pays. Les
sistently urged the conclusion of a treaty recog- Etats-Unis ont demande avec la mcme persisnizing the independence of Austria and provid- tance que l'on conclue un traite reconnaissant
ing forthe withdrawal of foreign troops. Austria, 1'independance de l'Autriche et prevoyant le
in our view, is a liberated and not an ex-enemy retrait des forces armees ctrangeres. L'Autriche
country. The United States, United Kingdom est, a nos yeux, un pays libere et non un pays
and the Soviet Union, as signatories of the Mos- ex-ennemi. En tant que signataires de la Decow Declaration of 1943 are obligated to relieve claration de Moscou de 1943, les Etats-Unis, le
her of the burden of occupation at the earliest Royaume-Uni et l'Union sovietique sont tenus
de delivrer le plus tot possible l'Autriche du
possible moment.
fardeau de l'occupation.
Les Etats-Unis estiment que l'occupation d'un
The United States believes that armed occupays
par des forces armees doit ct~e strictem.ent
pation should be strictly limited by the requirements of collective security. For that reason we limitee aux necessites' de la secunte collective.
proposed to the Council of Foreign Ministers C'est pourquoi au Conseil des Ministres des
that we should fix agreed ceilings on the occupa- Affaires etrangeres, nous avons propose que l'on
tion forces in Europe. We could not secure fixe d'un commun accord des plafonds pour les
agreement this week, but we shall continue our effectifs des forces d'occupation en Europe.
efforts to reduce the occupation forces in Eur- Nous n'avons pas pu parvenir.3o un accord cette
ope. We are also prepared to fix agreed ceilings semaine-ci, mais nous poursUlvrons nos efforts
for the occupation forces in Japan and Korea. pour reduire ces forces d'occupation en Europe.
Nous somrnes egalement disposes a f~xer par
entente, des plafonds pour les forces d occupa,
tion au Japon et en Coree:
Le jour de la victoire contre le Japon, ~ous
On V- J Day we had over five million troops
overseas. We had to send with them extensive avions plus de cinq millions d'hommes, s~tIon­
supplies and equipment which could not be dis- nes outre-mer. Nous avions dO expedIer,. en
mcme temps que ces forces armees, des quantlt~s
posed of overnight.
considerab1es d'approvisionnements et de materie! qui ne pouvaient ctre liquidees seance
tenante.

Sixty~second plenary

meeting

1294

But despite the tremendous problem of liquidating our extensive overseas war activites, today we have less than 550,000 troops outside of
American territory. Most of these troops' are in
Germany, Japan and the Japanese Islands,
Korea, Austria and Venezia Giulia.
The great majority of the troops we have on
the territory of the other States outside these occupation areas are supply or administrative personnel. Let me state specifically just what combat troops we have in these other States.
We have a total of 96,000 military personnel
in the Philippines but only about 30,009 are
combat forces, air and ground, and of these
17,000 are Philippine Scouts. These troops are
in the Philippines primarily to back up our
forces in Japan. Substantial reductions are contemplated in the near future.
Of the 19,000 troops we have in China, about
15,000 are combat troops and roughly one-half
of these are today under orders to return home.
We have about 1,500 troops in Panama, excluding the Canal Zone. One thousand of those,
composed of a small air unit and some radar air~arning detachments, can be classified as combat forces. We have, of course, our nonnal protective forces in the Panama Canal Zone proper.

We have no combat units in countries other
than those I have just mentioned.
Our military personnel in Iceland number less
than 600 men.· They include no combat troops.
They are being withdrawn rapidly and all will
he withdrawn by early April 1947, in accordance
with our agreement with the Government of
Iceland. The military personnel have been there
only to maintain one of our air transport lines of
cooununication with our occupation forces in
Germany.
In the Azores, on the southern air transport
communication line to Germany, we have about
300 men. Again there is not a single combat
soldier among them. They are technicians and
administrative officials. They are there under an
agreement with the Government of Portugal.
Our combat troops are in North China at the
request of the Chinese National Government.
Their task is to assist in carrying out the terlllil
of sun-ender with respect to the disarming and
deportation of the Japanese. Their mission i5
nearly completed. Instructions have already
been issued for the return of half of our forces
now in China although the Chinese Government
has urged that they be retained there until
conditions become more stabilized.

13 December 1946

Aujourd'hui, en depit des immenses difficultes
inherentes a la suppression de nos importants
services de guerre outre-mer, le total de nos
effectifs stationnes a l'etranger est inferieur a
550.000 hommes. Ces effectifs sont pour la
plupart en Allemagne, au Japon et dans les lies
japonaises, en Coree, en Autriche et en Venetie
Julienne.
La plus large part de nos effectifs stationnes
sur le territoire d'autres Etats, en dehors de ces
zones d'occupation, consiste en personnel des
services d'approvisionnement ou des services
administratifs. J e vais preciser exactement
l'importance des forces armees combattantes que
nous avons dans ces autres Etats..
Aux Philippines, nous avons en tout 96.000
hommes, mais sur ce nombre, environ 30.000
seulement appartiennent aux forces combattantes de l'armee de terre et de l'aviation, et
17.000 sont des tirailleurs philippins. La mission prindpale de ces troupes stationnees aux
Philippines est de servir de reserve a nos forces
d'occupation du Japon. Nous nous proposons
de reduire sensiblement ces effectifs a bref delai.
Sur les 19.000 hommes que nous avons en
Chine, environ 15.000 appartiennent a des unites
combattantes et la moitie environ de celles-ci a
des maintenant re"u un ordre de rapatriement.
Nous avons environ 1.500 homme& au Panama, non compris la zone du canal; sur cet
effectif, un millier d'hommes, constituant une
petite unite aerienne et des detachements de
reperage aerien par radar, ,peuvent etre classes
comme forces combattantes. Nous avons, naturellement, nos forces armees norm ales de protection dans la zone proprement dite du canal de
Panama.
Nous n'avons pas d'unites combattantes, dans
des pays autres que ceux que je viens de dter.
Notre personnel militaire en Islande compte
moins de 600 hommes et ne comprend aucun
combattant. Nous le retirons rapidement et la
totalite sera evacuee au debut d'avril 1947, conformement a l'accord que nous avons conclu
avec le Gouvernement de l'Islande. Ce personnel militaire ne se trouve Ht que pour maintenir
l'une de nos lignes de communication ,aerienne
avec nos forces d'occupation en Allemagne.
Aux A"ores qui se trouvent sur la ligne sud
de communication aerienne avec l' Allemagne,
nous avons environ 300 hommes. Il n'y a pas
non plus parmi eux un seul combattant. Ce
sont des techniciens, et du personnel des services
administratifs. Leur presence est prevue par
un accord condu avec le Gouvernement du
Portugal.
Celles de nos forces combattantes qui sont
stationnees dans le nord de la Chine sont dans
ce pays a la demande du Gouvernement national chinois. Leur mission est de collaborer a
l'application des conditions de, l'armistice relatives au desarmement et au transfert des
Japonais..Leur tache est presque achevee. Des
ordres de retour ont deja ete donnes a la moitie
de nos forces en Chine hien que le Gouvernement chinois ait insiste pour qu'elles soient
maintenues sur place jusqu'a ce que la situation
soit devenue plus stable.

13 decembre 1946

1295

We have made it clear that our troops will
not become participants in civil strife in China.
But we are eager to do our part, and we hope
other States are eager to do their part, to prevent
civil war in China and to promote a unified
and democratic China. A free and independent
China is essential to world peace and we cannot
ignore or tolerate efforts by any State to retard
the development of the freedom and independence of China. The United States Government
repudiates the suggestion that our troops in
China or elsewhere, with the consent of the
States concerned, are a threat to the internal or
external peace of any country.

Because the representative of the Soviet
Union has referred to our troops in China, it is
fair for me to say that I am confident that the
number of American troops in North China is
far less than the number of Soviet troops in
South Manchuria, in the Port Arthur area.
Under the Finnish Peace Treaty the Soviet
Union acquires the right to lease the Porkkala
naval base in Finland and to maintain troops
there. The temporary presence of a few thousand United States troops in China at the request of that country certainly raises no essentially different question than the permanent
presence of Soviet troops in another country
under treaty arrangements.

It is our desire to live up to the letter and
the spirit of the MOBCOW Declaration. We
do not intend to use our troops on the territories
of other States contrary to the purp08eS and
principles of the United Nations.
The implementation of the Moscow Declaration is not made easier by lOO5e charges or
counter-charges. The Declaration requires consultation and that is the method we should
pursue if we wish to advance the cause of disarmament and of collective security.
Last December at Moscow we consulted tile
Soviet Union and the United Kingdom regarding our troops in China. We have now asked for
consultation in the Council of Foreign Ministers
regarding the number of troops to be retained
in Germany, Poland, Austria, Hungary and
Rumania upon the conclusion of the peace
treaties with the ex-satellite States.
The task before U3 is to maintain collective
security with'scrupulous regard for the liIOvereign
eq uality of all States, This involves· more than
the question of armaments and armed forces.
Aggressor nations do not go to war because they
are anned, but because they want to get with

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniine

Nous avons precise que nos troupes ne participeraient pas aux luttes intestines de la Chine.
Toutefois, nous tehons a faire ce qui est en
notre pouvoir, de meme que, nous l'esperons, les
autres Etats sont decides a le faire, pour empecher une guerre civile en Chine et pour favoriser
l' etablissement d'une Chine unifiee et democratique. Vne Chine libre et independante est
indispensable a la paix du monde et nous ne
pouvons ni feindre d'ignorer ni tolerer les efforts
que peut faire un Etat quelconque en vue de
retarder les progres de la Chine dans la voie de
la liberte et de l'independance. Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis reje~te 1'argumentation
seIon laquelle la presence de forces americaines
en Chine ou ailleurs avec le consentement des
Etats interesses, constituerait une menace pour
la paix interieure ou la securite exterieure d'un
pays quelconque.
Puisque le representant de rUmon sovietique
~ fait allusion a nos forces armees en Chine,
11 me parait bon de dire que je suis convaincu
que les effectifs americains dans le nord de la
Chine sont tres inferieurs aux effectifs sovietiques en Mandchourie meridionale, dans la
region de Port-Arthur.
Par le traite de paix avec la Finlande, l'Union
sovietique acquiert le droit de prendre a bail
la base navale de Porkkala en Finlande et d'y
maintenir des forces armees. Les quelques milliers de soldats americains qui sont temporairement stationncs en Chine, a la demande de ce
pays, ne posent assurement pas un probleme
qui differe essentiellement de celui que cree la
presence permanente de forces armees de l'Union
sovietique dans un pays etranger, en execution
des clauses d'un traite.
Nous desirons respecter dans sa lettre et dans
son esprit la Declaration de Moscou. Nous
n'avons pas l'intention d'utiliser, contrairement
aux buts et aux principes de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, nos forces armees stationnees
sur le territoire d'autres Etats.
La mise en reuvre de la Declaration de
Moscou ne se trouve pas facilitee si l'on se lance
des accusations et contre-accusations sans fondement. Cette declaration prevoit des consultations, et telle est bien la methode que nous
devrions suivre si nous voulons servir la cause
du desarmement et de la securite collective.
En decembre dernier, a Moscou, nous avons
consulte l'Union sovietique et le Royaume-Uni
au sujet de nos forces armees stationnees en
Chine. Nous venons de demander une consultation du Conseil des Ministres des Maires etrangeres au sujet de l'effectif des forces armees qui
seront maintenues en Allemagne, en Pologne,
en Autriche, en Hongrie et en Roumanie a
partir de la conclusion des traites de paix avec
les anciens satellites de l'Axe.
Notre tache est d'assurer la securite collective
en veillant scrupuleusement au respect du prin-.
cipe de l'egalitcS souveraine de tous les Etats.
Ceci depasse la question des armements et des
forces annees. Les pays agresseurs ne partent
pas en gue~re parce qu'ils sont armes, mais

f.'I
Sixty-second plenary meeting

1296

their arms things which other nations will not
freely accord to them. Aggressor nations attack
not only because they are armed but because
they believe others have not the armed strength
to resist them. Sovereignty can be destroyed not
only by armies but by a war of nerves and by
organized political penetration. World peace
depends upon what is in our hearts more than
upon what is written in our treaties.

Great States must strive for understandings
which will not only protect their own legitimate
security requirements but also the political independence and integrity of the smaller States.
It is not in the interest of peace and security
that the basic power relationships among great
States should depend upon which political party
comes to power in Iran, Greece or in China.
Great States must not permit differences among
themselves to tear asunder the political unity of
smaller States. Then, smaller States must recognize that true collective security requires their
co-operation just as much as that of the larger
States. Without the co-operation of large States
and small States, all of. our disarmament pla;ns
are doomed to failure.

A race for armaments, a race for power is not
in the interest of any country or of any people.
We want to stop the race for armaments and we
want to stop the race for power. We want to be
partners with all nations, not to make war, but
to keep the peace. We want to uphold the rule
of law among nations. We want to promote the
freedom and well-being of all peoples in a
friendly civilized world.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Makin, representative of Aus-

13 December 1946

parce qu'ils veulent obtenir par les armes ce
que, librement, les autres· nations ne consentent
pas a leur accorder. Les pays agresseurs attaquent, non seulement parce qu'ils ont des annes,
mais encore parce qu'ils croient que d'autres
pays n'ont pas la force armce qU'il faut pour
leur resister. La souverainete peut etre detruite
non seulement par des armees, mais encore par
la guerre des nerfs et par la penetration politique
organisee. La paix du monde depend bien plus
de ce qui est dans nos creurs, que de cc qui est
inscrit dans nos traites.
Les grands Etats doivent s'efforcer de realiser
des ententes qui prob~geront, non seulement leurs
booins legitimcs de securite, mais aussi l'independance et l'integrite politiques des petits Etats.
11 n' est pas souhaitable pour la paix et la securite que les relations fondamentales entre les
grands Etats dependent de la question de savoir
que! est le parti politique qui arrive au pouvoir
en Iran, en Grece ou en Chine. Les grands
Etats ne doivent pas laisser les divergences qui
se produisent entre eux detruire l'unite politique
des petits Etats. A leur tour, les petits Etats
doivent comprendre que, pour que la securite
collective existe vraiment, il faut qu'ils y collaborent tout autant que les grandes Puissances.
Sans la cooperation de tous les Etats, grands et
petits, tous nos plans de desarmement sont
condamnes a l'echec.
Dne course aux armements, une course a la
suprematie ne sert l'interet d'aucun pays
et d'aucun peuplc. Nous voulons mettre un
terme a la course aux armements et aussi a la
course a la suprematie. Nous voulons nous
associer a toutes les nations, non pour faire la
guerre mais pour maintenir la paix. Nous vouIons afl'ermir le regne du droit parmi les nations.
Nous voulons favoriser le progrcs de la liberte'
et du bien-etre chez tous les peuples, le progres
de la bonne entente et de la civilisation dans
le monde.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M.
Makin, representant de I'Australie.

tralia.

Mt. MARIN (Australia): The passing of this
resolution will mean the commencement of a
great work. It is an expreBSion of our common
resolve to take a path leading towar.ds peace and
security, and of our determination to advance towards that goal side by side. We do 'not know
yet where this day will stand in history. That
depends on the way in which we work in the
coming years. All we say, and that is all we can
say at this moment, is that we will do our best,
placing confidence in each other, to attain the
high purposes of this resolution and to follow the
principles which it lays down.
At the commencement of the disarmament
debate the Australian delegation presented a
proposal on disarmament, and we are happy to
find that' all of the principles which we then
advanced have been incorporated in the present
text.

M. MARIN (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
L'adoption de cette resolution marquera le debut
d'une grande reuvre. Cette resolution exprime
notre volonte commune de nOus engager sur une
voie qui conduise a la paix et a la securite et
notre ferme intention' de marcher cote a cote
vers ce but. Nous ne savons pas encore queUe
place cette journee occupera dans l'histoire; ceIa
dependra de la manihe dont nous travaillerons
au cours des annees a venir. Tout cc que nous
disons, et c'est tout ce que nous pouvons dire
pour le moment, c'est que nous nouS efforcerons,
dans un esprit de confiance mutuelle, .d'~tteindr~
les buts eleves et d'appliquer les pnnclpes qUi
sont enonces dans cette resolution.
Au commencement du debat sur la question,
la delegation australienrie a presente une proposition relative au desarmement; nous sommes
heureux de constater que tous les principes alors
enonces par nous, ont ete incIus dans le texte
soumis a l'AssemblCe.

,

13 ·decembre 1946

1297

Those principles were:
(a) The Security Council should commence the formulation of plans on the regulation and reduction of armaments for submis-.
sion to Members of the Vnited Nations.

(b) The fulfilment of the terms of reference of the Atomic Energy Commission
should be expedited.
(c) The reduction and regulation of armaments and the prohibtion of weapons of mass
destruction should be based on an international convention or conventions.

(d) The system should include effective
safeguards to protect complying States against
the hazards of violation and evasions.
(e) For the above purpose there should be
established a special international organ for
control and inspection, with powers adequate
for the discharge of its duties.

To speak frankly, we do not think the text of
the resolution is as clear and as precise as it
might be. We would have preferred a much
simpler and much more direct resolution sufficient for the single purpose of commencing the
work of formulating disarmament plans. But
any clumsiness in the text is the result of its history and the intensive work done in a succession
of Committees in bringing together the various
ideas of various delegations.
We believe from our participation in the work
of the Committees and from hearing the statements made by the leaders of various delegations
that there can now be no doubt as to what the
text of the resolution is intended to mean, and
that, among other principles and statements of
opinion, it contains those principles to which our
delegation has from the commencement of the
debate attached first importance, because we regard them as essential to the building of a sound
and effective system of disarmament.
In conclusion, I should like to express our ap·
preciation of the spirit shown by the great
Powers in bending their strength to serve the
common good. The 'way to disarmament can
only be opened when they take down the barriersand when they pledge themselves to disarm
and to co-operate in a system of regulation and
reduction of arms. By joining in this resolution,
they have given earnest proof of their intention
to do so, and have raised the hopes of men in
all lands. At the same time the nations who are
not so great have a deep interest in disarmament
and a very real part to play.
It is perhaps significant that this resolution
now before us contains a good measure of the
suggestions put forward by the smaller nations.
Here will be found, in addition to the words and
the ideas of the great Powers, the words and the

Soixante-deuxieme seance pJenrere

Ces principes etaient les smvants:
a) Le Conseil de securite devrait commencer a elaborer des plans pour la regIementation et la reduction des armements, et ces
plans devraient etre soumis aux Membres des
Nations Vnies.
b) La Commission de l'energie atomique
devrait s'acquitter sans retard de son mandat.
c) La reduction et la reglementation des
armements, ainsi que l'interdiction des armes
de destruction massive, devraient etre regies
par une ou plusieurs conventions internationales.
d) Le systeme devrait comprendre des
garanties efficaces protegeant les Etats respectueux de leurs obligations contre les risques
de violation et de subterfuge.
e) Pour la realisation des fins ci-dessus, i1
faudrait etablir un organe international special de contr01e et d'inspection, dote de pouvoirs suffisants pour lui permettre de s'acquitter de ses fonctions.
Pour parler franchement, nous estimons que
le texte de la resolution proposee n'est ni aussi
clair ni aussi precis qu'il pourrait l'etre. Nous
aurions prefere une resolution beaucoup plus
simple qui visat directernent et uniquement a
permettre de commencer l'elaboration des plans
de desarmement. Mais les imperfections de ce
texte proviennent de la maniere dont il a ete
etabli et de l'activite intense qui a ete d6ployee
dans les differentes Commissions en vue de coordonner les idees cxprimees par les delegations.
Apres avoir participe aux travaux des Commissions et entendu les declarations faites par
les chefs des diverses delegations, nous estimons
qu'aucun doute ne peut plus subsister sur ce que
la resolution entend signifier et sur le fait qu'el1e
contient, entre autres notions generales et declarations de principes, les principes memes aUKquels la delegation australienne a attache, depuis
le debut de la discussion, une importance capitale, parce qu'elle les considere comme essentiels
a l'edification d'un systeme solide et efficace de
desannement.
'
Pour conclure, je tiens a. dire combien nous
avons apprecie l'elevation d'esprit dont les grandes Puissances ont fait preuve en mettant leUT
force au service· du bien commun. La vote du
desarmement ne s'ouvrira que lorsque les grandes
Puissances abaisseront les barrieres, lorsqu'elles
s'engageront a desarmer et a participer a un
systeme de reglementation et de reduction des
armements. En s'associant a cette resolution, les
grandes Puissances ont nettement marque leur
intention d'agir dans ce sens, et fait nahre ainsi
un espoir chez les hommes de tous les pays. Les
nations qui ne sont pas aussi grandes ont, eUes
aussi, un interet vital au succes du desarmement,
et un role tres important a. jouer.
Peut-etre est-ce un fait significatif que 1'on
ait incorpore a la resolution qui est actuellement
soumise a. l'Assemblee un bon nombre des suggestions faites par les petites nations. On peut y
trouver, en efIet, outre les idees exprimces par

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1298

13 December 1946

ideas of countries such as Argentina, Australia, les grandes Puissances, les idees exprimees par
Belgium, Canada, Egypt, and India, and of des pays te1s que l'Argentine, l'Australie, la Belothers who took part in the work of the Dis- gique, le Oanada, l'Egypte, l'Inde et d'autres
armament Sub-Oommittee. Furthermore, the encore qui ont pris part aux travaux de la Soustext makes it clear that all the Members of the Oommission du desarmement. De plus, il ressort
United Nations are concerned. When the plans c1airement du texte que la resolution interesse .
have been formulated they will be submitted to tous les Membres des Nations Dnies. Lorsque
all Members and will be considered by them at a les plans de desarmement auront Cte elabores, ils
special session of the General Assembly. In the seront soumis a tous les Membres qui les examimaking of the conventions' and in the applica- neront au cours d'une session speciale de
tion of the conventions, the smaller Powers have l'Assemblee generale. Les petites Puissances
an essential role and a constant interest. No sys- auront un role essentie1 a jouer quand il s'agira
tem of disarmament can be complete and effec- d'etablir puis d'appliquer les conventions, et
tive without them. Their own security will al- leurs interets y seront constarnment en jeu. Auways be imperilled unless there is disarmament. cun systeme de desarmement ne saurait etre
All nations, great and small, must work together. complet nL efficace sans la participation des
petites Puissances. Leur propresecurite sera
toujours menaoee tant que le desarmement
n'aura pas ete effectue. Toutes les nations,
grandes et petites, doivent travailler e~ commun
cette reuvre.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. El-Sanhoury; representative of
Egypt.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. EISanhoury, representant de l'Egypte.

Mr. El-SANHOURY (Egypt) (translated from
French): I note with the greatest pleasure that
the question of disarmament has met with general agreement in the First Oommittee, particularly with regard to the. principle of the general
regulation and reduction of armaments, the total
prohibition of weapons of mass destruction and
the institution of an effective system of control
and inspection.
There is no nobler or higher task than that
which we can undertake at this meeting by voting unanimously for the resolution which has
already been adopted unanimously by acclamation in the First Oommittee.
The essential purpose of our Organization is
to ensure international peace and security. However, peace and security can only be established
by serious and bold efforts towards disannament,
in order to increase general confidence, because,
after all, the guarantee of security depends on
the confidence which the Powers have in each
other.
After so many ordeals, the question of security
cannot be separated from that of disannament.
The resolution before us quite rightly emphasizes, in paragraph 7, the close link which exists
between the two questions.
I shall confine myself here to elaborating one
of the essential points stated in this very important paragraph, the point relating to the· immediate withdrawal of foreign troops stationed
on the territory of Member States.
It is obvious that every Member State enjoys
full sovereignty; that is the very foundation of
our Organization. This foundation is defined in
the Charter in the clearest and most explicit
fashion. Article 2 states that the. Organization
is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members. Furthermore, acc?rding to the Oharter itself, one of the prinCIpal purposes of the United Nations is to develop friendly relations among nations based on

M. El-SANHOURY (Egypte): Je constate avec
le plus grand plaisir que la question du desarmement a ete, au sein de la Premiere Oommission,
l'objet d'un accord general qui s'est particuliere.
ment manifeste sur le principe de la reglementation et de la reduction generales des armements,
ainsi que sur l'interdiction totale des armes de
destruction massive et sur l'institution d'un systeme efficace de controle et d'inspection.
Il n'y a pas de tftche plus noble et plus elevee
que cene que nous pouvons entreprendre en
cette seance en approuvant unanimement la
resolution deja adoptee a l'unanimite et par acclamation par la Premiere Oommission.
Le but essentiel de notre Organisation est
d'assurer la paix et la securite internationales.
Or, la paix et la securite ne peuvent etre etablies
que par des efforts serieux et hardis entrepris en
vue du desarmement, afin d'accroltre la confiance generale car, apres tout, la garantie de la
securite est fonction de la confiance que leg Puissances ont les unes envers les autres.
Apres tant d'epreuves subies, on ne saurait
separer la question de la securite de celle du
desarmement. La resolution qui nous est soumise releve tres justement, dans son paragraphe
7, le lien etroit qui existe entre les deux questions.
Je me borne a examiner ici Pun des points
essentiels qu'affinne ce paragraphe tres important, celui re1atif au retrait sans delai des forces
etrangeres stationnees sur des territoires d'Etats
Membres.
Il est evident que tout Etat Membre jOllit
de sa pleine souverainete; c'est la base meme
de notre Organisation. On trouve cette base
definie dans la Oharte de la fac;on la plus
claire et la plus explicite. L'Article 2 dit en ciiet
que POrganisation est fondee sur le principe de
l' egalit'e souveraine de tous ses Membres. L'un
des buts principaux des Nations Unies, se10n la
Oharte elle-meme, est d'ailleurs de deve10pper
entre les Nations des relations amicaIes fondees

13 decembre 1946

1299

respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples.
Sovereign equality is, therefore, a rule of international public law. No Member State can,
even by a voluntary act, abolish or diminish its
sovereign equality without losing, by this very
act, its right to membership of our Organization.
Now, it goes without saying that the presence
of foreign troops on the territory of a Member
State might constitute a violation of its inde. pendence, a diminution of its sovereignty. This
is particularly the case when the presence of
troops is aggravated by occupation or control
imposed on that country. It is with this principle in view that paragraph 7 of the resolution
under discussion recommends the immediate
withdrawal of foreign troops stationed on the
territory of Member States. This is the general
rule on the question. That must be borne in
mind.
There is, however, an exception to this rule;
that is in cases where foreign troops are stationed on the territory of the State concerned
with its freely and publicly expressed consent.
This exception, like others, must be limitatively
interpreted. An essential condition is that there
should first be free and public consent given by
the State on whose territory the foreign troops
are stationed. This consent may take the form
of a treaty, an agreement or any other arrangement. But whatever form it takes, it must not
be vitiated by violence or pressure; it must be
free, spontaneous and public. Any consent extorted by force, intimidation, constraint or
threat of armed force is not valid. Where there
is force, there can be no free consent.

This condition of free consent is not the only
one. There is another condition to be fulfilled in
order that the presence of foreign troops on the
territory of a Member State may be justified;
the consent, whatever form it may take, whether
it is expressed in a treaty, an agreement or any
other arrangement, must be in accordance with
the letter and the spirit of the Charter. Although necessary, the fact that the consent is
free is insufficient. In addition, the consent must
not infringe upon the imperative fundamental
principles of the Charter. We have just seen
that one of these imperative principles is that of
the sovereign equality of Member States. According to this principle, we have already
pointed out that the said Member State cannot,
even by a freely negotiated treaty, renounce an
essential attribute of its sovereignty.
This is a point I must dwell on for a moment.
When foreign troops are stationed on the territory of a Member State, even with the latter's
consent, it is not possible to determine at once
whether the presence of these troops is in accordance with the principle of the sovereign
equality of this State or not. Everything depends on the purpose and nature of the presence

Soixanfe~deuxieme seance

pleniere

sur le respect du principe de l'egalite des droits
des peuples et de leur droit a disposer d'euxmemes.
L'egalite souveraine est par consequent une
regIe du droit public international. Aucun Etat
Membre ne peut, meme par un acte volontaire,
abolir ou diminuer son egalite souveraine sans
encourir par cela meme la decheance de son
droit a etre Membre de notre Organisation.
Or, i1 va sans dire· que la presence de troupes
etrangeres sur le territoire d'un Etat' Membre
pourrait constituer une violation de son independance, une diminution de sa souverainete.
C'est notamment le cas, lorsque le stationnement
de troupes est double d'occupation ou de
contrale impose au pays. C'est en partant de
ce principe que le paragraphe 7 de la resolution en cours d'examen recommande le retrait
sans delai des troupes etrangeres stationnees sur
le territoire d'un Etat Membre. Telle est la
regIe generale en cette matiere. 11 faut le retenir.
11 est cependant que exception a cette regIe;
c'est le cas dans lequel les troupes etrangeres se
trouvent stationnees sur le territoire de l'Etat
interesse avec son consentement librement et
publiquement exprime. Comme d'autres exceptions, cette exception doit etre limitativement
interpretee. 11 faut tout d'abord qu'on se trouve
devant un consentement libre et public de la
part de l'Etat sur le territoire duquelles troupes
etrangeres sont stationnees. Ce consentement
peut revetir la forme d'un traite, d'un accord ou
de tout autre arrangement. Mais, quelle que
soit la forme qu'il prenne, il ne doit pas etre
entache du vice de violence ou de pression; il
doit etre libre, spontane et public. Le consentement arrache par la force, l'intimidation, la
contrainte, la menace de forces armees n'est
point valable. La ou la force apparalt, le libre
consentement disparalt.
Cette condition du libre consentement n'est
pas la seule. 11 est une autre condition a remplir
pour que le stationnement de troupes etrangeres
sur le territoire d'un Etat Membre se jwtifie;
il faut que le consentement, sous quelque fonne
qu'il se presente, qu'il soit exprime dans un
traite, un accord ou tout autre arrangement,
soit compatible avec la lettre et l'esprit de la
Charte. Bien que necessaire, le fait que le con~
sentement est libre, n'est pas suffisant. Le,consentement doit en outre ne point deroger aux
principes fondamentaux imperatifs de la
Charte. Or, nous venons de voir que l'un de
ces principes imperatifs est celui de l'egalite
souveraine des Etats Membres. En vertu de ce
principe, nous avons deja fait remarquer qu'un
Etat Membre ne peut, meme par un traite librement negocie, renoncer a l'attribut essentiel de
sa souverainete.
Je m'arrete quelque peu sur ce point. Lorsque
des troupes etrangeres se trouvent stationnees
sur le territoire d'un Etat Membre, meme avec
le consentement do celui-ci, il n'eat pas possible
de declarer de prime abord si ce stationnement
est compatible avec le principe de l'egaIite
souveraine de cet Etat ou lui est contraire. Tout
depend du but et du caractere de la presence

Sixty-second plenary meeting

13 December 1946

1300

of these troops. If they are stationed there f?r a de ces troupes. Si le setationnement a lieu pour
lengthy period and for the purpose. of domma- une duree prolongee et dans un but de dominal'independance et a la
tion, the, independence and sovereIgnty of the tion il y a atteinte
State has been violated. If, on the contrary, the sou~erainete de l'Etat. Si, au contraire, le sta·
presence of troops implies no idea of domina- tionnement n'implique aucune idee de domination, and has for its sole purpose th~ perform- tion et a pour unique but l'accomplissement
ance of a legitimate task which is in conformity d'une tache legitime et con£orme aux fins et
with the purposes and principles ascribed the principes assignes aux Nations Unies, par. la
United Nations by the Charter, such a state of Charte, un tel etat de choses ne se heurte pDillt
principe de l'egalite souveraine des Etats: la
affairs does not conflict with the principle of the
presence
des troupes etrangeres est alors comsovereign equality of States; and the presence
patible
avec
la Charte.
of foreign troops is then in accordance with the
Charter.
Tel est le critere auquel on doit s'arreter pour
This is the criterion which must be adopted
to determine whether an agreement or a treaty determiner si un accord ou traite portant sur le
relating to the presence of foreign troops is or is stationnement de troupes etrangcres est comnot in accordance with the letter and spirit of patible ou non avec la lettre et l'esprit de la
the Charter. It is a criterion which derives from Charte. C'est un critere tire de la nature des
the nature of things, the text of the Charter and choses, du texte de la Charte et des principes
the fundamental principles of international law. fondamentaux du droit intemationaL
Jusqu'ici, nOUli n'avons envisage que l'aspect
Hitherto, we have only considered of the legal
aspect of the question. I shall now touch on the juridique du probleme. Il est temps d'aborder
l'aspect politique, qui n'est pas moins important.
political aspect, which is 110 less important.
Le stationnement de troupes etrangeres sur
The presence of foreign troops on the territory
of a State, if this is not in accordance with the , le territoire d'un Etat, au cas ou ce stationneCharter, constitutes an international situation ment n'est pas compatible avec la Charte, consfraught with danger. The resultant suspicions, titue une situation intemationale pleine de
anxiety and disturbances cannot be exaggerated. dangers. On ne saurait exagerer les soup<;ons,
les inquietudes et les troubles qui en resultent.
D'une part, cette situation comporte une
Firstly, such a situation constitutes a serious
threat, a direct infringement on the independ- grave menace, une atteinte directe a l'indepenence and freedom of the State whose territory dance et la liberte du pays dont le territoire
is occupied by foreign troops, hence the constant est occupe par des troupes etrangeres, d'ou le
friction, continual disturbances and menacing heurt continu, les troubles incessants, et I'instainstability. Secondly, the effect of such an abnor- bilite mena~ante. D'autre part, l'influence de
mal situation on international peace and security cette situation anormale sur la paix et la securitt
is no less serious.
intemationales n'est pas moins grave.
As I said last Tuesday, the presence of troops
Ainsi que je l'ai dit mardi demier, le stationno the territory of other States implies a policy nement de troupes sur les territoires d'autres
of unilateral defence. This old, obsolete system, Etats implique une politique de defense par
with its indispensable corollaries-the system of action unilaterale. Ce vieux systeme suranne,
the balance of power and of spheres of influence avec ses corollaires indispensables-le systeme de
~firmly established the regime of secrecy and l'equilibre des Puissances et celui des zones
fear. As Sir Hartley Shawcross has well said, the d'influence - avait fortement etabli la politique
cause of peace has never been furthered by du secret et de la peur. Et, comme l'a fort
secrecy and fear and never will be.
bien dit Sir Hardey Shawcross, le secret et la
peur n'ont jamais servi et ne serviront jamais la
cause de la paix.
For the system of,unilateral defence the CharA la place du systeme de d6fense unilateraIe.
ter has substituted that of universal defence la Charte a institue celui de la defense univerwhich goes even further than collective defence~ s~lle, encore. plus etendue que la defense collec-

a.

a4

a

If we really wish to conform to the directives

tive.,

.Si ,:,raiment nous voulons, conformement aux
dlrecuves de la Charte, preserver les generations
futures des fIeaux de la guerre, proclamer a
nouveau notre foi en les droits fondamentaux
de l'hornme, en la dignite et la valeur de la
personne humaine, cl1eer les conditions necessaires, au maintien de la justice, ne pas faire
usage de la force et des armes sauf dans I'in·
teret cornmun, urnI' nos forces pour le maintien
de la paix et de la securite mondiaJes, nous
d~ons nous attacher ala politique de la defense
ull1verselle et ne point nous en ecarter.
The decisio~ will depend upon you. It will, I
C'est ae vous que dependra la decision. Elle
hope, be unammous and it will doubtless mark a
sera, je l'espere, unanime, et elIe marquera sans
new era in the history of mankind.
doute une ctape nouvelle dans I'hi<;toire de
.l'humanite.
of the Charter and save generations to come
from the scourge of war, to re-affirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in th~ dignity and
~orth of the human person, to establish conditIOns under which justice can be maintained t~
ensure that armed forces shall not be used ;ave
in the.con;m?n inter~t and to unite our strength
to rnamtam mternatlOn~1 peace and security, we
must adhere to the policy of universal defence
and not withdraw from it.

13 decembre 1946

1301

Soixante-deuxieme seance preniere

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Bevin, representative of the
United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: 'Je donne la parole
M. Bevin, representant du Royaume-Dni. !

Mr. BEVIN ( United Kingdom): I desire to
make just a few observations on this problem
of disarmament and security. Like the United
States we were involved in the production of the
atomic weapon, and immediately after the war
was over my Government took steps, through
Prime Minister Attlee, to raise the issue of obtaining control of this deadly weapon. This resulted in the conference of the three producing
Powers held in Washington last year. Our great
desire has been to try to control the development
of this discovery, so wonderful if used for peaceful purposes, but such a deadly thing if used for
war; and to try and find a way, as is so essential
in the development of confidence between nations, which will make control and use efficient.

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais simplement presenter que!-

Therefore we entered into the agreement for
the setting up of the Atomic Energy Commission.
We regard ourselves as bound by that decision
now and are pledged to support the Atomic
Commission until it has completed its task. The
task it has to perform is one of the most difficult
that has been given to any Commission to perform. It will need very great care, and if I may
suggest, it cannot be settled if it is dealt with on
a basis of political conflict. It can only achieve
success if all the parties to that Commission bend
their energy and intellects to try and discover
the right solution.

I believe, and my Government believes, that
it is possible to separate this new discovery of
atomic energy (rom the dangers of being used
for war, providing all Powers can be brought to
realize their responsibility.
Therefore, the first point I want to make is
that in any consideration of this problem, we
cannot be diverted or cannot agree to be diverted from the work and the responsibilities of
the Atomic Commission which has already done
so much.
Turning to the general question of disarmament, I said in the Committee, and I repeat
here, that we have been engaged as a country
. in two long wars, and I think the whole Assembly will agree that whatever may be said about
us we fought on the right side; that is to say,
we fought against the aggressor on both occasions, and we were in it from the start, to the
end and our people never flinched and never
failed.
Obviously then, there c'an be no country in
the world that has a greater desire to see peace,
disarmament and security, which though three
words are really one thing: that is, collective
action by a world government organization

ques observations sur le probleme du desarmement et de la securite. qomme les Etats-Unis,
nous av;ons participe la fabrication de l'arme
atomique, et des la fin de la guerre, notre
Gouvernement, par l'intermediaire du Premier
Ministre Attlee, a entrepris de poser la que~tion
du controle de cet engin de mort. I1 en est
resulte qu'une conference des trois Puissances
productrices s'est tenue
Washington l'annee
derniere. ~ous desirons ardemment que l'on
parvienne a controler l'exploitation de cette decOllverte, merveilleuse quand on la fait servir a.
des buts pacifiques, mais qui devient un si terrible instrument de mort quand on l'emploie a
la guerre; nous voulons aussi trouver, et ceci est
indispensable pour accroltre la confiance entre
nations, une methode qui permette de controler
et d'utiliser au mieux cette decouverte.
C'est pour cette raison que le Royaume-Uni
s'est associe la decision d'instituer la Commission de l'energie atomique. Nous nous estimons
lies desormais par cette decision, et nous avons
pris l'engagement d'appuyer l'action de cette
Commission atomique jusqu'a l'entier accomplissement de sa tache. Cette tache est l'une des
plus difficiles qu'une commission ait eu a accomplir; il faudra y apporter un~ grande attention, et je me permets de signaler qu'il ne sera
pas possible d'aboutir a une solution si 1'0n se
place sur le terrain de l'opposition politique. La
Commission ne pourra reussir dans sa tache que
si tous les membres s'appliquent de toute leur
energie et de toute leur intelligence a trouver la
bonne solution.
Je suis persuade, et mon Gouvernementl'~st
aussi, que le danger que cette recente decouverte de l'energie atomique soit utilisee a des
fins de guerre, peut etre ecarte a condition que
prendre constoutes les Puissances viennent
cience de leurs responsabilites.
En consequence, le premier point que je veux
etablir est que, lors de tout examen de ce
probleme, nous ne devons pas detourner ou
laisser detoumer notre attention des travaux et
de la mission confies cette Commission atomique qui a deja accompli tant de choses.
Pour revenir a la question generale du desarmement, j'ai dit a la Commission et je le
repete ici: mon pays a fait deux longues guerres,
et je crois que tous les membres de l'Assemblee
s'accorderont a reconnaitre que,. quoi que 1'0n
puisse dire de ce pays; il a combattu du bon
cote, c'est-a-dire que, par deux fois, nouS avons
combattu l'agresseur, nous avons lutte des le
debut et jusqu'a la fin sans que notre peuple
cede ou renonce jamais.
Nul pays au monde, c'est evident, ne peut,
plus que nous, desirer la paix, le desarmement,
la securit6, et ces trois idees, en realite, n'en
font qu'une: l'action ~ollective exercee par une
organisation gouvernementale mondiale, capa-

a

a

a

a

a

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1302

1:

13 December 1946

ble de maintenir la paix en exer~ant cette
action collective contre l'audacieux, quel qu'il
soit, qui, a un moment quelconque, voudrait
jouer le role d'agresseur. Je repete que nul pays
au monde plus que le notre, n'a interet a voir
ce resultat atteint, et ne le desire plus vivement.
The Assembly will pardon me, I am sure, if
L'Assemblee me permettra, j'en suis sur, de
I say that we approach it with caution; that the dire que nous abordons ce probleme avec circarrying of resolutions, compromise resolutions, conspection; et que si l'on adopte des resolutions,
without careful study of long duration and des resolutions faites de compromis, sans qu'elles
deliberate intent may mislead the public into a aient ete l'objet d'une etude attentive longuefalse sense of security. That is what happened ment poursuivie et resolument menee, on risque
in 1919. The document that was produced in de tromper l'opinion en faisant naitre, a tort,
the League of Nations was perfect. But before un sentiment de securite. Ce fut le cas en 1919.
we knew where we were, first one nation had La Societe des Nations avait etabli un instrugone, then another nation had .gone. Even ment parfait. Mais, avant que 1'0n ait eu le
then, my country proceeded first by promoting temps de savoir ou 1'0n en etait, un pays s'est
the limitation of naval armaments, and secondly retire, un autre a suivi. Meme dans ces condiby promoting the Disarmament Conference at tions, mon pays a favorise d'abord la limitation
Geneva, to try and get some sane approach to des armements navals, puis il a donn6 son appui
this problem of war and its dangers. But while a la Conference du desarmement de Geneve, afin
the very act was being performed, let me remind de tenter d'ouvrir la voie a une solution du
the United Nations, with all that had been put probleme de la guerre et de ses dangers. Or,
down, one nation admitted to the League was dans le meme temps ou cette action etait menee
secretly, designedly, violating it long before they - je voudrais rappeler ces faits aux Nations
withdrew. In the end, it flouted the whole Unies - et en depit de tout ce qui avait ete
international organization.
etabli, une nation qu'on avait admise a la Societe des Nations violait secretement et d6liberement ses engagements a I'egard de cette Societe,
et cela bien avant qu'elle s'en retire. En fin de
compte, ce pays s'est moque de toute l'organisation internationale.
11 nous semble donc que deux actions sont
Therefore, there seems to us to be two things
necessaires:
i1 ne faut pas seulement poursuivre
necessary: not merely to prosecute disarmament
but to organize the pacific nations, the pacifist I'reuvre du desarmement, il faut encore que les
nations, the liberty-loving nations, so that those nations pacifiques, les nations pacifistes, les nawho love liberty and democracy are ready to tions aimant la liberte, s'organisent afin que
defend it notwithstanding their pacifism and ceux qui aiment la liberte et la democratie soient
prets a de£endre cet ideal en depit de leur
their love of peace.
pacifisme et de leur amour de la paix.
C'est dans cet esprit que mon pays aborde la
It is in that sense that my country is studying
questum,
et je declare a toutes les nations prethis, and I say to every nation represented in
this great Assembly, we are ready, ready at sentes a cette AssembIee que nous sommes prets
any moment, to supply you with any informa- a tout instant a vous fournir tous renseignements
tion you desire in order to give effect to the que vous pouvez desirer en vue de donner effet
Charter of the United Nations. We are ready aux dispositions de la Charte des Nations Unies.
to discuss any scheme, and indeed, to bring the Nous sommes prets a discuter tout plan propose,
benefit of such experience as we have to bear to et prets, en fait, a apporter a cette etude le fruit
get a correct scheme that we believe will work. de l'experience que nous avons acquise, afin
We are not influenced at all if resolutions are d'etablir un bon plan qui nous paraisse appliput on this agenda for any other purpose than cable. Nous ne nous laisserons influencer en
the carrying out of obligations under the Char- aucun cas, si 1'0n vient a porter a l'ordre du
ter. If it is done-and I want to be quite jour des resolutions ayant un tout autre but que
frank-to pick out a nation, or to put it on the d'executer les dispositions de la Charte. Si ce
spot, or to use it for propaganda, however much cas se produit - je veux etre franc - si 1'0n vise
we may be abused, we cannot sacrifice the in- un pays, si on le prend pour cible, si 1'on agit
terest of our people on that account. But we ainsi a des fins de propagande: de quelque
will go deeply, soundly and honestly, with any fa~on qu'on nous maltraite, nous n'accepterons
otheD'nation that will come, into this great study. pas pour cela de sacrifier les interets de notre
peuple. Par contre, nous apporterons notre concours entier, fermeet loyal, a toute nation qui
participera a l'etude de ce grand probleme.
M. Byrnes vient, au nom du Gouvernement
Mr. Byrnes on behalf of the United States
na.~ made references to the action of that great des Etats-Unis, de donner un aper~u des mesures
country on demobilisation and the changes in de demobilisation prises par ce grand pays et de
the forces. I am not in possession here at this la reorganisation de ses forces armees. .T e n'ai
Assembly of detailed figures but we have an- pas ici les chiffres detailles concernant le
which can secure the peace and which will act
collectively at all times against anyone who dares
to attempt the role of aggressor. No country, I
say, in the world has a greater interest or a
greater desire to see that accomplished.

h

n
£1
e
c
t

11

a

SA

1

t

(

f

j

t

t

,'"

13 decembre 1946

1303

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

Royaume-Uni mais ils ant ete donnes au Parlement britannique. Naus avons reduit nos forces
armees qui comptaient plus de six millions
d'hommes; les effectifs britanniques correspondant aux categories d'unites citees par M. Byrnes
ont ete ramenes maintenant a moins d'un million
d'hommes. Si nous n'etions pas dans l'obligation d'entretenir des troupes d'occupation en
Allemagne, en Autriche et en Venetie Julienne,
ce chiffre serait encore plus faible.
It is obvious that a country like ours which
Il est evident qu'un pays comme le mien, qui
has had to spend in two wars over five thousand a dli depenser, au cours de deux guerres pour
million pounds of its accumulated savings and plus de cinq milliards d.e livres de fonds d'eparforeign investments, and has destroyed its total gne et de valeurs etrangeres et qui a epuise la
exchanges in the world; it is obvious that we totalite de ses moyens de' change dans le monde
cannot afford, even afford in our own interests, entier, ne peut se permettre d'entretenir, flit-ce
to carry great forces of arms and we are not go- dans son propre interet, de puissantes forces
ing to do it except if we are attacked. We can armees; nous ne le ferons que si l'on nous attaagain, as we always have, try to defend our- que. Nous sommes capables, dans l'avenir,
comme nous l'avons ete dans le passe de faire
selves to the best of our ability.
tous les efforts pour nous defendre de notre
mieux.
Par consequent, si le Conseil de securite a
Therefore, if numbers of troops are wanted
by the Security Council, at home or abroad, let besoin de connaltre le chiffre de nos effectifs
them write for it. Send the same letter as they stationnes sur le territoire national ou a l'etrando to all other nations and we will give the ger, qu'il nous le demande par ecl'it. Qu'il nous
figures. We sball not hesitate. But we want to envoie la meme 1ettre qu'a toures les autres nafeel that when they are asked for, it is for tions, et nous lui foumirons ces chiffres. Nous
the purposes required by the Charter in order les donnerons sans hesitation. Toutefois, nous
that the knowledge which we readily give will voulons avoir le sentiment que si on nous les
be used by that Council and by the Organiza- demande, c'est en vue de servir les fins prcvues
tion to defend collective security and regional par la Charte, et que les renseignemellts 9-ue
defence and all the other obligations we have nous donnerons volontiers seront utilises par le
Conseil de securite et par l'Organisation pour
entered into.
assurer la securite collective et la defense regionale et pour faire face a toutes les autres obligations que nous avons souscrites.
J'ai lu avec le plus grand soin la resolution
I have read this resolution with very great
care and I have also read the resolution of the soumise a l'Assemblee; j'ai lu egalement la resoFirst Committee which calls upon the Security lution presentee par la Premiere Commission qui
Council: "to determine, as soon as possible, the prie le Conseil de securite "de determiner aussiinformation which the States Members should tot que possible les informations que les Etats
be called upon to furnish in order to give effect Membres des Nations Unies devraient etre into the resolution", and the resolution which vites a foumir en vue de don~er dIet a ladite
refers to the information on armed forces of the resolution", et aussi la resolution 9. ui trai~e
United Nations. I accept that resolution. On des informations a fournir par les Membres des
behalf of my Government, I accept this general Nations Unies en ce qui concerne leurs forces
resolution which I regard as a basis for real armees. Au nom de mon Gouvernement, j'acwork to be commenced. I trust that it will be cepte cette resolution generale que je considere
adopted, and not merely adopted but taken as a comme la base du travail veritable qui va etre
directive to the Organization of the United Na- entrepris. Je compte qu'elle sera adoptee; bien
tions to begin seriously working with the best plus, je compte que l'Organisation des Nations
brains they can get in order to achieve this ob- Unies la prendra comme directive en se mettant
jective as early as they possibly can. The quicker, serieusement a l'reuvre avec le concours des
hommes les plus capables qu'elle pourra recruter,
the better.
afin d'atteindre cet pbjeetif le plus tot possible.
Le plus tot sera le mieux.
Toutefois, je voudrais donner un avertisseI would utter this warning, however. I believe
ment:
je crois que, pour ce probleme du desarthat in this matter, as in the Organization
mement
comme pour l'Organisation elle-meme,
itself, it will be a matter of growth o.f confidence.
le
succes
dependra du progres de la confiance.
I once said in our own House of Commons
that if you live together long enough and trust J'ai dit un jour a la Chambre des Comeach other enough, without too many rules munes que si l'on vit ensemble assez longand regulations, you' grow together and you temps, avec assez de confiance mutuelle et sans
achieve a common understanding in that way. trap de reglementation, alors l'on grandit enTherefore, in de~ling with this problem, the Mili- semble et l'on parvient a s'entendre. C'est pourtary Staff Committee, the Security Council, and quoi, lorsque le Comite d'etat-major, le Conseil

Dounced our figures to our Parliament. We have
reduced our forces from well over 6,000,000;
compared to the categories he quoted, we are
now well below a million. And were it not for
the commitments of occupation that we have in
Germany and Austria and Venezia Giulia, they
would go down still further.

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1304

13 December 1946

de securite et les autres organes s'occupent du
probleme du desarmement, la tache q.u'!1s. ont ~
accomplir est l'une des plus grandes qUI alt JamaJS
ete donnee a des hommes..
Je prends l'engagement 9.ue man pays - dont
I pledge my country - ihdeed, its' his~ory is
le
role passe en ce domame est . blen connuwell known in this field - to do what It can
fera
tout ee qui est en son pouvoIr pour assurer
to make it a success.
le sueees du desarmement.
Je reviens maintenant a la question des forces
With regard to troops in other countries. This
armees
stationnees a l'etranger. Le ~ouvern:­
Government of which I am a member has been
ment
dont
je fais partie est au pOUVOlT depws
in office since July, 1945. During that ~iz:ne we
juillet
1945.
Pendant cette periode, nous no~s
have been doing nothing else but stnvmg to
sommes
uniquement
efforces de crt~~r des condIcreate the situation to establish freedom over. as
tions
telles
qu'il
soit
possible de falre re~ner la
wide an area of the world as we can, and I think
libert.e
sur
une
partie
aussi vaste que pOSSIble du
the steps we have taken indicate our attitude
monde
et
J'e
crois
que
les mesures que nouS
of mind. We are striving to settle the great prob,prises traduisent cette 1'd'
,avons
ee. N,ous nous
lem of India, 'and I pray and h~pe that all
effor90ns
en
ce
moment
de
refler
le grand p~o­
pkties will be able to combine III order t~
bleme
de
l'Inde;
je
demande
a
toutes
le;; parties
achieve the right results for that great sub-conninteressees-et
j'espere
qu'elles
y
parvlendront
nent, which will make it unnecessary for us to
- de s'unir en vue d'aboutir a des resultats
keep troops there at all.
favorables a cette vaste partie du continent asiatique, cc qui nous dispensera d'y maintenir des
forces armees.
We had a ten-year treaty, a solemn treaty beLe Royaume-Uni avait un traite formel de dix
tween Egypt and ourselves. I think all the ~lli~s ans avec l'Egypte. J'estime que tous les Allies
are indebted to Egypt for the great serVIce It ont contracte une dette envers l'Egypte en raison
rendered during the war in giving its territory . du service immense qu'elle a rendu pendant la
and communications, which prevented the guerre en mettant son territoire et ses voies de
enemy joining hands through the Middle East, communication a leur disposition, ce qui a
and probably making the war much longer and empechC l'ennemi de faire la jonction de ses
much more disastrous. But when we were ap- forces par le Moyen-Orient et, par la d'augmenter
proached to revise it we readily agreed, and probablement la dun~e et les ravages de la
negotiations are going on for the same results. guerre. Cependant, lorsqu'on nous a demande
In other fields too, as soon as we can see peace de reviser ce traite, nous y avons consenti volonand achieve resettlement, my Government is en- tiers; des negociations tendant a ce resultat sont
deavouring to carry out a long-term progressive en cours. En d'autres domaines egalement, dans
policy.
la mesure ou nous voyons s'etablir la paix et ou
nous pouvons restaurer la situation, mon Gouvernement s'efforce de poursuivre, a long teffile,
une politique de progres.
I apologize to nobody for our conduct. We
Je n'eprouve pas le besoin de justifier notre
have based our attitude on the establishment of ligne de conduite. Notre attitude consiste essenthis United Nations, but I have been, as I said, tiellement a vouloir affermir l'Organisation des
both in the Committee and elsewhere, cautious, Nations Unies. Toutefois, comme je l'ai dit, je
and the reason I am cautious is that once already me suis montre circonspect a la Commission et
in our history my country w~ nearly wiped out. ailleurs; et la raison de ma circonspection, c'est
We were within an ace of being defeated. There- qu'une fois deja au cours de notre histoire, notre
fore, this time we want to see that we build pays a failli etre aneanti. Nous avons ete a deux
soundly and safely, not merely on a basis of doigts de la de£aite. Cette fois, donc, nous vousentiment, but on a basis of collective responsi- Ions nous assurtr que nous construisons sur des
bility in which everyone, great and Sniall, takes bases solides et sures: pas seulement sur des
their share to obliterate war forever.
bases sentimentales, mais sur un systerne de responsabilite collective en lequel chaque nation,
grande ou petite, contribue pour sa part a abolir
. la guerre a jamais.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
call upon Mr. Molotov, representative of the M. Molotov, representant de l'Union des RepuUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics.
bliques socialistes sovietiques.
. Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques sociapublics) (translated from Russian): I have al- listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'ai deja
ready had occasion to explain from this rostrum eu l'occasion d'exposer ici meme le point de vue
the views of the Soviet Union Government on de l'Union sovietique sur le desarmement gene..
the subject of general disarmament. The reasons raJ. J'ai deja precise, au cours de mon intervenwhich guide the Soviet Union Government in tion en date du 29 octobre, les raisons dont
this matter were set forth in the statement which s'inspire le Gouvernement sovietique. Aussi
the other organs are being given one of the
greatest jobs to grapple with that has ever been
handed on to men.

,

!

13 decem bre 1946

1305

I made here on 29 October. It was therefore
with all the more attention and inter~st that w~
heard the views of other Governments, both in
the Committee which discussed this question and
in the General Assembly.
Indeed, the present day international situation
differs in many respects from that which existed
after the first World War. We are all mindful of
this difference, and we know that Germany as it
is after the second World War is not the Germany that existed after the first World War. If
we add to this that Japan after the second
World War is not at all the same as that which
existed after the first World War, and if we bear
in mind that Germany and Japan were the two
chief aggressor States, the one in the west and
other in the east, and that they drew into the
second WorId War all countries, both large and
small, then, this fact of a radical change in the
position of Germany and Japan, not to mention
their satellites in aggression, is of the utmost
importance.

This presupposes, of course, that in our policy
towards the former aggressor States, we will pursue to the end a policy which is demanded by
the exigencies of universal peace; we must carry
out to the end the demilitarization and disarmament of these States and the control which will
prevent them from ever again becoming aggressive forces. We must carry on to the end the
fight against Fascism and the struggle for the
democratization of these States, since we have
accepted and recognized this as the chief aim of
the Allies. We recognized this aim during the
war, and we recognize it now.
Thus, in regard to the forces of aggression,
conditions are favourable for taking action to
strengthen peace and prevent new aggression.
Another important fact is that, since the conclusion of the second WorId War, there are now no
countries which keep aloof from the task of international organization for the promotion of
peace and security. In these respects, the situation is very different from that which existed
after the first World War.

Now all the countries, great and small, which
are worthy of the name of democratic States and
which can participate in the carrying out of a
policy ensuring universal peace, are Members of
the United Nations; this constitutes a very important prerequisite for the solution of the prob.
lem which we are discussing today, the problem
of general disarmament.
We must admit that it now depends upon us,
upon our common efforts; upon our will to work
together in the interest of universal peace without dividing the nations among themselves,
without setting up one group of States against
other peace-loving States and without striving to
bring other States into subjection. By working in
accordance 'lVith the principles and aims which

Soixante-deuxieme seance pleniere

~vons-no~s suivi avec le plus grand interet les
mterventlOns des representants des autres Gouv~rnements, tant a la Commission chargee d'etudIer cette question, qu'a l'Assemblee generale.

En fait, la situation internationale actuelle
differe a beaucoup d'egards de celle qui existait
au lendemain de la premiere guerre mondiale.
Nous avons tous conscience de ces differences,
nous savons que l'Allemagne d'apres la deuxicme '
guerre mondiale n'est pas ceIle d' aprcs la premiere guerre. De meme, le Japon d'aprcs la
deuxieme guerre mondiale n'est pas du tout
celui d'apres la premiere guerre. Souvenonsnous d'autre part que Ce sont ces deux Etats,
l'Allemagne et le Japon, qui ont cte les deux
principales puissances d'agression, l'une en Occident, l'autre en Orient, et que ce sont elles qui
ont entraine dans la deuxieme guerre mondiale
tous les Etats, grands et petits. On ne peut donc
manquer d'apercevoir l'importance extreme de
ce changement radical qui s'est produit dans la
situation de l'Allemagne et du Japon - sans
parler de leurs allies qui ont pris part a l'agression.
II va sans dire qu'a l'egard des anciens agresseurs, nous devons poursuivre une politique qui
serve la cause de la paix mondiale. Nous devons
mener a bonne' fin la demilitarisation de ces
pays, assurer leur desarmement effectif et etablir
un controle afin qu'ils ne redeviennent pas des
puissances agressives. Nous devons roener a
bonne fin la lutte contre le fascisme et assurer
le triomphe de la democratie dans ces pays.
Pendant la guerre, nous avons reconnu que telle
etait la mission essentielle des Allies, et nous
continuons a le reconnaitre aujourd'hui.
A l'egard des forces d'agression, nous nous
trouvons donc aujourd'hui dans une situation
favorable qui nous permet de travailler a consolider la paix et a preveni:r: toute nouvelle agression. Autre fait important: aujourd'hui, au
lendemain de la deuxieme guerre mondiaIe,
aucun pays ne se tient a l'ecart des taches qui
incombent a 1'0rganisation internationale chargee d'assurer la paix et la securite. La aussi, la
situation actuel1e n'est pas du tout celle qui
s'etait creee au lendemain de la premiere guerre
mondiale.
Aujourd'hui, tous les Etats, grands et petits,
qui meritent d'ctre appeles democratiques et qui
sont capables de participer a une ceuvre politique chargee d'assurer la paix du monde, font
partie de ]'Organisation des Nations Unies. n
y a Ut un facteur tres important qui joue en
faveur d'une solution du probleme que nous
examinons aujourd'hui -le probleme du desarmement general.
Aujourd'hui, nous devons le reconnaitre, cette
solution depend de nous, de nos efforts communs, de notre volonte de collabcirer dans l'interet de la paix generale, en· evitant d' opposer
les pays les uns aux autres ou de constituer des
blocs diriges contre des Etats pacifiques, et en
s'abstenant d'imposer a certains Etats l'hegemonie de certains autres. C'est donc en restant

,
~

'.';

~

Sixty-second plenary meeting

1306

form the basis of the United Nations, we can
and must try to ensure universal peace and the
security of peoples.
I will now turn to the resolution submitted for
our consideration. The Soviet Union draft, as
submitted to the General Assembly, was founded
on two basic ideas.
First, we considered it important that the
United Nations should state its firm opinion regarding the necessity of general disarmament.
Secondly, we considered it essential that the
United Nations should declare the necessity of
prohibiting the production and use of atomic
energy for military purposes.
The draft resolution submitted contains both
these ideas. I will not conceal that the Soviet
Union delegation would have liked to see those
basic proposals which it has submitted to the
General Assembly expressed in a more definite
form. However, the resolution contains fundamental concepts which reflect both the idea of a
general reductioJ;l of armamerits and that of the
prohibition of the use of atomic energy for military purposes. Therefore, the Soviet delegation is
satisfied with the work of the Committee and
with the resolution now submitted for the approval of the General Assembly.
Much has been said here today about atomic
energy and the use of atomic energy for military
purposes. This is quite understandable, since
this type of armament calls for our kneest attention at the present time. That is why the Suviet
Union draft stated that the prohibition of the
use of atomic energy for military purposes was a
primary objective. Everybody understands that
the atomic bomb is not a defensive weapon.
Therefore, when we are told of the exigencies
of national defense, it must be borne in mind
that what is necessary for the defence of a
State, for the defence of frontiers, for protection
from attack is not a problem that can be settled
with the help of atomic bombs. Atomic bombs,
as we know, are directed against foreign countries) and are not used for fighting on or defending the home territory.
The resolution now submitted for our consideration and decision and which, we are certain,
will be adopted by the General Assembly today,
. will be the first step towards implementing the
idea of general disarmament. Following this
decision of the General Assembly, other steps
and measures will have to be taken and worked
out by the Security Council. This is a necessary
and very important task, and we must wish the
Security Council success in the preparation and
execution of these further measures. Today the
delegation of the Soviet Union expresses its
satisfaction with the first results of the work for
a general reduction of armaments and with the
co-operation which we have achieved in preparing this resolution for the General Assembly.
Today we still hear it said that the question
of the general reduction of armaments arouses

13 December 1946

fideles a l'esprit des principes fondamentaux des
Nations Unies, et c'est en ayant en vue les objectifs de 1'Organisation que nous pourrons et
devrons assurer la paix et la securite des peuples.
Et maintenant, je vais pader de la resolution
soumise a notre examen. Le projet sovietique
qui a ete presente a l'Assemblee generale s'inspire
de deux idees.
En premier lieu, il nous a semble essentiel que
l'Organisation des Nations Unies proclame fermement la necessite du desarmement general.
En second lieu, il est indispensable, croyonsnous, que 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
declare qu'il est necessaire d'interdire la production et l'utilisation de l'energie atomique a des
fins militaires.
Ces deux idees se retrouvent dans le projet
de resolution qui nous est soumis. .le ne vous
cacherai pas que la delegation sovietique aurait
prefere que les deux idees fondamentales qu'elle
avait soumises a 1'attention de l'Assemb1ee fussent exprimees d'une fa~OJi plus nette. Neanmoins, la resolution qui nous est soumise contient
ces idees essentielles: reduction generale des
armements et interdiction de 1'emploi de 1'energie atomique a des fins militaires. C'est pourquoi, la delegation sovietique se declare s!itisfaite
des resultats des travaux de la Commission et
du texte de la resolution soumise au vote de
l'Assemblee generale.
On a beaucoup pade, aujourd'hui, de 1'energie atomique et de son utilisation a des fins
militaires. Cela est parfaitement naturel, car
cette arme merite, a l'heure actuelle, une attention particuliere. C'est bien pour cette raison
que le projet sovietique considerait que notre
tache primordiale etait d'interdire l'utilisation
de l'energie atomique a des fins militaires. Il
est evident que la bombe atomique n'est pas une
arme defensive. Lorsqu'on invoque la necessite
de se defendre, de protegeI' ses frontieres, il faut
bien se rendre compte que si l'on veut defendre
son pays et ses frontieres ou preserver son peuple
de 1'agression, ce n'est pas avec 1'aide de la
bombe atomique qu'on paurra le faire. Les
bombes atomiques, on le sait, sont destinees a
etre employees en territoire etranger, et non pas
pour la defense immediate du territoire national.
La resolution qui nous a ete soumise et que
l'Assemblee generale, nous en sommes convaincus, va adopter aujourd'hui, constituera une
premiere etape sur la voie du desarmement general. Apres cette decision de l'AssembJee generale,
il y aura d'autres etapes a franchir; il faudra
prendre d'autres mesures que le ·Conseil de
securite devra prepareI'. C'est la une tach~ indispensable et extremement importante, et nous
dcvons souhaiter plein succes au Conseil de securite charge d'elaborer et d'appliquer ces mesures.
Pour aujourd'hui, la delegation sovietique se
declare satisfaite des premiers resultats des travaux dans le domaine de la reduction des armements ainsi que de 1'esprit de collaboration qui
s'est manifeste au cours de nos travaux preparatoires.
On entend dire, aujourd'hui encore, que les
representants de certains pays envisagent la re-

13 decembre 1946

1307

some anxiety amongst the representatives of certain States, who talk of the reduction of armaments in a doubting voice. Of course, the question is so important and complicated that
nobody would advocate, haste. Still we must
adopt a firm tone because this problem has become a serious and immediate task which we
must all undertake. We must not think that the
more troops we have in the territories of other
States, the more military, naval and air bases
we have in territories beyond our own frontiers,
the better the security and peace of our countries will be safeguarded.
Information has been adduced here concern~
ing troops in foreign territories, a subject which
has been widely discussed recently. It goes without saying that such information could not be
submitted in full, and could not be exhaustive.
The Soviet Union delegation has expressed
the wish that a decision should also be taken on
the proposal, which we discussed as a separate
question, and which deals with the submission
of information concerning troops stationed on
foreign territory. Let us all know exactly where
and how many troops are stationed beyond our
frontiers, where and what bases have been
established by our .states. The clarification of
these questions cannot but benefit the cause of
universal peace. It is at this precise moment,
when we are deciding the question of a general
reduction of armaments and the prohibition of
the production and use of atomic energy for
military purposes, that such information would
be useful in clarifying this question completely.
A decision concerning the general reduction
of armaments must certainly also be reflected in
the economic field, and particularly in the
budgets of the States. Indeed it is no secret
that at the present moment the budgets of certain countries are extremely inflated and that
the populations will welcome a decision on the
general reduction of armaments and military
budgets, because this will mean a real decrease
in the burden of taxation, because it will prevent the inflation of the prices of commodities,
and because it is connected with the vital material interests of every man, of every worker.
It is to be hoped that one of the practical
results of our decision today will be the reduction of inflated military budgets and of budgets
to a more. normal type, thus bringing about a
reduction in' the burden of taxation, which will
meet with the greatest approval of the populations.
I must remind you that even now, in some
cases, in this second year after the end of the
second World War, frenzied propaganda in
favour of a new war is being carried on.
The encouragement of such propaganda is
not in keeping with the direction of our efforts
towards the general reduction of armaments.
When we are told of the freedom of the press

Soixanfe-deuxieme seance pleniere

duction generale des armements avec quelque
apprehension et en parlent parfois sans grande
conviction. Certes, dans une question aussi importante et aussi complexe, il n'est pas desirable
de se hater. Mais iI faut adopter un ton ferme,
parce qu'iI s'agit d'un probleme grave et urgent,
a la solution duquel nous devons tous nous
consacrer. Nous aurions tort de croire que plus
nous aurons de troupes en territoire etranger Oll
de bases militaires, navales et aeriennes dispersees au dehors, et mieux nous aurons assure la
securite et la paix de nos pays.
Il a deja ete fait etat id de renseignements sur
les troupes maintenues en territoire etranger,
renseignements dont il a ete beaucoup question
ces derniers temps. Bien entendu, il ne pouvait
s'agir d'informations completes, qui epuiseraient
la question.
La delegation sovietique a exprime le desir
que cette question des reriseignements a fournir
sur les troupes stationnees en territoire etranger,
question qui a fait l'objet ici d'une discussion
speciale, trouve egalement sa solution. Il faudrait
qu'on nous dise exactement quelle est la composition et le dispositif des troupes stationnees a
l'etranger, et queUes sont les bases, dont elles
disposent: une telIe clarification ne peut avoir
que des consequences favorables pour la paix
generale. D'autre part, la publication de ces
renseignements, au moment meme ou nous devons prendre une decision sur la reduction
generale des armements et l'interdiction de la
production et de l'emploi de l'energie atomique
a des fins militaires, contribuerait a eclaircir le
probleme du desarmement.
Une decision de l'Assemblee portant sur la
.reduction des armements aura assurement des
consequences d'ordre economique - notamment
en ce qui concerne les budgets des Etats. En
effet, ce n'est un secret pour personne qu'en ce
moment les budgets de certains Etats sontgonfles
a l'exd:s, et que les peuples ant accueilli avec
une grande satisfaction la decision de proceder a
une reduction generale des armements et de reduire les budgets militaires. En effet, cela constituera pour les peuples un reel allegement des
charges fiscales et un remede a l'inflation des
prix. Enfin, ces reductions repondent aux interets materieIs essentieIs de tous les hommes, de
tous les travailleurs..
II est a souhaiter que l'un des resultats pratiques de notre decision d'aujourd'hui soit de :reduire a des dimensions plus normales les budgets
militaires gonfles al'exc~s, et par la me~e d'a~Ie­
ger les charges ficales a la grande satIsfactlOn
des peuples.
Je voudrais vous £aire remarquer que dans
certains milieux - moins de deux ans apres la
fin de la deuxieme guerre mondiale - on se
livre It une propagande effrenee en faveur d'une
nouvelle guerre.
Le moins qu'on 'puisse dire, c'est qu'en encourageant cette propagande, on nuit aux efforts
que nous deployons en vue de la reduction generale des armements. Quand on mentionne a ce

Sixty-second plenary meeting

13 December 1946

1308

and other advantages, we would like to ask
why the freedom of the press sho~ld not be used
to counteract this propaganda In favour of a
new war? Why must freedom of t~e press be
used primarily by war propagandIsts? 'Yhy
cannot we, the opponents of such propagandIs~s,
use the freedom of the press for concerted reSIStance to such people who direct the public opinion along these lines?
The present General Assembly has adopted,
and will yet adopt, a whole series of decisions.
Each one of us understands that the decisions
adopted are of varying signifiance. I do not
think that anyone can have any doubt that a
decision on the reduction of armaments will
rank amongst the most important decisions ever
taken by the General Assembly. We. have
adopted it unanimously. Thi., is further proof
that the decision is a timely one, that we have
all recognized it as being timely and urgent.
Moreover, it corresponds to the interests of all
nations, both large and smal~. We adopt this
decision unanimously, because we understand
that it is in the best interests of our peoples,
whom we serve, as well as in the best interests
of universal peace.
That is why the delegation of the Soviet
Union expresses its confidence that the unanimity which we have acchieved in the preparation of this resolution will also be displayed in
taking the resolution on the general reduction
of armaments.
. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
still have two speakers on my list. If each
speaks only for ten minutes and their speeches
and Mr. Molotov's are translated also, the meeting will last at least another hour. Moreover, we
have yet to take a vote. Now I am not sure
that we shall not have a discussion on document
A/203. If so, we should have to sit llntil six
o'clock in the morning. That is impossible for
the interpreters, the rest of the Secretariat . . .
and the President.
Under these circumstances I shall ask Mr.

~olotov to forgo the French interpretation of

his speech and I shall request the Canadian
and French representatives, in their turn to
forgo the interpretation of the statements ~hey
are going to make.

propos la liberte de la presse et d'autres belles
choses de ce genre, nous avons envie de demander: "Et pourquoi n'use-t-on pas de cette
liberte de la presse pour combattre la propagande de guerre? Pourquoi faut-il que la liberte
de la presse serve avant tout ,les bellicistes? Et
nous, qui sommes les adversaIres de ces pr?pagandistes pourquoi ne pouvons-nous pas ubhser
la liberd de la presse pour resister ensemble a
ces maitres de la presse et de l'opinion publique?l>
La presente Assem~lee generale a a~opt(\ ou
va adopter, un certam nombre de resolutIOns
qui, tout le monde l'admettra, n'ont pas toutes
la meme importance. Personne ne contestera, me
semble-t-il, que la decision de reduire les armements ne soit parmi les plus importantes que
cette Assemblee puisse prendre. Nous avons ete
unanimes a l'approuver. Ceci montre une fois de
plus qu'elle vient a son heure, et que nous
l'avons tous jugee opportune, et enfin qu'elle
repond aux interets de tous les peuples, grands
et petits. C'est pourquoi nous adoptons cette
resolution a l'unanimite, convaincus qu'elle sert
les interets des peuples que nous representons,
ainsi que la paix generale.
Aussi la delegation sovietique est-elle persuadee que l'unanimite qui s'est faite au cours
de nos travaux preparatoires se retrouvera lorsqu'il s'agira d'adopter la resolution sur la reduction generale des armements.
Le PRESIDENT: Deux orateurs sont encore
inscrits. Si chacun d'eux ne parle que dix
minutes, et si 1'on tient compte de la traduction de leurs discours ainsi que celle du discours
de M. Molotov, la seance durera encore au
moins une heure. Mais il faut, en outre, que
nous procedions au vote. Or, je ne suis pas sQr
que nous n'ayons pas une discussion sur le document A!203. Si tel etait le cas, nollS devrions
siegeI' jusqu'a 6 heures du matin. Or, cela n'est
pas possible, ni pour les trad ucteurs, ni pour le
reste du Secretariat, ni . . . pour le President.
Dans ces conditions, je demanderai a
M. Molotov de renoncer a la traduction de
son discours en frari~ais et je prierai le representant du Canada comme celui de la France de
bien vouloir, leur tour, renoncer la traduction des exposes q u'ils vont nous faire.

a

a

Rep~b~ics)

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
(translated from Russian): I do
not mSIst on a French translation of my speech.

M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je n'insiste
pas pour qu'il y ait une traduction en fran~ais de
mon discours.

Mr. MARTIN (Canada): I shall be very
happy to forgo the French translation of Our
speeches.

M. MARTIN (Canada) (traduit de lJanglais) :
Je ne vois pas d'objection non plus ace que mon
discours ne soit pas traduit.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
FTffnch): I shall also forgo the English translatIOn of my statement.

M. PAROD! (France) : Je renonce egalement a
la traduction anglais~ de mon expose.

The PR.ES~ENT (tr~nslated from French):
The questIOn IS now whether we are going to
start a ~iscussion on document A/203 or come
to unanImOUS agreement.

Le PRESIDENT: La question est maintenant de
savoir si nous allons commencer un debat sur le
document A!203 ou si nous allons arriver a un
accord unanime.

14 decembre 1946

1309

Soixante-troisUtme seance pleniere

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, the question covered by document
A/203 deserves s~ecial attention.

M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit duo russe): La question qui fait l'objet du document A/203 merite
une attention particuliere, Monsieur le President.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In those circumstances we shall have to adjourn
the meeting.

Le PRESIDENT: Dans ces conditions, il est
n'eccssaire de lever la seance.

The meeting rose at 1.30 a.m.

La seance est levee a 1 h. 30,

SIXTY-THIRD PLENARY MEE1'ING

SOlXAN'rE-rROISIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Saturday, 14 December 1946,
at 11.a.m.

Tenue le samedi 14 decembre 1946)
a 11 heures.

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES
Page

Pages

176. Budgets of the United Nations for the
financial years 1946 and 1947: report of
the Fifth Committee: resolutions
1310
177. Scale of contributions to the budgets of
the United Nations for the financial years
1946 and 1947 and to the working
capital fund: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution
1310
178. Principles governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments: report
of the First Committee: resolution (continuation of the discussion)
1310
179. Information on armed forces .to be supplied by Members of the United Nations:
report of the First Committee: resolu1316
tion
180. Election of two members of the Trusteeship Council: resolution
1320

176. Budgets de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies pour les exercices 1946 et 1947.
Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission.
Resolutions
1310
177. Bareme des contributions aux budgets de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour
les exercices 1916 et 1947, et au fonds de
roulement. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution
1310
178. Principes regissant la reglementation et
la repartition generales des armements.
Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Resolution (suite de la discussion)
1310
179. Informations relatives aux forces armees
a fournir par les Membres des Nations
Unies. Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Resolution
1316
180. Election de deux Membres du Conseil de
1320
tutelle. Resolution

President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK. (Belgium).

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK. (Belgique).

Agenda of the meeting

Ordre du jour de la seance

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item on the agenda is the continuation
of the discussion on the disarmament question,

Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle la
suite de la discussion sur le desarmement.

Mr. VANDENBERG (United States of America): Mr. President, a point of order.

M. VANDENBERG (Etats-Unis d'Arnerique)
(traduit de Panglais): Monsieur le President, je
voudrais presenter une motion d'ordre.
Puis-je faire observer que les points 2 et 3 de
l'ordre du jour de ce matin, relatifs aux premier
et second budgets annuels etau bareme des
contributions, ont ete adoptes par la Commission, 'a l'unanimite? Ce sont des questions que
nous devons 0 bligatoirement examiner et dont
nous devons achever la discussion avant la fin
des travaux de la presente session. J'ai pris a la
discussion de ces points une part personnelle que
-je ne le cache pas-j'aimerais garder jusqu'au
bout, or je ne pourrai etre ici cet apres-midi.
J'estime que ces deux points, qui ont reuni
l'unanimite a la Commission, peuvent etre
adoptes sans debat.
Je demande done a l'Assemblee de consentir
unanimement a modifier l'ordrc des questions
et de prendre en premier lieu les points 2 et 3,
etant entendu que si ma proposition donne lieu
a la moinclre discussion, je la retire immediatement.

May I point out that items 2 and 3 on the
printed agenda this morning covering the first
and second annual budgets and the scale of contributions passed the Committee unanimously?
They are mandatory items which, of course, wc
must conclude before we finish the work of this
session. I have had some personal responsibility
in connexion with them which-I frankly say to
my colleagues-I should like to see through to the
finish, and I cannot be here this afternoon. In
my opinion, both of these items can pass without
any debate because there was complete unanimity
in the Committee.
'
I ask unanimous consent that we therefore
take up items 2 and 3, interrupting the present
order with the understanding that the request
will be immediately withdrawn if there is any
debate.
