47

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Füth Committee

1091 (XI). Report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Fonds
A

2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
the twelfth session of the General Assembly the item
entitled "Report of the N egotiating Committee for
Extra-Budgetary Funds".

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the N egotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds 26 appointed at
the tenth session of the General Assembly, and the
recommendation of the N egotiating Committee for a
change in the method of securing pledges of contributions to the voluntary programmes,
Having been notificd of the views of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Children's Fund, 27 and
of those of the Technical Assistance Committee, 28 that
these two bodies favour the retention of their present
fund-raising procedure,

*

*

*

At the 662nd plenary mecti11g on 27 Fe/,,..uary 1957, the
l'rcsidcnt of tlzc Ge11cral Asscmbly appoi11ted a .\'cgotiating
Committcc for Extla-Budgetary Funds ta serve until the close
of the twclfth session of the Assembly. The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTIN A, BRAZJL, CANADA, FRANCE,
LEBANON,

NEW

ZEALAND,

PAKTST.·\N,

GREAT BRJT.\JN AND ;\ORTHE1'X

UNITED

lHEL.1:-.:u,

KINGDOM

OF

and l;!-.1TEll ST.11Es

OF AMERICA.

Recognizing the importance of determining the financial resources for activities and programmes to be
financed by voluntary contributions before the reports
on such activities and programmes are considered and
acted upon by the General Assembly,

1092 (XI). Registration and publication
treaties and international agreements

Recognizing further the need to change the existing
procedure for obtaining financial support for those
programmes of the United Nations financed by voluntary contributions for which those contributions fall
considerably short of the financial targets set for them,
1. Decides:
(J) In the case of the United Nations Children's
Fund, to retain the present year-round fund-raising
procedure;
( b) In the case of the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, to retain the present system of
a special pledging conference, to be held at the initiative
of: the Negotiating Committee;
( c) To convene, du ring the twelfth session of the
General Assembly, an ad hoc committee of the whole
Assembly, under the chairmanship of the President of
the session, where pledges of voluntary contributions
for the two refugee programmes for the following
financial year would be announced, with separate meetings dedicated to each programme;

adopting regulations to give effect to Article 102 of
the Charter of the United ?\ations, as amended by its
resolutions 364 B ( 1V) of 1 December 1949 and 482
( V) of 12 December 1950,
H aving consid cred the report of the Secretary-Gcneral29 and the seventeenth report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to the eleventh session of the General Assembly 30 on
the registration and publication of treaties and international agreements,

2. Decides further that States not Members of the
United Nations, but memLers of one o:- E1or,· uf u1e
specialized agencies, shall be invited to attend meetings
of the ad hoc committee for the purpose of announcing
their pledges to the two refugee programmes.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds consisting of not more than ten members,
with the same terms of reference as those laid clown in
General Assembly resolution 693 (VII) of 25 October
1952, to serve from the close of the eleventh session
to the close of the twelfth session of the Assembly,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/3194.
"'See Official Records of the Economie and Social Council,
Twenty-third Session, Supplement N o.2 (E/2937-E/ICEF/
330, E/ICEF/333).
·
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/C.5/694.

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 97 (I) of 14 December 1946

N oting the substantial printing economies which have
already been achieved by various means of a technical
nature,
N oting f urtl,er that the lev el of current inflow of
registration material and the rate of production already
achieved will permit, if maintained, the publication of
treaties within a much shorter period than had previously been estimated,
1. Decides to continue the existing system of registration and publication of treaties and international
agreements, including in particular the method of publication of translations and annexes;
2. Concurs in the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in regard to the other questions referred to in the
seventeenth report of the Advisory Committee to the
eleventh session of the General A.ssembly;
3. Renews its invitation to States parties to treaties
or international agreements subject to publication under
article 12 of the regulations to give effect to Article
102 of the Charter of the United Nations, to provide
the Secretary-General, where feasible, with translations in English or French, or both as may be needed,
for the purposes of such publication ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to achieve an early reduction of the
delay in publication of treaties and international agreements and to accelerate the publication of indexes to
the Treaty Series;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to continue bis
efforts to bring about whatever further printing econo20
30

Ibid., agenda item 50, document A/3168.
Ibid., document A/3387.

General Assembly-Eleventh Ses111ion

48

mies may be possible without, however, lowering the
present standard of reprod11dio11 of the Treaty Series.

66/nd plenary meeting,
27 Felm.ary 1957.

1093 (XI). Appointment to fil] a vacancy in the
membership of the Board of Auditors
The Ceneral Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of Colornbia as a member of the Board of Auditurs fur a three-vear tenu to
commence on 1 July 1957.
·
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1094 (XI). Administrative and hudgetary co-ordination hetween the United Nations and the
specialized agenciPs
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Aclvisory Committee on Administrative and Bu<lgetarv Questiom on
the administrative budgets of the specializecl agencies
for 1957 31 and its special rt'ports relatim~ to the International Labour Organi,atiu11:i 2 and the l l nited Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi1.ation, 3 :i

I
l. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the observations and rernmmendati()ns contained in
the report of the Advisorv Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Oil th(' admi11istrative
budgets of the specialized agencies fur 1957;
2. Requests the Economie and Social c·ouncil to
study the matters raised in paragraph, I> and 7 of that
report concerning an appraisal of the uver-all programmes to be undntakl'.ll by the Unit1·d Nations and
the specialized agencies in the ecorwrnic and social tields
over the next five or six _\'ear,, ;rnd to report thereon
to the General Assemblv at ih thirternth session;
.3. Requests the specialized agencies to co-operate
w1th the Economie and S(\cial Council in its consideration of this question;
Il

1. Notes that the special reports of the Advisorv
Com?1ittee on Administrative and Budgetary Question\
relatmg to the International Labour Organisation and
the United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization are of a preliminary character and that
the Advisory Committee intends, on completion of
S!~ila~ stu_dies in respect of other organizations partlc1patmg m the Expanded J 'rogramme of Technical
Assistance, to submit a final report to the General
Assembly embodying its conclusions and recommendations;
2. Invites the attention of the International Labour
0gani~ation to the observations and suggestions contamed m the Advisory ( ·ommittee's special report on
ithat organization, and in particular in paragraphs 36.
43, 46, 52, 59, 66 and 80 of that report;
3. Invites the attention of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the
.,_ Ibid., agenda item 49. <lucumc11t :\,i.î489
• A/3142.
11
A/3166.

observations and suggestions contained in the Advisory
Committee's special report on that organization, and in
particular in paragraµhs 16, 32 to 35, 43, 45, 47, 60,
7S, SO and 98 of that report.

662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.

1095 (XI). United Nations salary, allowance and
henefits system
A
The Ccneral Assembly,
I !aving considcrcd the report of the Salary Review
Committee 34 established by General Assembly resolutiun <)75 (X) of 15 Decernber 1955, the comments
t!ten·on by the Secretary-General and by the executive
heads of the International Labour Organisation, the
L nited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization, 35 and the observations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions/16
l. Expresses its great appreciation to the Salary
l{eyiew Committee for its valuable work;
., R eque sts thl' Secretary-General :
(a) To apply the provisions of base pay, post adjustments and dependency allowances, as set forth in
paragraph 7 helow, to staff serving at Headquarters or
at the Euroµean l)lfice of the United Nations with
effect from 1 January 1957, and to apply these provisions as soon as practicable to other members of the
staff of the l;nited Nations, with effect from dates
c.,tablished by him for each office;
( b) To carry out, ai ter consultation with the executive heads of the specialized agencies, the reconciliation
of conditions of service under different programmes
referred to in chapter XIII of the report of the Salary
Review ( 'ommittee, by application of the basic measures
proposed by that Committee, including provision for
an assig11rne11t allowànce for staff members on Ct'rtain
temporary assignments, subject to such modification
of the detailecl proposais as the Secretary-General deems
necessary and desirable;
( c) To be gmded by the conclusions of the Fifth
Committee, as recorded in its report to the General
Assembly,:n in respect of matters therein not covered
b_v the present resolution;
3. Requcsts the Secretary-General, in conjunction
with the executi\T heads of the specialized agencies
concerne<l and iu co-operation with the Joint Staff
Pension Board :
(a) To review the question of the pensionable remuneration of the staff with a view to making recommendations for action by the General Assembly;
( b) To provicle for death and disability protection
for members of the staff on temporary appointments
for a fixed terrn, if practicable by eventual amendment
of the Regulations of the Joint Staff Pension Fund;
4. Resolves to amend the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 359 (IV) of 10 December 1949,
"'A/3209.
""Official Records of the Gener-al Assembly, Eleventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 51, document A/C.5/691.
.. Ibid., document A/3505.
"'Ibid., documen' A/3558.
