United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/58/89
Distr.: General
17 December 2003

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 82

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2003
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/58/471)]

58/89.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999 and 57/116 of 11 December 2002,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind, for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international cooperation
in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Considering that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of

_______________
1

03 45825

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

A/RES/58/89

further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in
this field,
Convinced of the importance of the recommendations in the resolution entitled
“The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,
adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held at Vienna from 19 to 30 July 1999, 2 and
the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 3
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the recommendations of UNISPACE III, 4
Convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications,
in such areas as telemedicine, tele-education and Earth observation, contribute to
achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that address
various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, inter alia, poverty
eradication,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-sixth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-sixth session;5
2.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 6 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties as well as incorporating them in their national legislation;
3.
Notes that, at its forty-second session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, as mandated by
the General Assembly in its resolution 57/116; 7
4.
Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Legal
Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following as regular agenda items:

(i)

General exchange of views;

(ii)

Status and application of the five United Nations treaties on outer space;

_______________
2
See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space,
Vienna,
19-30 July
1999
(United
Nations
publication,
Sales
No. E.00.I.3),
chap. I, resolution 1.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
A/58/174.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20).
6
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution
2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
(resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 34/68, annex).
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
chap. II.D.

2

A/RES/58/89

(iii) Information on the activities of international organizations relating to
space law;
(iv) Matters relating to:

(b)

a.

The definition and delimitation of outer space;

b.

The character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including
consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and
equitable use of the geostationary orbit without prejudice to the role
of the International Telecommunication Union;

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Review and possible revision of the Principles Relevant to the Use of
Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space; 8
(ii) Examination of the preliminary draft protocol on matters specific to
space assets to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
opened for signature at Cape Town, South Africa, on 16 November 2001:
a.

Considerations relating to the possibility of the United Nations
serving as supervisory authority under the preliminary draft
protocol;

b.

Considerations relating to the relationship between the terms of the
preliminary draft protocol and the rights and obligations of States
under the legal regime applicable to outer space;

(iii) Contributions by the Legal Subcommittee to the Committee for the
preparation of its report to the General Assembly for its review of the progress
made in the implementation of the recommendations of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE III);
(c) Consider the practice of States and international organizations in
registering space objects in accordance with the work plan adopted by the
Committee; 9
5.
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee, at its forty-third session, will submit
its proposals to the Committee for new items to be considered by the Subcommittee
at its forty-fourth session, in 2005;
Notes also that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (ii) above, the Legal
6.
Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group with the terms of reference as
agreed upon by the Legal Subcommittee, 10 to meet for three years, from 2002
to 2004;
7.
Notes further that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (iii) above, the Group
of Experts on the Ethics of Outer Space, invited by the Committee at its forty-fourth
session to identify which aspects of the report of the World Commission on the
Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization might need to be studied by the Committee and
_______________
8

See resolution 47/68.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
para. 199.
10
See A/AC.105/763 and Corr.1, para. 118, and A/AC.105/787, para.138.
9

3

A/RES/58/89

to draft a report, in consultation with other international organizations and in close
liaison with the World Commission, presented its report to the Legal Subcommittee,
and agrees that the report should be transmitted to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization with the request that it keep the Committee and
its subcommittees informed about its activities relating to outer space;
Notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (iv) above, the Legal
8.
Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group on the item only to consider
matters relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space;
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee should reconvene its Working Group
9.
to consider the questions reflected in paragraphs 4 (b) (ii) a. and b. above separately;
10. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 13 of General
Assembly resolution 57/116, the Government of Austria continued to convene and
facilitate intersessional informal consultations on the composition of the bureaux of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies for the third term, and that consensus
agreement was reached, before the forty-sixth session of the Committee, on the
extension of the term of office of the current bureaux of the Committee and the
future composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
11. Endorses the agreement reached by the Committee on the extension of
the term of office of the current bureau of the Committee and future composition of
the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 11 on the basis of the
measures relating to the working methods of the Committee and its subsidiary
bodies, 12 which were endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/56 of
10 December 1997, and notes that, in accordance with paragraph 14 of General
Assembly resolution 57/116, the Committee conducted the election of its officers at
its forty-sixth session;
12. Agrees that the Committee and its subcommittees, at the beginning of
their sessions in 2004, should conduct the election of the officers agreed upon by the
Committee at its forty-sixth session; 13
13. Also agrees that, in accordance with the measures relating to the future
composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies indicated in
paragraph 11 above, the Committee at its forty-seventh session, in 2004, should
reach agreement on all the officers of the bureaux of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies for the next term and that, for this purpose, the Committee should
include in the agenda at its forty-seventh session an item on the composition of the
bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies for the period 2006-2007;
14. Urges each of the five regional groups to ensure that agreement within
the group on the officer to be determined for the period 2006-2007 is reached before
the forty-seventh session of the Committee;
15. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fortieth
session, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution
57/116; 14
_______________
11

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II,
paras. 4-9.
12
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I. See also Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.
13
Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 241.
14
Ibid., chap. II.C.

4

A/RES/58/89

16. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-first session, taking into account the concerns
of all countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following items:

(i) General exchange of views and introduction to reports submitted on
national activities;
(ii)

United Nations Programme on Space Applications;

(iii) Implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III;
(iv) Matters relating to remote-sensing of the Earth by satellite, including
applications for developing countries and monitoring of the Earth’s
environment;
(b) Consider the following items in accordance with the work plans adopted
by the Committee: 15
(i)

Space debris;

(ii)

Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;

(iii) Space-system-based telemedicine;
(c)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Examination of the physical nature and technical attributes of the
geostationary orbit and its utilization and applications, including, inter alia, in
the field of space communications, as well as other questions relating to
developments in space communications, taking particular account of the needs
and interests of developing countries;
(ii) Implementation of an integrated, space-based global natural disaster
management system;
(iii) Solar-terrestrial physics;
17. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-first
session will submit its proposal to the Committee for a draft provisional agenda for
the forty-second session of the Subcommittee, in 2005;
18. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the symposium to
strengthen the partnership with industry should be organized during the first week of
the forty-first session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and should
address small satellite applications in agriculture, health and human security;
19. Agrees that, in the context of paragraphs 16 (a) (ii) and (iii) and 17
above, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-first session should
reconvene the Working Group of the Whole;
20. Also agrees that, in the context of paragraph 16 (b) (i) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-first session, could establish a
working group to consider comments from member States of the Committee on the
proposals on debris mitigation presented by the Inter-Agency Space Debris
Coordination Committee to the Subcommittee at its fortieth session; 16
_______________
15
See A/AC.105/761, para. 130, for item (i); A/AC.105/804, annex III, for item (ii); and Official Records
of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 138, for item (iii).
16
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
para. 126.

5

A/RES/58/89

21. Further agrees that, in the context of paragraph 16 (b) (ii) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-first session should reconvene its
Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space;
22. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2004,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications; 17
23. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General
Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995, the African regional centres for
space science and technology education, in the French language and in the English
language, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, and the Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific continued their education
programmes in 2003, that the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education for Latin America and the Caribbean became affiliated to the United
Nations and began its education programme, and that the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications is providing technical support to the Government
of Jordan for the establishment of the regional centre for space science and
technology education for Western Asia;
24. Also notes with satisfaction the success of the Fourth Space Conference
of the Americas, held at Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from 14 to 17 May 2002,
which adopted the Declaration of Cartagena de Indias and the Plan of Action, 18 and
notes the desire of Member States in the Latin American and Caribbean region to
institutionalize the Space Conference of the Americas;
25. Welcomes the memorandum of understanding between the Office for
Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat and the Pro Tempore Secretariat of the Fourth
Space Conference of the Americas, under which the parties demonstrated their
intention to collaborate in promoting and implementing joint activities, and invites
the Pro Tempore Secretariat to inform the Committee of the work accomplished;
26. Urges all Governments, entities of the United Nations system as well as
intergovernmental and non-governmental entities conducting space-related activities
to take the necessary action for the effective implementation of the
recommendations of UNISPACE III, in particular its resolution entitled “The Space
Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,2 bearing in
mind the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
27. Agrees that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General Assembly
resolution 55/122 of 8 December 2000, the Committee should include in the agenda
of its forty-seventh session an item on the implementation of the recommendations
of UNISPACE III;
28. Notes with satisfaction the work conducted by the twelve action teams
that the Committee had established at its forty-fourth and forty-sixth sessions under
the voluntary leadership of Member States to implement the recommendations of
UNISPACE III, 19 and urges Member States to provide full support to the action
teams in conducting their work;

_______________
17

See A/AC.105/790 and Corr.1, sects. II-IV.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), annex II.
19
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 and corrigendum (A/56/20 and Corr.1), paras. 50 and 55;
ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/57/20), paras. 42 and 43; and ibid., Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 62.
18

6

A/RES/58/89

29. Also notes with satisfaction that the Committee made further progress in
the preparation of its report under the agenda item on the implementation of the
recommendations of UNISPACE III for submission to the General Assembly, in
order for the Assembly to review and appraise, at its fifty-ninth session, in 2004, in
accordance with paragraph 16 of its resolution 54/68, the implementation of the
outcome of UNISPACE III and to consider further actions and initiatives, and agrees
that, in this context, the Working Group established by the Committee to prepare the
above-mentioned report should be reconvened at the forty-seventh session of the
Committee to complete its work;
30. Notes that in order to advance the preparation of the report of the
Committee, mentioned in paragraph 29 above, the Working Group of the Committee
could hold informal consultations during the forty-first session of the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee as well as the forty-third session of the Legal
Subcommittee;
31. Urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the United
Nations Programme on Space Applications to support activities to implement the
recommendations of UNISPACE III, in particular the priority project proposals as
recommended by the Committee at its forty-third session; 20
32. Recommends that more attention be paid and political support be
provided to all matters relating to the protection and the preservation of the outer
space environment, especially those potentially affecting the Earth’s environment;
33. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to
the problem of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power
sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved
technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and
dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible,
information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on
future space missions;
34. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
35. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
36. Notes that space science and technology and their applications could
make important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and
welfare as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna
Declaration on Space and Human Development”,2 and notes also that the
International Fair on Air and Space to be held at Santiago de Chile early in 2004

_______________
20

Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/55/20), para. 87.

7

A/RES/58/89

will address in an international conference the question “Space and water: towards
sustainable development and human security”;
37. Agrees that the benefits of space technology and its applications should
be prominently brought to the attention of conferences organized within the United
Nations system to address global issues relating to social, economic and cultural
development and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and implementing the United Nations
Millennium Declaration;
38. Notes with satisfaction the increased efforts of the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee as well as the Office for Outer Space Affairs
and the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to promote the use of space
science and technology and their applications in carrying out actions recommended
in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”); 21
39. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to examine, in
cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, particularly in the areas relating to, inter alia, food security and
increasing opportunities for education;
40. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to continue
to contribute to the work of the Committee and to report to the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee on the work conducted at its annual session;
41. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, and agrees that during its
consideration of the matter, the Committee could consider ways to promote regional
and interregional cooperation based on experiences stemming from the Space
Conference of the Americas and the role space technology could play in the
implementation of recommendations emerging from the World Summit on
Sustainable Development;
42. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider a report on the
activities of the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue as a part of its
consideration of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications under the
agenda item entitled “Report of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee”, and
invites Member States to report on their activities regarding the System;
43. Notes that in connection with the consideration of the implementation of
an integrated, space-based global natural disaster management system, under the
agenda item entitled “Report of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee”, during
the forty-seventh session of the Committee, a one-day workshop for industry would
be organized with the participation of Member States and communications satellite
operators to discuss how satellite-based communications could be used during
natural disasters;

_______________
21
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.

8

A/RES/58/89

44. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-seventh
session, its agenda item entitled “Spin-off benefits of space technology: review of
current status”;
45. Also requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-seventh
session, its agenda item entitled “Space and society”, and agrees that a special
theme for the focus of discussions for the period 2004-2006 should be “Space and
education”, in accordance with the work plan adopted by the Committee; 22
46. Agrees that a new item entitled “Space and water” should be included in
the agenda of the Committee at its forty-seventh session, and urges entities of the
United Nations system and invites other intergovernmental entities dealing with
issues relating to the use and management of water resources as well as space
agencies to contribute to the work of the Committee in this field;
47. Welcomes the continued interest of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
becoming a member of the Committee, and, to this end, requests that constructive
consultations be conducted as soon as possible within the Committee as well as
among regional groups, taking into account the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, with a view to reaching a positive and final decision on the membership
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya at the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
48. Requests the Committee to consider ways to improve participation by
member States and entities with observer status in its work, with a view to agreeing
on specific recommendations in that regard at its forty-eighth session;
49. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the Regional Centre for Remote Sensing of the North African States and
the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis;
50. Invites the Committee to expand the scope of international cooperation
relating to the social, economic, ethical and human dimension in space science and
technology applications;
51. Requests entities of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to continue and, where appropriate, to enhance their cooperation with
the Committee and to provide it with reports on the issues dealt with in the work of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
52. Requests the Committee to consider and identify new mechanisms of
international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space to strengthen
multilateralism, in accordance with the preamble to the present resolution, and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, including its
views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
72nd plenary meeting
9 December 2003

_______________
22

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 239.

9
