General Aleembly-El1bteenth Se11lon

(XXXVI), taking into account the resources available
for housing and urban development;
3. Recommends that Governments take all necessary
measures designed to ensure the creation and execution
of low-income housin;., programmes, including the encouragement of housmg co-operatives, and to guard
against any practices, especially speculation in real
estate, which may prove detrimental to such programmes;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, the regional economic commissions, the specialized agencies concerned
and the interested inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Committee
on Housing, Building and Planning and to assist requesting Governments in formulating· and exe~uting,
within the framework of general development and
taking into account internal resources and external aid
available for such programmes, specific action programmes in housing and environmental development'
consistent with the targets and standards recommended;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to explore appropriate methods of expanding, within the framework of
the United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and with the co-operation of interested Governments, the programme of pilot projects in housing,
building and planning as a means of facilitating the
achievement of national targets for the remainder of
the Decade;
6. Invites the Managing Director of the Special Fund
to consider the feasibility of including suitable aspects
of such pilot projects among the pre-investment activities essential for environmental development as part
of general development ;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary -General to report to the General Assembly
at its nineteenth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1918 (XVIII). Capital punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1396 (XIV) of 20 November
1959, in which the Economic and Social Council was
invited to initiate a study of the question of capital
punishment, of the laws and practices relating thereto,
and of the effects of capital punishment and the abolition
· thereof on the rate of criminality,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 747
(XXIX) of 6 April 1960 concerning the procedure for
the study of the question of capital punishment,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 934 (XXXV) of 9 April 1963 relating to capital
punishment,
l. Endorses the action of the Eccnomic and Social
Council in its resolution 934 (XXXV);
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights to study the
report entitled Capital Punishment6 and the comments
thereon of the Ad H oc Advisory Committee of Experts
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders,'' and to make such recommendations on the
matter as it deems appropriate;
e United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IV.2.
1 Officio/

Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 11, document

E/3724, section IH.

3. Requests the Secretary-General, after examining
the report of the Commission on Human Rights and
with the CO·Oreration of the Consultative Group on the
Prevention 6 Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
to present a report, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly not later than at its
twenty-second session on new developments with respect to the law and practice concernin{ the death
penalty and new contributions of the criminal sciences
in the matter.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1919 (XVIII). United Nations Children'• Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1773 (XVII) of 7 December

1962,
1. Takes note with approval of the work of the
United Nations Children's Fund which, while continuing to be devoted to the fields of child health, nutrition
and social welfare, has now been extended to include
education and vocational training as well ;
2. Recommends that Governments, when planning
their economic and social development, should take into
account the importance of meeting the needs of children
and youth and should use to the full such facilities as
the United Nations Children's Fund can provide, including aid for the training of national personnel, in
order to help prepare them for life;
3. Calls upon Member States to continue to contribute as much as they can to the United Nations
Children's Fund.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1920 (XVIll). Participation of women in national
social and economic development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of developing human
resources in order to accelerate social and economic
progress,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
961 E (section II), F and G (XXXVI) of 12 July
1963 and 975 B and C (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963,
Considering General Assembly resolution 1777
(XVII) of 7 December 1962 concerning United Nations
assista!lce for the advancement of women in developing
countries.
Believing in the necessity of women playing their full
part, on equal terms with men, in planning for balanced
and co-ordinated economic and social development, and
in the execution of such plans,
Recognising the contribution of women to national
social development programmes, particularly those relating to community development and social welfare
and the importance of such programmes to the advance~
ment of women in general,
Affirming the importance of training women for such
participation at all levels of social and economic development by means of appropriate programmes in the
economic and social fields, including the fields of educati~n_, vocati~nal training,. eradi~at.ion ?f illiteracy,
nutrition, public health, public adm1mstratton, housing
social welfare, and urban and rural development,
'
1. Calls the attention of Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the spe-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

cialized agencies to the desirab~lity of appointing qu~lified women to bodies responsible for the preparation
of national development plans;
2. Further calls the attention of the Governments of
such States to the importance of training women so as
to enable them to participate fully in all phases of the
planning and execution of national development programmes and to the contribution which non-govern-mental organizations can make in this respect;
3. Invites Governments of States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations within those States
to collaborate in making full use of the services available
under the various technical assistance and advisory
services programmes in order to 1;romote the fu~l participation of women in the planning and execution of
national development programmes ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance Board, the Managing Director of the Special Fund,
the directors-general of the specialized agencies concerned and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, to study the possibilities, under the
United Nations technical co-operation programmes, of
making available to the developing countries the assistance required for the establishment and developm~nt
of social or other centres where women can receive
the requisite training _to enable ~hem to participate eff~tivcly in the economic and social development of their
countries.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1921 (XVIII). Draft declaration on the elimination
of discrimination against women
The General Assembly,
Desirous of implementing the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in which
are affirmed the equal rights of all human beings regardless of sex,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing p_art played
by women in society and the progress made m the field
of equal rights,
Noting also U;rith satisfaction th~ ~fforts ma?e ~y
the United N at10ns and the speciahzed agencies m
achieving that progress,
Noting however that in various fields there stilt remains, in fact if not in law, considerable discrimination
against women,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on the Status of Women to
prepare a draft declaration on the elimination ot discrimination against women, with a view to its consideration by the General Assembly, if possible at its twentieth
session;
2. Invites Governments of Member States, the specialized agencies and appropriate non-governmen~l
organizations to send to the Secretary-General their
comments and proposals relating to the principles that
might be inc~rpor~ted in the draft declara~ion, with
a view to their bemg brought to the attention of the
Commission on the Status of Women.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

41

1922 (XVIII). SeHions of the CommiHion
on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1776 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 on the further promotion and encouragement of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and resolution 8 (XIX) of 3 April 1963 of the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling that the Third Committee has, from the
outset, depended to a large extent upon the Commission
on Human Rights for the preparation of studies on
certain items submitted to it as well as for the elaboration of draft :ieclarations and conventions in the field
of human rights,
Takinq into account that, without the co-operation
of the Commission on Human Rights, the work of the
Third Committee would be greatly hindered since it
could not depend on a previous and specialized study
of the items allocated to it, particularly the drafting
of texts,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-sixth session decided that owing to problems
caused by the work of alteration at United Nations
Headquarters, the Commission on Human Rights could
not meet in 1964,
Noting with concern that there is a tendency to consider that biennial meetings of the Commission on
Human Rights would be sufficient,
l. Declares that in the interest of the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
the Commission on Human Rights should continue to
meet annually as heretofore ;
2. Urges the Economic and Social Council to reconsider the above-mentioned decision, so that the Commission on Human Rights may continue to meet
annually;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as soon as the
Economic and Social Council has agreed that the Commission on Human Rights should meet in 1964, to make
special provisions for the Commission to meet at United
Nations Headquarters and conclude its session before
15 March.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1923 (XVIII). Equitable geographical represent&•
tion on the Commission on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
845 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 by which the Council,
while noting that there has been a considerable increase
in the membership of the United Nations since the
establishment of the functional commissions of the
Council and believing in the importance of ensuring
an equitable geographical distribution in the membership
of the functional commissions, decided to increase the
membership of the Commission on Human Rights to
twenty-one members,
Taking into account that the Third Committee depends to a large extent on the work of the Commission
on Human Rights in preparing draft declarations, draft
conventions and draft resolutions concerning the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that, consequently, an equitable geographical representation on the Commission would immensely
facilitate the work of the Third Committee,
