Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

5. Urges the administering Powers to allow United
Nations visiting groups to visit the Territories and to
extend to them ful! co-operation and assistance ;
6. Decides that the United Nations should render
ali help to the peoples of these Territories in their
efforts freely to decide their future status;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session
on the implementation. of the present resolution.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

N oting with concern -that the voluntary contributions
in 1968 have been inadequate and sharing the SecretaryGeneral's concern over the future of the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa,
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is essential and that it is therefore
desirable to strengthen and expand the Programme,
l. Appeals to ali States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions to the United
N ations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish an
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training- Programme for Southern Africa
composed of representatives of Member States to
advise him:
(a) On the strengthening and expansion of the Programme, including, in particular, the promoting of
contributions ;
( b) On the granting of subventions to educational
and training institutions in Africa in order to enable
them to provide places for persons who come under
this Programme ;
(e) On any other matters concerning the Programme
on which the Secretary-General may seek advice;
3. Decides that as a further transitional measure
provision shall be made under section 12 of the regular
budget for the financia! year 1969 of an amount of
$100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme
pending- the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on
the progress of the Programme.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2431 (XXIII).

United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 by which the special educational and training
programP-Ies for South West Africa, the special training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training pro~ramme for South Africans were consolidated and
11].tegrated, and its resolution 2372 (XXII) of 12 J une
1968 on the question of Namibia,
H aving considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral,21
Recalling paragraph 14 of its resolution 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968 concerning the question
of the Territories under Portuguese administration, in
which it invited the Secrctary-General to develop and
expand training programmes for inhabitants of these
Territories, and chapter II, section D, of the report
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 22
21 [bid., agenda item 70, documents A/7284 and Add.1.
22 [bid., Twenty-third Session, agenda item 64, document

A/

7338 and Corr.1.

*

*

*

Other decisions
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Grantii1,,, of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peopfos

(ltem 23)
At its 1692nd plenary meeting, on 11 October 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee, 23 adopted the following text as
representing the consensus of the members oí the Assembly:
"l. Having considered the chapter of the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Equatorial Guinea, 24 including the report of the United Nations Mission for
the Supervision of the Referendum and the Elections in Equatorial Guinea
(1968), 25 the General Assembly takes note of that report and expresses its
appreciation of the work done by the Mission.
"2. The General Assembly also expresses its appreciation to the administering Power for making it possible for the United Nations presence to
be established in the Territory as called for in General Assembly resolntion
2355 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and to the Secretary-Gener;il for the
action taken by him in this regard.
23 [bid., Twenty-third Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/7265, para. 5.
24 [bid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l ), chapter IX.
25 [bid., chapter IX, annex VI.

65
