A /73/PV.30

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

30

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 1 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 43 (continued)
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/85)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.3)
Draft amendments (A/73/L.9 through
A/73/L.16)
Ms. McGuire (Grenada): Grenada aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the Caribbean
Community, the Group of 77 and China, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (see A/73/PV.29).
Grenada takes the floor to speak in its national
capacity on agenda item 43, entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Grenada maintains its unequivocal opposition
to the imposition of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against the Government and the
people of Cuba. This is a matter of grave concern to
Grenada. Grenada shares in the widespread sentiment
of the global community condemning such unilateral

measures imposed on sovereign States. Because such
actions are contrary to the tenets of the Charter of the
United Nations, the embargo itself runs counter to the
principles that the constitutive document sets forth.
In recent years, we have witnessed with hope and
commendation the strides taken by the United States
Government to re-establish diplomatic relations with
Cuba and further implement several policy changes.
But, alas, we have also witnessed the reversal of those
measures. Grenada views the reversal of rapprochement
efforts between the United States of America and the
Republic of Cuba as unfortunate. We therefore urge
both parties to return to good-faith dialogue.
We continue to stand in firm opposition to laws and
measures that encroach on and hinder the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and equality, international trade or
navigation of any State. Today, we renew our clarion
call for all necessary steps to be taken to repeal or
invalidate the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed on the Government and the people
of Cuba.
Grenada continues to believe that, with the support
of multilateralism in this community of nations, there is
still hope for the return to the normalization of relations
between the two Governments in the spirit of true and
sincere reconciliation and for this unilateral imposition
to become a vestige of the past. For it is only in unity
that we can earnestly fight to overcome the seemingly
monumental difficulties in this world.
Grenada therefore calls for the immediate lifting
of the unfair economic, commercial and financial

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-35542 (E)

*1835542*

A/73/PV.30

embargo on the Republic of Cuba, and reiterates its
unwavering support for draft resolution A/73/L.3 on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We align ourselves with the statements made
yesterday by the representatives of Morocco, Egypt
and Venezuela, on behalf of the Group of African
States, the Group of 77 and China and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, respectively (see A/73/PV.29).
At the outset, I wish Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, a very warm
welcome and a pleasant stay among us.
As on previous occasions throughout the years,
Equatorial Guinea is very pleased to take the floor
on such an important issue as the need to lift the
embargo against Cuba. As in previous years and with
persistence, our delegation unequivocally joins in the
clamour of the voices of 191 of the 193 States Members
of the United Nations calling for an end to an embargo
that has gone on for more than half a century and has
been harming the noble Cuban people economically,
commercially, culturally and socially.
To illustrate the evolution of the situation and
countries’ positions with statistics, in 1992 59 States
voted in favour of that year’s resolution, to 3 against,
with 71 abstentions and 46 absent (resolution 47/19).
In 2000, 167 voted in favour, to 3 against, with 4
abstentions and 15 absent (resolution 55/20). In 2015,
191 countries voted in favour, to 2 against, with no
abstentions (resolution 70/5). In 2016, 191 countries
voted in favour, to none against, with 2 abstentions
(resolution 71/5). In 2017, 191 countries voted in favour,
to 2 against, with no abstentions (resolution 72/4).
When, in 2016, aware of the global clamour and
overwhelming call for an end to the embargo, the
Government of the United States, through thenPresident Barack Obama, took initiatives and decisions
for the realization of that near-unanimous global demand
from among the Members of the United Nations, the
world population in general and the Cuban people in
particular, we were filled with optimism to finally see
the fulfilment of such a long-awaited desire. In fact,
the diplomatic missions of both countries were opened
and trips to the United States and Cuba were conducted
by top leaders of both countries. Commercial flights
were resumed and other measures were taken, which
2/24

01/11/2018

suggested a promising horizon for the total unblocking
of and the end of the unilateral isolation imposed
against Cuba.
It is with the positive developments of the years
2015 and 2016 in mind that our delegation takes
advantage of this meeting to once again — as it has
done and will continue to do — launch an appeal to
the Government of the United States to continue along
the path already laid out by President Obama by fully
implementing resolution 72/4, on the immediate lifting
of the blockade against Cuba in all its aspects. We are
counting on the United States Government to listen to
these appeals and this clamour and, as a result, agree
to pursue and strengthen the actions already initiated,
so that when the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly is held in 2019, this issue will no longer be
on the agenda, and so that it will be, by then, relegated
to the annals of history.
Despite the unilateral embargo and isolation
imposed by the United States, Cuba has been able to
achieve very high levels in the human development
index, with an active and very fruitful South-South
cooperation programme with dozens of countries from
different parts of the planet — including my country,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea — with broad
educational and health cooperation.
If it reached excellent levels of development in
the health, education, sociocultural and other sectors,
can we imagine the heights this brave country could
have reached had it not suffered this unjust embargo
and blockade? Without this embargo and blockade,
Cuba would deploy all its productive, scientific,
commercial, cultural, social, health, educational and
sports potential involved, and its impact would be
much greater, with benefits not only for Cuba and the
countries with which it cooperates, but for many more
countries in the community of nations.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates that it condemns and opposes the embargo
against Cuba, expresses its total solidarity with the
Government and the people of Cuba, and once again
calls on the current United States Government to use
the mechanisms already established by the previous
Administration and within the framework of the United
Nations by proceeding to the unconditional lifting of
the embargo against Cuba.
18-35542

01/11/2018

Mr. Suan (Myanmar): First of all, my delegation
wishes to welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
The Myanmar delegation aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Venezuela,
Egypt and Singapore, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, Group of 77 and China, and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, respectively.
My delegation joins the overwhelming majority
of United Nations Members in calling for an end to
the unilateral economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba, which has no justification whatsoever in
a multilateral rules-based system.
Myanmar believes in the fundamental principles
of sovereign equality, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We are against the extraterritorial application
of the blockade and the politicization of human rights
issues, as they run counter to international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. My delegation has
therefore consistently supported and voted in favour of
the annual resolution on this topic for the past 26 years,
and we will continue to do so today.
The unilateral economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba
over the past 56 years has caused considerable suffering
to the people of Cuba. The embargo has significantly
affected the economic, social and environmental
development of the Cuban people, particularly
its women and children. We fully understand and
sympathize with the people of Cuba in their suffering
and hardship, as, in the recent past and for over two
decades, we were also subjected to unilateral sanctions.
It is therefore with great hope that we welcomed
the rapprochement between Cuba and the United States
with the resumption of diplomatic relations and the
subsequent official visit of President Obama to Havana
in 2016. Furthermore, the United States abstained in
the voting on resolution 75/5 of 26 October 2016. All
of these developments were positive and encouraging
steps towards ending the 56-year unilateral embargo,
which would have benefited both countries.
Myanmar would like to encourage the United
States and Cuba to continue dialogue and negotiations
to achieve the full normalization of bilateral relations

A/73/PV.30

based on the principles of sovereign equality and
mutual respect. The total lifting of the embargo would
alleviate the economic and social hardship of the
Cuban people, thereby helping their efforts to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
leave no one behind. It would also contribute to the
economic development of both countries — the United
States and Cuba — as well as to the peace, stability and
development of the region as a whole.
We are convinced that the United States and
Cuba have the wisdom and capacity to overcome
this protracted political problem between their two
countries. Myanmar will continue to support every
constructive effort to end the embargo as soon
as possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to express my condolences to the people and
the authorities of the City of Pittsburgh, the State of
Pennsylvania and the United States for the events that
transpired in the Tree of Life Synagogue, in which 11
people were killed. We also express our condolences
to the people and the Government of Indonesia for the
air disaster that occurred on 29 October, in which 189
people lost their lives.
On 25 June, Adam López Macias, a 181-day-old
boy, underwent surgery to correct a life-threatening
congenital heart defect, the transposition of the great
arteries, an anatomical problem in which the arteries
are reversed. The surgery lasted five hours. His
unstable condition, subsequent hypotension, or low
blood pressure, and bradycardia, a slow heartbeat,
meant that he had to remain with his small sternum
open until 29 June, that is, for 96 hours.
The embargo prevents Cuban children suffering
from postoperative low cardiac output due to insufficient
blood being pumped by the heart — the most frequent
complication of paediatric heart surgery — from
receiving the best treatment, that is, the advanced
paediatric ventricular assist device, which the
United States companies HeartWare Inc., located in
Massachusetts, and Thoratec Corporation, located in
Pleasanton, California, manufacture and protect with
patents. How can one measure the suffering of the small
boy and his family? Adam recovered thanks to the
professionalism and dedication of the Cuban medical
staff and the efforts of an entire country.

18-355423/24

A/73/PV.30

On 13 December 2017, Rosa Esther Navarro
Ramirez, who was born at 37 weeks, had to undergo
surgery. At the time, she was 14 months old, and had
anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, that is, when
oxygenated blood mixes with deoxygenated blood. The
girl then suffered from ventricular fibrillation — a
rapid and irregular heartbeat — and, during 27 days of
great distress for her parents, was treated for pulmonary
hypertension, or increased blood pressure in the
small lung arteries, without being able to receive the
appropriate drug — inhaled nitric oxide, which cannot
be readily obtained in an emergency and transported by
aeroplane, since it is flammable and combustible and
requires special conditions for transportation by sea.
If there had been no embargo, the medicine could have
swiftly been requested from the United States company
Datex Ohmeda, which produces the beneficial drug
and the system by which it is administered. Rosita was
saved despite the cruelty of that policy.
A 13-year-old girl from Guantánamo with a
malignant spinal tumour and a 5-year-old boy from
Havana with a tumour between the brainstem and
the cerebellum, whose names I clearly must not
disclose, could not be treated with the optimal drug
temozolomide, which is manufactured in the United
States, although they have fortunately recovered from
their conditions.
The company Illumina is the world leader in
next-generation sequencing, which ensures the most
accurate cancer diagnosis and is the basis for precision
medicine and the specialized treatment of patients. The
suppliers of specialized drugs usually require that type
of diagnosis in order to administer them.
In 2017, 224 people per 100,000 inhabitants died
in Cuba because they did not have access to those
treatments due to the embargo. In the past year, more
than 30 United States companies, including Agilent,
Cook Medical and Thermo Fisher Scientific, refused
to sell drugs, supplies and equipment essential to our
health system through the company Medicuba or did
not respond to its repeated requests. No mother in this
Hall or on this planet can help but be moved by the
cases I have described.
The human harm caused by the embargo, which
qualifies as an act of genocide under article 2 (b) and
(c) of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide of 1948, is incalculable.
It is even a violation of international humanitarian
4/24

01/11/2018

law. The human suffering cannot be measured. The
purpose of the embargo, anchored in the Cold War,
has remained unchanged over time. The infamous
classified memorandum of 6 April 1960 from the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Lester Mallory,
guides the current United States Administration’s Cuba
policy, stating:
“There is no effective political opposition ...
The only foreseeable means of alienating internal
support is through disenchantment and disaffection
based on economic dissatisfaction and hardship
... every possible means should be undertaken
promptly to weaken the economic life of Cuba...
denying money and supplies to Cuba to decrease
monetary and real wages, to bring about hunger,
desperation and overthrow of government.”
As an exception, we welcome the recent signing of
an agreement, under a special licence that has existed
since 2016, that established a joint venture between the
marketing agency of the Cuban Centre of Molecular
Immunology and the Roswell Park Cancer Center,
which will allow for therapeutic vaccines manufactured
with Cuban technology to treat head, neck and lung
cancer to be sold in the United States. Under a special
licence issued in 2017, Cuba will also be allowed to buy
81,000 doses of the hormonal contraceptive Mesigyna
from a United States subsidiary of the Bayer company.
Moreover, the embargo is the main obstacle to the
flow of information and broader access to the Internet
and information and communication technologies for
all Cubans, since it hinders connectivity and makes it
more expensive in the archipelago, restricts access to
their platforms and technologies and uses cyberspace
for actions aimed at regime change.
The embargo also obstructs cultural, academic,
scientific, sports and civil society exchanges. In
exercising that hostile policy, the United States
Government, under unbelievable pretexts and for truly
political reasons, fails to comply with the number
of immigrant visas for Cubans agreed as part of the
migration agreements in force. It has made family
reunification and temporary visits by Cubans to their
country more difficult and increased the cost and
has restricted family ties. The blockade is a flagrant,
massive and systematic violation of Cubans’ human
rights, and has been and continues to be a major
impediment to several generations who yearn for their
well-being and prosperity.
18-35542

01/11/2018

These policies also affect Cubans residing in the
United States. Furthermore, the blockade is oppressive
for United States citizens, as it unjustly and arbitrarily
restricts the freedom to travel to Cuba — the only
destination in the world forbidden to them.
The United States Government is crudely
manipulating and politicizing the universal desire
for human rights for all and for the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals through draft
amendments A/73/L.9 through A/73/L.16, which it
has proposed with the sole purpose of adulterating the
nature and focus of the annual resolution against the
blockade, which the Assembly has adopted 26 times,
and the goal of fabricating a pretext to find some sort
of international endorsement to continue to tighten
it, which the Assembly will not allow. A shameless
memorandum that the State Department circulated
last week to accredited diplomats, which I have in my
hands, acknowledges that, “Our proposed amendments
are intended to address the underlying reason for the
embargo.” In the same document, the State Department
points out with unabashed cynicism,
“Last year, direct reference was made to the United
States embargo undermining collective efforts to
implement the Sustainable Development Goals.
We heard [the delegations] loud and clear. Cuba’s
actions clearly threaten those Goals, and, in order to
fully implement them, we need [those delegations’]
support on amendments.”
That acknowledges the lack of respect that the
Ambassador of the United States to the United
Nations and the State Department have for the United
Nations, multilateralism and the General Assembly,
which, last year, she called a “political theatre” (A/72/
PV.38, p. 9). This recently circulated memorandum
truly makes a mockery of multilateralism, decency
in international politics and the great, universal and
democratic Assembly.
I also call attention to the fact that the memorandum
misleadingly implies that the text of the amendments
was previously agreed so as to surreptitiously introduce
other contents referring to another issue, by another
body and another country. Once again, we see the
practice of lying, deceit and immorality in political
discourse. Draft amendment A/73/L.7, which originally
was a single amendment comprised of eight paragraphs,
was later transformed into eight separate amendments,
with the sole intention of creating confusion, wasting

A/73/PV.30

time and wearing out the Assembly. It is an unethical
ploy. If the United States Government wanted to
consider and put to the vote initiatives related to
human rights or to the Sustainable Development Goals,
we would be willing to do that immediately under
the auspices of any body, at any time and under any
relevant agenda item. We will continue to encourage
dialogue and cooperation as the only way to foment
progress in the exercise of human rights, and we will
continue to actively and constructively participate in
the Human Rights Council and its Universal Periodic
Review and maintain our cooperation with every one
of its universal mechanisms.
The United States Government does not have the
least moral authority to criticize Cuba or any other
country in the area of human rights. We reject the
repeated manipulation of them for political ends and
the double standards that go along with it. The United
States Government is responsible for crimes against
humanity. It was that country that used a nuclear
weapon on a civilian population. It develops weapons
of mass destruction. It is currently starting a new
arms race. It is perfecting nuclear weapons, extremely
lethal conventional weapons and lethal autonomous
weapons, and it is militarizing cyberspace and outer
space. The United States Government is the one that
has established military dictatorships and organized
bloody coups d’état.
With the wars that its Government has waged in
recent years, it has caused the deaths of millions of
people, many of whom were innocent civilians, as
well as waves of refugees and the consequent human
suffering. Its Government has resorted to extrajudicial
executions, kidnapping and torture. It is holding
prisoners indefinitely in legal limbo, without recourse
to legal defence, courts or due process at the naval base
in Guantanamo — territory that it illegally usurped
from us.
The Government of the United States has
committed human rights violations against its
own citizens, particularly African-Americans and
Hispanics, minorities, refugees and migrants. Within
a country of great opulence, 40 million United States
citizens live in poverty, and 52 million Americans live
in impoverished communities. More than half a million
of its citizens sleep in the street, which the Ambassador
does not mention. Some 12 per cent of Americans do
not have medical insurance, and 1 million low-income
persons will be deprived of it by their Government.

18-355425/24

A/73/PV.30

Quality education is not accessible to the majority of
people, whom their Government neither represents nor
champions. Equal opportunities in the United States are
a pipe dream. The Government that the United States
delegation is part of is one comprised of millionaires
who adopt brutal policies.
For the same job, women earn 82 per cent of what
men make, while African-American women earn 64 per
cent, and Hispanic women, 62 per cent. Accusations of
sexual harassment are widespread. The average wealth
of white families is seven times greater than that of
families of African descent. The mortality rate for
African-American children less than one year of age
is double that for white children. African-American
mothers are three to four times more likely to die in
childbirth than white mothers, and half of them would
survive with better medical care, which the State
Department never calls for.
There is a difference in racial patterns in the
United States prison population, in the length of
prison sentences, in the use of capital punishment,
which is also applied to minors and mentally disabled
persons, and in appalling deaths by the discharge of
police weapons.
The United States Government builds walls,
separates minors, including young children, from
their migrant parents and locks them up in cages.
False information and the monopolization of digital
communication platforms and content creation are
increasing. The United States Government intervenes
unscrupulously in the electoral processes and internal
affairs of the majority of our States. It is attempting to
overthrow the legitimate Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela by force, while waging a brutal
defamation campaign, threatening military action and
calling for violence and a coup d’état. It is intervening
in and attempting to destabilize the Republic of
Nicaragua. It is interfering in the internal affairs of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia. The Government
of the United States is seeking to exercise imperial
domination in our Americas, invoking once again the
outdated, aggressive and dangerous Monroe Doctrine
and resorting to gunboat diplomacy. It has redeployed
its Fourth Fleet and increased the number and capacities
of its military bases in the region.
The United States is party to only 30 per cent of
major human rights instruments and does not recognize
the rights to life, peace, development, security or food,
6/24

01/11/2018

nor does it recognize the rights of children. It is hardly
surprising that it has withdrawn from the Human
Rights Council. Corporate special interests have
hijacked the United States political system, which is
corrupt by definition.
Words and political discourse do matter. They are
important. By demonizing and making enemies through
propaganda targeting political opponents, institutions,
social groups and nations, they fuel and propagate
division, violence, hate crimes and wars. The impunity
enjoyed by the arms lobby is to blame for the increase
in murders, including those involving teenagers. We
have seen worsening levels of dirty politics, indecency,
amorality, lying, the gerrymandering of electoral
districts for political ends and voter manipulation. Six
million low-income Americans were prevented from
voting in the previous presidential elections, and they
will probably be prevented from voting next Tuesday.
In Florida, 21 per cent of African-American voters
are disenfranchised.
The quantifiable cumulative damage caused
by the almost six-decade-long blockade amounts to
$933.678 billion, adjusting for the devaluation of the
dollar against the price of gold. In present-day dollars,
the blockade has caused more than $134.499 billion in
financial damages. In the past year alone, it has led to
losses of approximately $4.321 billion for Cuba. Had
Cuba received revenues it was unable to receive from
the export of goods and services and not incurred costs
associated with the geographical reorientation of trade,
which requires our country to maintain extremely large
inventories, Cuba’s gross domestic product would have
increased at an approximate average annual rate of
10 per cent, in current-day prices, over the past decade.
Faced with such challenges, Cuba has managed
to make economic progress and provides broad and
supportive international cooperation — which the United
States Government is increasingly hindering — despite
the blockade and forbidden access to multilateral
credit, while at the same time reaching internationally
recognized levels of human development and social
justice. The blockade continues to be the main obstacle
to the implementation of both the 2030 national plan
and the Sustainable Development Goals. It undermines
the exercise of the right of the Cuban people to
self-determination, peace, development, security
and justice.
18-35542

01/11/2018

A/73/PV.30

The blockade constitutes a violation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. It is an act of aggression and
economic war in breach of peace and the international
order. It also violates the internationally recognized
rules of trade and freedom of navigation. It violates the
principles of the Proclamation of Latin America and
the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace and runs contrary
to the consensus reached by the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the world. It
engenders the isolation of and discredits the Government
of the United States and calls for the judicious rejection
of the international community.

Since the 1898 military occupation of Cuba by the
United States to hinder our independence, which had
already been won in a prolonged and epic struggle,
our relationship has been marked by the efforts of the
Government of the United States to control the fate
of Cuba in the face of the unwavering determination
of the Cuban people to defend our independence and
self-determination. Today, Cuba is a fully independent
nation. Master of its destiny, it develops relations
based on respect and enjoys bonds of friendship and
cooperation with all the countries of the world. We
have achieved that through the sacrifices of several
generations, and we will defend it at any cost.

We are living in a time of increasing threats to
international peace and security, the proliferation
of unconventional wars, gross violations of the
sovereignty of States, policies of domination through
the use of force, attempts to reimpose the unipolar
order, of breaches of international law, the ominous
and arbitrary breaking of international treaties, and
propagation of unilateral sanctions and trade wars,
essentially caused by the predatory and supremacist
nature of United States imperialism, based as always
on the principles of neoliberalism, the philosophy of
dispossession and so-called peace based on force.
As a result, grave international issues are becoming
more acute, poverty and inequality are on the rise,
the irrational and unsustainable production and
consumption cycles of capitalism are harder felt,
climate change is accelerating unstoppably, together
with all of its negative consequences, and the nuclear
threat is at a dangerously heightened level.

In terms of our relations with the United States,
we have diplomatic relations and some instances of
official dialogue, and we are developing some mutually
advantageous cooperation in a limited number of
areas. But the defining characteristic of our bilateral
relationship continues to be the economic, commercial
financial blockade that punishes all the people of Cuba
and comes from a place of domination, ideological
intolerance and political revenge. Amid the deep
differences that exist between Cuba and the Government
of the United States, we are willing to pursue a peaceful
coexistence that is based on mutual respect, sovereign
equality and the benefit of both peoples.

Moreover, the extraterritorial imposition of the
blockade has been ferociously intensified, especially
with regard to crippling measures affecting the financial
transactions and banking and credit operations of
Cuba at the international level. More than a hundred
banks have requested the closure of the accounts of our
embassies and representative offices abroad. They have
either withheld funds destined for Cuba or refused to
execute transfers from and to our country, including
funds intended for humanitarian purposes, such as
those intended to deal with the impact of Hurricane
Irma in Cuba, or for Cuban solidarity cooperation
projects in other nations. The blockade runs contrary to
the Charter and international law, and its aggressively
extraterritorial implementation harms the sovereignty
of all States.

The Cuban people will continue to freely determine
our internal affairs in close unity, just as we are doing
in the public debate on the draft of the new Constitution
and as we will do in the upcoming referendum to
adopt it. There is no space — nor will there be any
space — for the interference of a foreign Power. I must
make it known that the escalation of statements, acts
and threats from the United States Government against
Cuba has no other aim than to foster a climate of greater
bilateral tension, and that, in this scenario, public
figures with long histories of conspiracy to provoke
bilateral crises are becoming increasingly visible.
As President Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez stated
on 26 September in this Hall,
“Cuba will always remain willing to engage in
dialogue and cooperation based on respect and
equal treatment. We will never make concessions
that affect our national sovereignty and
independence. We will not barter our principles or
accept conditions.” (A/73/PV.8, p. 35)
Cubans of all generations will adhere with
invariable loyalty to the example of José Martí and

18-355427/24

A/73/PV.30

proclaim with his same conviction that, the south and
north seas would merge and a serpent would hatch from
an eagle’s egg before we would yield in our efforts to
make the homeland free and prosperous.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item. The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 43.
The General Assembly shall now resume its
consideration of agenda item 43 to take action on the
draft resolution issued as document A/73/L.3 and the
draft amendments contained in documents A/73/L.9 to
L.16.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.3.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We deeply thank all those who have expressed their
rejection of the blockade imposed against our country.
To the citizens of all nations, and to the growing
majority of Americans who have joined us in this
cause for peace, justice, goodwill and human dignity,
and in the name of the heroic, selfless and supportive
Cuban people, I ask those present to vote in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document A/73/L.3,
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba. The process of adopting the
draft resolution has begun, and I understand that any
intervention with regard to the substance would be in
violation of the rules. Madam President, I hope that you
will enforce those rules.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the United States
to introduce the draft amendments contained in
documents A/73/L.9 to A/73/L.16.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This is
the twenty-seventh year that the General Assembly has
held this vote. Every year, with the exception of one, the
United States has voted against this draft resolution.
As this draft resolution is currently constructed, the
United States will oppose it again today.
Cuba and its allies do the same thing every year.
They propose a draft resolution blaming Cuba’s
poverty, repression and lack of freedom on the United
States. They falsely blame America for all kinds of evil
things, even genocide. But this draft resolution changes
8/24

01/11/2018

nothing. It does not help a single Cuban family. It does
not feed a single Cuban child. It does not free a single
Cuban political prisoner. Those who support this draft
resolution every year have it wrong. Our reason for
the embargo is and always has been Cuba’s denial of
freedom and the most basic human rights to the Cuban
people. The United States will continue to stand with
the Cuban people until their rights and freedoms are
restored. Period. We will not back down.
Last year, we were joined by just one nation in
voting against resolution 72/4, and that is fine; we
were in very good company. We have no problem with
standing alone on behalf of the things that we believe
in and will proudly do so again today if necessary. But
the most regrettable fact of this draft resolution each
year is not that the United States may not stand alone
in opposing it, but that the draft resolution is a waste
of everyone’s time. It is one more time that countries
feel they can poke the United States in the eye. But
they are not hurting the United States when they do
this; they are literally hurting the Cuban people by
telling the regime that their treatment of their people
is acceptable.
For 27 years we have had this debate, and nothing
has changed in Cuba — at least nothing for the better.
Supporters of draft resolution A/73/L.3 claim that
a change in the policy of the United States would
somehow transform life for the Cuban people. But the
Government of Cuba does not agree. It responded to the
softening of our Cuba policy under President Obama
with more, not less, political repression of its people.
The sorry state of liberty and human rights in Cuba is
not lost on anyone in this Hall, even as countries vote to
blindly support the same resolution every year.
The proof is in the statements delivered by countries
during this annual debate. Many of us care deeply
about the lack of freedom of expression and assembly
in Cuba, the arbitrary arrests and detentions, and the
status of women and labour. We have listened carefully
to our fellow countries’ statements in this debate,
studied their comments from last year, and taken their
messages to heart. We read last year’s statement by the
European Union and we agree with it wholeheartedly.
The European Union called on Cuba to
“fully grant its citizens internationally recognized
civil, political, and economic rights and freedoms,
including freedom of assembly, freedom of
18-35542

01/11/2018

expression, and free access to information” (A/72/
PV.38 p. 27).
Yesterday, multiple representatives, speaking
both for their own countries and for regional groups,
expressed concern for the realization in Cuba of
the goals of prosperity, human rights and human
dignity contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (see A/73/PV.29). Last year, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, speaking for the Group
of African States, expressed the same concern (see
A/72/PV.38). The Ambassador of Singapore, speaking
for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, also
expressed the desire to end poverty and promote human
rights and gender equality in Cuba, in line with the
Sustainable Development Goals (ibid.) The Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
speaking for the Caribbean Community, echoed that
support, as did the Ambassador of Côte d’Ivoire,
speaking for the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
and the Venezuelan ambassador, speaking on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement (ibid.). Furthermore, in
their national capacities, the Permanent Representatives
of India, South Africa, Mexico, Indonesia, Chad and
St. Kitts and Nevis all advocated Cuba’s achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals (see A/72/PV.38
and A/72/PV.39).
We have studied Member States’ expressions of
support for freedom and human rights in other countries
where, like Cuba, they are denied. For example, there
are striking parallels between the suffering of the Cuban
people under the Castro dictatorship and its successors
and the suffering of the Iranian people under the
dictatorship of the mullahs in Tehran. Like the Castro
regime, the Iranian regime violently represses dissent,
imprisons and kills its political opponents, and abuses
women, and religious and ethnic minorities. Like the
Castro dictatorship, the Tehran Government has rigged
its economy in favour of its regime and its cronies. And
both Governments use these stolen funds to finance
their aggression abroad.
Each year, the General Assembly adopts a draft
resolution condemning the Iranian regime’s violations
of human rights. Last year, resolution 72/189 was
adopted with the support of 81 Member States. Eightyone countries made the decision to use the Assembly’s
time and prestige to do what the United Nations does
best — what it is meant to do. Eighty-one countries put
the weight of the international community behind the
principles of peace, security and human rights in Iran.

A/73/PV.30

They did not just pay lip service to those principles;
they put them in a draft resolution, which they then put
to a vote. They won. But most importantly, the cause
of human rights in Iran won. The time has long passed
for the General Assembly to do the same for Cuba and
for the same reasons. How can delegations feel strongly
about Iran and not about Cuba? Countries that are
concerned about the arrest of political opponents and
journalists, the lack of access to the Internet, and the
absolute authority of the Government to restrict travel
both within and from Cuba should have the opportunity
to vote to put themselves and the Assembly on record.
The United Nations does not have the ability or the
authority to end the United States embargo of Cuba.
But the United Nations has the unique ability to send a
moral message to the Cuban dictatorship. We should use
our megaphone to do something that has the potential
to actually improve the lives of the Cuban people. The
United States has proposed a series of amendments
to draft resolution А/73/L.3. These amendments have
been taken directly from the Member States. They are
their expressions of hope for human rights in Cuba.
The content has been supplied by the Member States;
the words of these draft resolutions are their words.
This year, delegations will be asked to vote not just
on the American embargo, but also on Cuba’s political
prisoners, the country’s lack of freedom of expression,
and its oppression of workers. This year, delegations
have the opportunity to do something that will send an
unmistakable message to the people of Cuba that the
world is not ignoring their suffering.
For decades, the General Assembly has failed to
demonstrate leadership in advocating a better life for
the Cuban people. Today, it can show leadership. I call
on the Assembly to vote to affirm the human rights
and freedoms of the Cuban people that it extends to so
many other countries. I call on Member States to vote
in favour on each and every amendment proposed by
the United States. We call on the General Assembly
today to show the world that it stands for human rights
and human dignity.
To the people of Cuba, I once again say that
the United States will continue to stand with them,
regardless of what others do. We will stand with them
until the day comes that we can stand together as free
peoples in our shared neighbourhood.

18-355429/24

A/73/PV.30

The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.3 and draft
amendments A/73/L.9 to A/73/L.16.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote should be limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I would ask delegations that take the floor to explain
their vote to do so only once, that is, either before or
after the consideration of all draft documents presented
for a vote.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba has a damaging
impact on the economic situation of the country and
negatively affects the living standards of the Cuban
people. External trade and foreign investment will play
a crucial role in setting the country on a path towards
sustainable growth. The EU therefore considers that
lifting the embargo could facilitate the opening of the
Cuban economy for the benefit of the Cuban people.
The EU believes that positive change in Cuba
is best brought about by closer engagement at all
levels — Government, economy and civil society — but
also through people-to-people exchanges. We therefore
deeply regret the reintroduction of restrictions on United
States relations with Cuba by the current United States
Administration. The measures restricting individual
self-directed travel in particular not only curtail the
possibility for engagement with the Cuban people, but
also are hitting Cuba’s burgeoning private sector, which
has benefited the most from such individual visits.
Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo on
ordinary Cubans, unilateral United States sanctions
and other unilateral administrative and judicial
measures are also negatively affecting EU economic
interests. We have firmly and continuously opposed
any such measures, owing to their extraterritorial
impact on the European Union, in violation of
commonly accepted rules of international trade. We
10/24

01/11/2018

cannot accept that unilaterally imposed measures
impede our economic and commercial relations with
Cuba. The EU Council of Ministers therefore adopted
a regulation and a joint action to protect against undue
interference and problems for EU citizens, businesses
and non-governmental organizations residing, working
or operating in Cuba.
It is crucial that the United States continue to fully
respect and implement the agreement reached at the
summit between the European Union and the United
States held in London in May 1998. This agreement
covers waivers to Titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton
Act, a commitment by the United States Government
to resist future extraterritorial legislation of that kind,
and an understanding regarding disciplines for the
strengthening of investment protection.
For the EU, opening doors and closer engagement
are the way to go with Cuba. The date of 1 November
2018 marks the first anniversary of the provisional
application of the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement (PDCA). The agreement has put
our bilateral relationship on a new and solid legal footing
and sets out an agenda of critical engagement with Cuba
that will also allow us to support and accompany Cuba
on its path of reform and modernization. We are also
enhancing dialogue and cooperation on issues on which
we still have fundamental differences. To this end, the
PDCA has established a human rights dialogue as a
key pillar of our relationship. The first formal meeting
of the Dialogue, which was held in a constructive and
open atmosphere, took place last month.
We reiterate our call on the Cuban Government
to fully grant its citizens internationally recognized
civil, political and economic rights and freedoms,
including the freedom of assembly, the freedom of
expression and free access to information, to ratify the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, and to extend invitations to United
Nations special rapporteurs to visit Cuba.
We take due note of the amendments proposed by
the United States. Such concerns were indeed brought
up by several EU member States at the recent Universal
Periodic Review of Cuba at the Human Rights Council.
However, the EU considers that they have no place
in the present draft resolution, which addresses a
different, largely economic topic. In a particularly
sensitive context, separate subjects should not be
18-35542

01/11/2018

mixed. Any amendments not directly related to the
subject matter should be avoided, as they risk unduly
confusing the issue.
Following the generational leadership change that
took place in Cuba last April and in the context of the
ongoing constitutional reform process, we call on Cuba
to pursue a comprehensive reform and modernization
agenda, extend economic and social reforms, and
implement such reforms in a manner that will address
the key concerns of the Cuban population and the
legitimate aspirations of the Cuban people for greater
opportunities to participate in the shaping of their
country’s future.
With the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement, the EU offers Cuba a
consistent and reliable partnership to support it as it
seeks to reform its political and economic model, pursue
sustainable development and find common solutions
to global challenges, while we continue to vigorously
promote democracy and respect for human rights. It
is our considered view that the United States embargo
does not contribute to promoting these aims, but
impedes their achievement. Against this background,
the States members of the European Union will vote
unanimously in favour of draft resolution A/73/L.3.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): As it has always done,
Canada will vote in favour of the draft resolution on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba (A/73/L.3).
With respect to the proposed United States
amendments to draft resolution A/73/L.3, Canada will
vote against them.
(spoke in French)
Canada wishes to clarify that by voting against these
amendments, it is not voting on the substance of the
amendments themselves. The reason Canada is voting
against these amendments proposed by the United
States is that this draft resolution is not the appropriate
framework in which to consider Cuba’s compliance
with its international human rights obligations.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): Not long ago, in the
General Assembly Hall and from this very rostrum, the
whole world paused as leader after leader praised one
of the greatest human beings that ever lived, Nelson
Mandela. We extolled his virtues, his principles and the
peace and reconciliation that he preached and lived by.

A/73/PV.30

At the end of the day, we all committed ourselves to
a decade of peace. It was a beautiful moment and, to
borrow the words of the former President of the United
States, Barack Obama, “a teachable moment”.
Mandela’s life, his philosophy and what he stood for
can be summed up in one word, ubuntu, which means
humanness or conscience. Humanness is not found in
the big declarations we make or the grand projects and
programmes that we craft as philanthropic gestures.
Rather, it is in the simple, small, mundane, day-to-day
things we do to each other, for each other, with each
other and against each other that our humanness, our
ubuntu, is defined.
As we consider the draft resolution before us on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba (A/73/L.3), let us ask ourselves
in good conscience, are we living up to the test and the
standard of ubuntu, of humanness, that we all extolled
Mandela for living up to?
My country, Zambia, has many differences with
how Cuba is run day by day, as well as with how the
United States of America is run day by day. Indeed,
we have many differences with how every country in
the world is run day by day. However, what we know
and are prepared to defend without equivocation is
that these differences in perspective on life and on
governance are the right of the people of each country
to decide for themselves, in accordance with their
history, their culture and their circumstances. What is
not in contention, and should never be in contention
is that the thread of life, the thread of humanness that
runs in every Cuban, is the same thread that runs in
every one of us and in every American.
I learned recently how the American lawenforcement community resented the use of the phrase
“mass incarceration” to describe the phenomenon of
the high incidence of a sector of the population being
imprisoned compared to other sectors. They said that
every person arrested was arrested as an individual
and tried as an individual for each crime committed
and on the specific evidence relating to each crime
for which each individual was charged. Just as the
United States law enforcement community rejects that
group characterization, so too should the United States
Government not continue with the group punishment
of the people of Cuba, with the embargo imposed
on ordinary people who have committed no crime

18-3554211/24

A/73/PV.30

whatsoever against the Government or the people of
the United States.
When we stand at this rostrum and say what we
are saying, we are not doing so as a lynch mob baying
for the blood of the United States. We have a saying
in my country: one who tells someone how ugly they
are is a good friend. The United States is a good
friend. We say these things to appeal to its sense of
ubuntu — humanness — in the treatment of the
people of Cuba. We say these things to appeal to the
United States to live up to the high standards that it
has set for itself — the standard of democracy that
compels all of us, if we choose to practice democracy,
to accept the decision of the majority. For, time after
time, the overwhelming majority of the world — the
Members of the United Nations — has voted in favour
of this resolution calling on the United States to lift
the embargo.
The United States is a big, powerful country — a
great country. As stated in the Bible, to whom much
is given, much is expected. Greatness lies not in the
ability to subdue, but in the ability to uplift and inspire.
Greatness lies not in the ability to destroy, but in the
ability to repair and build. Greatness lies not in the
ability to benefit from power, but in the ability to use
power to protect the small and the weak and to enable
the unable.
I beseech all of us to learn from the palm tree that
withstands storm after storm. That greatness lies not in
the ability to stand straight and rigid, but in the ability
to stoop low, to the level of one whom the gales of
winds have knocked down, and lift them up.
My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/73/L.3, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the draft
amendments contained in documents A/73/L.9 to
A/73/L.16, one by one.
Before proceeding to take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.3 and draft amendments A/73/L.9
12/24

01/11/2018

to A/73/L.16, I wish to inform members that I have
been approached by several delegations concerning
the majority required for the adoption of the draft
proposals. Having taken note of the statements made
by Member States in the debate, I shall put to the
consideration of the Assembly the question of whether
a two-thirds majority of the members present and
voting is required for the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.3 and the amendments contained in documents
A/73/L.9 to A/73/L.16, in accordance with rules 83 and
84 of the rules of procedure.
I shall first give the floor to delegations that wish to
take the floor in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba): Before adopting
any decision, it should be crystal clear to all Member
States that proposals presented under item 43 of the
agenda of the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly, on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba, are important questions by virtue of rule 83 of
the General Assembly’s rules of procedure.
In assigning the agenda items of the seventythird session of the General Assembly, as indicated
in document A/73/252, the Assembly defined item
43 — as it has done for more than a decade — under
the heading of “Maintenance of international peace and
security”. Rule 84 of the General Assembly’s rules of
procedure, establishes that
“Decisions of the General Assembly on
amendments to proposals relating to important
questions, and on parts of such proposals put to
the vote separately, shall be made by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting.”
Therefore, in order to be adopted, draft resolution
A/73/L.3 and the draft amendments contained in
documents A/73/L.9, A/73/L.10, A/73/L.11, A/73/L.12,
A/73/L.13, A/73/L.14, A/73/L.15 and A/73/L.16 require
the support of a two-thirds majority of the members
present and voting.
As the Assembly has seen, I am requesting, in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, that item 43 be considered an important
question and that all of those decisions, including on
the draft amendments, be adopted only by a two-thirds
majority. Cuba would appreciate that countries vote
in favour of the motion by voting yes to this proposal
made by Cuba.
18-35542

01/11/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): At this point, I
would like to clarify that, in accordance with Article
18, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
this question will be settled by a simple majority of the
members present and voting.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): A simple
majority is required for the adoption of the United
States-proposed draft amendments. Cuba’s draft
resolution and our amendments do not rise to the
standard required for a two-thirds majority. They are
solely about economic, human rights and social issues.
I would refer the membership to a decision made by the
Assembly on 22 June, in which the Assembly decided
that a resolution on the Republic of Moldova (resolution
72/282) would be subject to a simple majority of the
members present and voting. If that resolution, on
Russia’s military forces in Moldova, was subject to
a simple majority, then surely this one, on economic,
human rights and social issues, with its related draft
amendments, is also subject to a simple majority.
I urge all Member States to vote against a decision
that a two-thirds majority is required.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
We will now proceed to take a decision on the
question of whether a two-thirds majority of the
members present and voting is required for the adoption
of draft resolution A/73/L.3 its draft amendments.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,

A/73/PV.30

Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Barbados, Canada, Georgia, Israel,
Peru, Republic of Moldova, Ukraine, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
By 126 votes to 9, with 52 abstentions, the General
Assembly decided that a two-thirds majority of
the members present and voting was required for
the adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.3 and its
draft amendments.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has decided that a two-thirds majority of the members
present and voting is required for the adoption of draft
resolution A/73/L.3. Therefore, pursuant to rule 84
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, a
two-thirds majority of the members present and voting
is also required for the adoption of draft amendments
A/73/L.9 to A/73/L.16.

18-3554213/24

A/73/PV.30

We will now proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.3 and draft amendments A/73/L.9 to
A/73/L.16.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
amendment contained in document A/73/L.9.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
14/24

01/11/2018

Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Yemen
Draft amendment A/73/L.9 was rejected by 3 votes
to 113, with 67 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Yemen informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.10.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
18-35542

01/11/2018

Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.10 was rejected by 3 votes
to 115, with 65 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.11.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,

A/73/PV.30

Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.11 was rejected by 3 votes
to 114, with 66 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.12.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

18-3554215/24

A/73/PV.30

In favour:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Ukraine, United States of
America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
16/24

01/11/2018

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.12 was rejected by 4 votes
to 114, with 65 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.13.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
18-35542

01/11/2018

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.13 was rejected by 3 votes
to 114, with 65 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.14.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,

A/73/PV.30

Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.14 was rejected by 3 votes
to 114, with 66 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.15.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic

18-3554217/24

A/73/PV.30

of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.15 was rejected by 3 votes
to 114, with 66 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/73/L.16.
A recorded vote has been requested.
18/24

01/11/2018

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Israel, Ukraine, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Oman,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
18-35542

01/11/2018

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/73/L.16 was rejected by 3 votes
to 114, with 66 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.3, as
a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi

A/73/PV.30

Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/73/L.3, as a whole, was adopted
by 189 votes to 2 (resolution 73/8).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I am
always taken aback when I hear applause in the
Chamber at moments like this because there are no
winners here today; there are only losers. The United
Nations has lost. It has rejected the opportunity to
speak on behalf of human rights. The Charter of the
United Nations commits every country here to the
promotion of peace, security and human rights, and
that Charter was betrayed today. Once again, we were
reminded why so many people believe that faith in the
United Nations is often misplaced. The countries that
profess to believe in human rights have lost, too. They
have earned a justified measure of doubt that they will
act to defend their beliefs. And, most of all, the Cuban
people have lost. They have been left once again to the
brutal whims of the Castro dictatorship. They have
been abandoned by the United Nations and by most of
the world’s Governments.
But the Cuban people are not alone today. The
United States of America stands with them. The people
of Cuba are our neighbours and our friends, and they
are fellow children of God. The American people will
stand with them until they are restored the rights that
God has given us all, rights that no Government can
legitimately deny its people.

18-3554219/24

A/73/PV.30

While today’s votes were not admirable, they were
highly illuminating. That light contributes to the cause
of truth, which is the essential basis of freedom and
human rights.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I should like thank the
Permanent Representative of the United States for
presenting the draft amendments that were submitted
during today’s meeting. Uruguay chose to abstain in
the voting on the draft amendments that were proposed.
My delegation will not speak on the content of the
paragraphs submitted to a vote, but rather on their
appropriateness and objective.
Uruguay is a firm defender of human rights and
has always worked actively to promote them. Uruguay
has also been a part of collective efforts to ensure
their incorporation into the Sustainable Development
Goals as well as their actual implementation. We will
continue to do so in all of the appropriate forums where
these topics are taken up. We understand that it would
not be appropriate in this specific case to incorporate
the draft amendments that refer to these matters in a
resolution whose text has been supported practically
unanimously by the entire membership for more than a
quarter of a century.
First of all, the matters referred to in the draft
amendments were not issues that were part of
resolution 73/8. The topic of the resolution that we are
dealing with is specific and targeted: it refers to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba.
Secondly, including those changes would have
distorted the essence of the resolution. The changes
would dilute the main and specific objective, which is
to put an end to the unilateral coercive measures that
have been applied for more than 50 years against that
Caribbean country. The draft amendments would have
diverted the focus of the resolution on the lifting of
the blockade. Because they dealt with issues that were
related to human rights, Uruguay could not vote against
them. That is the reason we abstained.
The blockade cannot be justified in any way.
This resolution must continue to be brief, clear and
blunt, expressing very clearly and firmly that the
embargo is unacceptable and illegitimate because
it violates international law and goes against the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
20/24

01/11/2018

With respect to the resolution to put an end to
the embargo, first of all we would like to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, and thank him for the detailed
introduction of the resolution.
As Uruguay has always done, my country voted
once again in favour of the resolution put forward by
the Cuban delegation, in the understanding that that
the unilateral economic, financial and commercial
embargo against the country goes against international
law and violates the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter. The position of Uruguay is a part of a
context of respect for the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention, as well as the peaceful dispute
settlement, principles that lie at the core of my country’s
foreign policy. As a matter of principle, Uruguay
rejects and does not acknowledge the extraterritorial
application of the domestic laws of other States, or
of any other direct or indirect mechanism that would
constitute a unilateral action by any State, and whose
objective would be to sanction the decisions adopted
in political, economic, commercial, social and cultural
matters, or other matters of another sovereign State.
In that respect my country does not support the
implementation of the course of unilateral measures
applied by the United States against Cuba.
Uruguay also believes that the unilateral sanctions
and extraterritorial laws imposed against Cuba
lead to very serious consequences for the economic
development of the country and undermine the wellbeing of its population, as they impede their legitimate
right to development and cause material damage
against the dignity and sovereignty of the Cuban
people. By voting in favour of the resolution, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to multilateralism, which
we see as a legitimate means of resolving disputes
between States and as an effective tool to promote
international cooperation.
The process of rapprochement between Cuba
and the United States and the measures of mutual
détente that were adopted some time ago with a view
to improving the bilateral climate were a historic
step. They constituted unprecedented progress and
demonstrated that understanding is possible. Uruguay
regrets the current chill in relations between the two
countries, and we kindly urge a return to the path of a
bilateral dialogue, which would lead to the benefits of
peace, understanding and stability in our region.
18-35542

01/11/2018

Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by thanking the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba for his expression of condolences and sympathies
with respect to the recent aviation incident in Indonesia.
The General Assembly has consistently opposed
the imposition of unilateral economic measures as
an instrument of political and economic coercion.
Therefore, it is regrettable that the General Assembly
has to meet once again to consider and vote on lifting
the embargo.
Indonesia reaffirms its fundamental belief that
unilateral economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against country and, in this
regard, the continued imposition of an economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba,
contradict the main principles of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, the norms
and principles governing peaceful relations among
States, the principle of the sovereign equality of States,
the principle of non-intervention and non-interference
in each other’s domestic affairs, as well as international
humanitarian law. Indonesia therefore joined the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations
by voting in favour of resolution 73/8, as proposed
by Cuba.

A/73/PV.30

In that regard, it is incomprehensible that a country,
the Constitution of which is based on those principles
and concepts — values that are the foundation of the
international human rights regime — should maintain
in force the provisions of the economic, commercial
and financial blockade against Cuba. Ecuador therefore
once again reiterates its concern that this issue has
remained under consideration by the General Assembly
for more than a quarter of a century, without a clear
signal regarding the total repeal of the provisions of
the blockade.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/73/85),
which compiles the responses of Governments, organs
and agencies of the United Nations system and entities
participating as observers in the General Assembly,
highlights the adverse socioeconomic effects on
Cuba of the implementation of the measures, as well
as the almost unanimous support of the international
community for ending the embargo.
The embargo continues to undermine the
common desire for harmonious coexistence among
countries, particularly now as collective efforts seek
to consolidate and accelerate processes towards the
full implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its goals.

Indonesia is concerned about the prolonged
negative impacts of the blockade on economic and
social development in Cuba. The blockade remains
an obstacle to the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development for the Cuban people. We
support efforts to ensure that the Government and the
people of Cuba can achieve sustainable development
and be an integral part of the global economic, trade
and financial system. Towards that goal, we call
for dialogue and cooperation and the removal of the
embargo on Cuba.

My country, in accordance with the principles of
international law, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and regardless of political or ideological
orientations, has consistently voted in favour of this
resolution submitted by Cuba.

Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
In making this explanation of vote I wish to refer to
the statement made by the President of the Republic
of Ecuador, Mr. Lenin Moreno Garcés, in the general
debate on 25 September. In that statement, he cited a
passage from the Declaration of Independence of the
United States on the intrinsic equality of all, in the
sense that

We do not, however, believe that using resolution
73/8, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic
commercial and financial embargo imposed by
the United States of America against Cuba”, is the
appropriate way to raise those human rights concerns.
Australia therefore abstained in the voting on the draft
amendments and, consistent with our long-standing
position, voted in favour of the resolution.

“all men are created equal, that they are endowed
by their creator with certain unalienable rights,
that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness” (A/73/PV.6, p.13).

Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica reaffirms its absolute commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Consistent with its policy of peace, commitment to

Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia agrees with the
United States that Cuba has human rights issues to
address. Australia recently put its concerns on record
through the statement it delivered at the 2018 Human
Rights Council Universal Periodic Review of Cuba.

18-3554221/24

A/73/PV.30

multilateralism and strict respect for international law,
my country reiterated its historic support for Cuba by
voting in favour of resolution 73/8 today. Costa Rica
has remained consistent in its position, both at the
regional and international levels, on the need to lift the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
on Cuba, which directly affects the Cuban people.
With respect to the draft amendments that were
presented to the draft resolution, which were voted
on prior to the resolution, Costa Rica felt that those
proposals would alter the scope of the resolution and
distort it, which is why we abstained in the voting in
order to maintain the integrity and ultimate purpose of
the resolution.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our conviction
that it is only through a frank, open and transparent
dialogue, within the framework of international law,
can differences between countries be addressed and
resolved. In voting against the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed on Cuba, Costa Rica
has reaffirmed its complete rejection of unilateral
measures that any State would take against another.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, and thank him for his very detailed
introduction of resolution 73/8.
Argentina fully associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Egypt, on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and El Salvador, on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, and wishes to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.
Argentina’s historic position is that the United
States economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba, which is contrary to international law,
in particular the principles of sovereign equality of
States, non-intervention in internal affairs, freedom
of international trade and navigation and peaceful
settlement of disputes, must be ended. As part of its
full commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and multilateralism, Argentina
opposes the use of unilateral coercive measures, the
extraterritorial application of national laws and the
adoption of discriminatory commercial practices.
Consequently, Argentina has traditionally supported
the resolutions against the blockade and has spoken
22/24

01/11/2018

out on every occasion that the issue has arisen, both in
regional forums and other international organizations.
We regret that the laws underpinning the blockade
continue to be in force and that their application
continues to constitute an obstacle to the full
development of the Cuban people. The adoption of this
new resolution 73/8 by a large majority reiterates the
unequivocal message of the international community.
Argentina reaffirms its conviction that dialogue
without preconditions between the two parties, which
implies the mutual recognition of both Governments as
legitimate and equal interlocutors, will make it possible
to resolve all outstanding issues between the United
States and Cuba, including the lifting of the blockade.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming Minister for Foreign
Affairs Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla and by thanking the
Secretary-General for presenting his report (A/73/85),
published on 29 August.
Panama once again voted in favour of the resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, thereby renewing our historic
support for the lifting of restrictive measures that
negatively impact Cuba’s full economic and social
development. As a country that promotes dialogue
based on common respect, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, as well as free trade and the transparent
practice of international trade, we encourage friendly
and cooperative relations among States, based on
international law, sovereign equality, non-interference
and non-intervention and the self-determination of
peoples as fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
My Government has followed with attention and
has expressed its full support for the economic opening
and modernization of Cuba, as they presage the positive
impact and opportunities they are generating for the
benefit of its population. We have therefore adopted
measures that strengthen the economic, commercial
and tourism exchange between our countries. More
recently, we have promoted significant business
engagement, which was supported by the participation
of President Juan Carlos Varela Rodríguez in the Havana
International Fair, as a sign of Panama’s determined
support to strengthen relations between our countries.
Bearing in mind the global objective that we have
set with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
18-35542

01/11/2018

and the purpose of leaving no one behind, my country
and 12 million Cubans hope that dialogue without
preconditions, in full compliance with our obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations, including the
application of the principle of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of another State, is the key to achieving
well-being and social justice.
As a result of Panama witnessing, on its own soil,
the historic 2015 rapprochement between Cuba and the
United States — both countries friends of the people
and the Government of Panama — which led to a new
stage in the normalization of their relations, my country
firmly believes that only the re-establishment of a
bilateral dialogue between the two Governments can
contribute to reaching understanding and achieving
cordial relations, which the international community
has been promoting for decades.
I conclude by expressing Panama’s support for
resolution 73/8, which was introduced and adopted
today, in favour of Cuba. I reaffirm the steadfast
and determined support of my country to contribute
constructively to overcoming the impasse that distances
two brotherly countries from our region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
voted in favour of resolution 73/8 and against the draft
amendments to the text because we felt that it was
important to maintain the integrity of the resolution
that was introduced by the Cuban delegation, which
is identical in scope to the resolution that the General
Assembly has consistently adopted since 1992 and in
which we call for an end to the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba — a blockade that Peru opposes.
However, want to be clear that we did so without
prejudice to our traditional and unconditional respect
for and promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as stated in the Constitution of Peru, in
addition to being a priority of our foreign policy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in the
exercise of the right of reply, I should like to remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second, and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

A/73/PV.30

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
statement made by the representative of the United
States leaves my delegation with no choice but to
exercise its right of reply. We deeply regret that this
forum has been used as an opportunity to make
reference to my country with fallacies that confirm the
pathological tendency of the United States to distort
reality when it comes to States that do not submit to
or follow its contradictory policies. We reject such
desperate efforts to take advantage of this international
forum and manipulate any issue for political purposes.
The United States has flagrantly violated
international law, including by its withdrawal from
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action — the Iranian
nuclear deal. Moreover, it disregards Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015), which was unanimously
adopted, including by the United States, grossly violates
human rights, demonstrates lunatic unilateralism and
exercises a warmongering policy. All of that is of great
concern and a threat to both regional and international
peace and security. The United States has no moral
authority to impose its views on my country through its
economic, commercial and financial blockade, under
which the Government of the United States is violating
the human rights of more than 80 million Iranians.
The United States is therefore in no position to
lecture or impose its will on anyone. We have strongly
condemned the contradictory and interventionist
policy of that country, in particular its devastating
intervention in the Middle East. It is unfortunate
that its abuse of the United Nations, in particular the
General Assembly, has become a pathological tendency
and prevailing tradition to advance its political ends.
It is worth noting that credible United Nation
treaty bodies have expressed deep concerns in their
concluding observations about discrimination against
racial, ethnic and national minorities, especially
Latino and African-American persons, in the United
States. Alongside the overwhelming majority of the
international community, which opposed or did not
consciously support similar moves in the past, we are
firmly convinced that such an ill-intended practice has
nothing to do with the humanitarian cause or human
rights and will harm the credibility of the United
Nations and its relevant mechanisms.
We expect that the United States officials present
here will take the opportunity to sincerely apologize
for their unilateral and arrogant, as well as unlawful,

18-3554223/24

A/73/PV.30

acts that violate human rights in Cuba, my country and
other States on which they have imposed sanctions,
which they have invaded or in which they have somehow
intervened. American disregard of international law
and norms, as well as its disregard for its commitments,
are arousing indignation and resentment worldwide.

24/24

01/11/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 43?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-35542
