S/PV.9338

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9338th meeting

Monday, 5 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2023/389)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15884 (E)
*2315884*

S/PV.9338

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2023/389)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Abdou Abarry, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa; His Excellency
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States; and Ms. Marie Tamoifo, Founder and
Regional Coordinator of the Network of Young Leaders
for Sustainable Management of Central African Forest
Ecosystems.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/389, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abarry.
Mr. Abarry (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you warmly, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month of June and wish you every
success in your work. I would also like to thank
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of Central African States, Ambassador
Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, and the Regional
Coordinator of the Network of Young Leaders for
Sustainable Management of Central African Forest
Ecosystems, Ms. Marie Tamoifo, for their participation
in today’s meeting.
I have the great honour today of presenting to the
Council the twenty-fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
2/21

05/06/2023

for Central Africa (UNOCA). Since presenting the
previous report of the Secretary-General to the
Council, in December 2022 (see S/PV.9213), I have had
the privilege of visiting the 11 countries that fall within
UNOCA’s mandate. During my visits, I had the honour
of being received by authorities at the level of Head
of State in 9 of the 11 countries. I was also welcomed
and briefed on the situation by the United Nations
resident coordinators and their teams. In my exchanges
with various political and civil society players, I was
reassured by the fact that Central Africa is richer in
opportunities and resources than it is in challenges.
I also noted the preference shown by most States in
the subregion for dialogue and consultation as a means
of resolving tensions peacefully. I am thinking in
particular of the dialogue between the President of the
Central African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, and the President of the Transition
and Head of State of the Republic of Chad, His Excellency
General Mahamat Idriss Déby Itno, on the revitalization
of cooperation between the two countries. In this
regard, I salute the eminently positive role played by
His Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço,
President of the Republic of Angola and African Union
Champion for Peace and Reconciliation in Africa, in
facilitating the normalization process between the two
countries, which led notably to the transfer of former
President François Bozizé from Chad to Guinea-Bissau.
I am also thinking of the mobilization of the States of
the region in favour of resolving the serious crisis that is
prevailing in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the support of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) for the transition
in Chad, through the facilitation entrusted to His
Excellency Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I have also noted the active commitment of the
States of the subregion to security issues, which led in
particular to the holding of the first ECCAS summit
on maritime security and the One Forest Summit, in
which Heads of State gathered to discuss climate
security, focusing on the preservation of the Congo
basin. Similarly, the fifty-fifth meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC) was held in Sao
Tome and Principe from 15 to 19 May, on the theme
of “climate security from the perspective of prevention
conflicts and the consolidation of peace and stability
in Central Africa”, thereby confirming the collective
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

awareness of the region’s States of the need and
urgency to act. These efforts are all the more justified
as the region continues to face the effects of climate
change, as recently demonstrated by the terrible floods
in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My thoughts go out to the victims of these floods and
reiterate UNOCA’s commitment to supporting the
efforts of the member States of ECCAS in order to help
them meet those challenges.
In addition, the region has continued to pay
particular attention to the political participation and
representation of women in key positions, notably
with the appointment of women to the posts of Vice
President in Gabon and Angola and Prime Minister in
Equatorial Guinea. In Equatorial Guinea, the last stop
on my tour of the States under the UNOCA mandate,
His Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
expressed his commitment to preserving peace and
stability in his country and did not fail to request the
support of the United Nations in implementing his
youth programme.
Since I last addressed the Council, I have noted
a growing number of calls for dialogue in the region
to address the challenges of governance and human
rights. In Chad, the transitional authorities have
pursued with determination the implementation of the
recommendations of the sovereign and inclusive national
dialogue. In particular, a consultation framework for
political parties and a national commission to organize
the constitutional referendum scheduled for November
to adopt a new constitution have been set up.
Although functional, those bodies continue to be
criticized for their lack of inclusiveness. As I stressed to
the transition authorities during my visit to N’Djamena
at the end of April, the inclusion of all political players
and respect for freedoms are essential conditions for
the sustainability and success of the transition process.
In that respect, I welcome the good collaboration that
exists between ECCAS and UNOCA to help create a
more inclusive space for dialogue among Chadian
political players.
I would also encourage the countries of the region
that are due to hold elections in the coming months to
ensure that such elections are inclusive and peaceful.
In Gabon, the UNOCA host country, the Government
organized a consultative dialogue prior to the general

S/PV.9338

elections scheduled for this year, at the request of
the opposition.
Although some parties did not take part, the political
dialogue held in February resulted in recommendations
for electoral reforms that led to a constitutional revision,
the adoption of the electoral code and the establishment
of the Gabonese elections centre. In the run-up to this
important meeting, I will continue my commitment
and my good offices with all stakeholders in order to
promote inclusive and peaceful elections, as promised
by His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President
of the Republic of Gabon.
In Cameroon, the crisis in the North-West and
South-West regions has entered its seventh year, while
the country continues to suffer attacks by violent
extremist groups in the far North and the flow of
Central African refugees into its eastern regions.
During my visit to the country at the end of March,
I noted the determination of the national authorities
and, in particular, that of His Excellency President
Paul Biya to pursue efforts to promote dialogue and
rebuild the areas affected by the crisis. In that respect,
I call on international partners to take into account the
positions expressed by the Cameroonian Government
in any initiative aimed at helping to bring about a
peaceful end to the crisis and to lend their support to
efforts to rehabilitate and rebuild the regions affected
by the crisis.
In Sao Tome and Principe, the authorities’
determination to reform the justice and security sectors
was strengthened following the unfortunate events of
November, confirming the country’s determination to
tackle the structural problems that threaten its peace
and stability by reforming the security and justice
sectors. In that regard, the United Nations and ECCAS
carried out a strategic assessment mission in the
country, whose recommendations, once implemented,
will help to ensure the country’s stability.
On a completely different level, it is regrettable to
note the persistence of violations of human rights, in
particular freedom of expression, in certain countries
of the subregion.
Indeed, as we marked the thirtieth anniversary of
World Press Freedom Day on 3 May, attacks on the
lives and physical integrity of journalists must cease.
I wish here to reiterate my commitment, as part of my
good offices, to continue to raise awareness among the

23-158843/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

States of the subregion about the safety of journalists
and access to information.
Recent developments on the border between Chad
and the Central African Republic and the impact of
the Sudanese crisis on those two countries remind
us of the urgent need to adopt a holistic approach to
peace and security issues in Central Africa, a region
already marked by the presence of a multitude of armed
and terrorist groups, with a humanitarian impact,
particularly for women and young people. I would like
to pay tribute here to the extraordinary solidarity and
generosity shown by the two countries, which have
already taken in, respectively, 100,000 and 10,000
Sudanese refugees.
The ongoing fighting in the Sudan is having
devastating humanitarian consequences for Chad and
the Central African Republic. For Chad, $129.8 million
will be needed to care for the 100,000 refugees for six
months. Without a rapid and peaceful resolution to the
conflict, the effects will be disastrous for the Sudan,
but also for all the countries in the Lake Chad basin
region. Faced with the continuing crisis in the Sudan,
we must face up to the fact that our commitment and
our solidarity with Chad are a matter of urgency. We
must therefore act quickly to help this country.

05/06/2023

that issue, with a UNOCA/UNOWAS technical mission
currently deployed in the four countries of the Lake
Chad basin in order to assess the impact of violent
extremism on the local populations.
The security situation in Central Africa has also
been marked by an upsurge in incidents of maritime
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, underlining the need to
strengthen interregional cooperation, particularly in
the run-up to the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct.
I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to
support ECCAS, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
in their efforts to strengthen coordination on this
important issue.

In that respect, I encourage both States to make
use of all existing bilateral cooperation mechanisms,
in particular their joint cooperation commission.
However, as the situation in the Lake Chad basin and
the Sahel demonstrates, a purely military response
will not be sufficient to address the root causes of
insecurity. Political and socioeconomic measures
are also necessary. Without them, armed groups will
continue to exploit intercommunal conflicts, such as
those linked to transhumance.

Three years have passed since the implementation
of the institutional reform of ECCAS, and I am pleased
to note that since my most recent briefing, ECCAS has
continued to play a central role on issues of peace and
security in the subregion. Its active involvement in the
search for solutions in Chad and Sao Tome and Principe
are proof, if any were needed, of its renewed dynamism.
The subregional organization has also continued to
work to strengthen the political participation of women.
The meeting of the ministers for women and gender of
ECCAS member States, held in Libreville at the end of
May, established a road map for the defence of women’s
rights and their empowerment. However, the ECCAS
institutional reform process requires sustainable
financial support. That is why I would like to call on
the States of the subregion to put in place mechanisms
that will help to ensure sustainable and long-term
funding of the organization’s operations and activities
in order to provide it with the resources to fully play its
part. In that respect, I welcome the commitment of His
Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the
Gabonese Republic, the architect of that reform, who
has made its support one of the priorities of his mandate
as current President of ECCAS.

The issue of cross-border management of the
activities of armed groups was so aptly discussed at the
fifty-fifth meeting of the UNSAC. I would therefore
like to reiterate my Office’s readiness to mobilize the
relevant United Nations agencies to support ongoing or
planned regional efforts to address that issue. My Office
also continues to work closely with the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) on

In addition to the challenges I have just mentioned,
Central Africa is suffering from the impact of the
crisis in Ukraine, which is leading to inflation
and rising prices for basic foodstuffs and fuel and
sometimes shortages. Although most countries have
taken measures to mitigate the impact on consumers,
we must be aware that a further deterioration in the
socioeconomic situation could lead to an uptick in

The joint military operations recently carried out
by Chad and the Central African Republic on their
common border reflect their desire to strengthen their
bilateral cooperation to meet the common security
challenges they face.

4/21

23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

S/PV.9338

social upheaval, which would undermine the stability
of the countries concerned.

the particularly complex security and political situation
prevailing in our subregion.

During the first nine months of my term of office,
I have been pleased to note that coordination among
United Nations entities in the subregion has been
strengthened, with regular exchanges on political,
security and socioeconomic issues. In that regard, I
would like to pay tribute to the positive collaboration
between UNOCA and the United Nations offices in the
subregion, namely, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the Office of the Special Envoy, as well as resident
coordinators and country teams, with whom my office
works closely, including in the implementation of my
good offices mandate.

At the time of this meeting, the security situation
in the majority of ECCAS member States is showing
signs of hope and therefore encouragement. Those
States are not spared from myriad security threats, but
they are nevertheless managing to keep them under
control and thus prevent them from contributing to the
development of hotbeds of insecurity at the national
level, which is likely to have a negative impact on the
stability of the entire subregion. We believe that such
efforts deserve to be supported, especially given the
particularly restrictive economic context in which they
are being undertaken.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that the
coming months will be an important turning point for
Central Africa, where crucial political and electoral
processes must be held between now and the end of the
year. With the invaluable support of Council members,
we will ensure that violence, fuelled in particular by
hate speech, which have marked elections in the past,
are avoided at all costs. The peace and stability of
the subregion depend on it. I would like to reiterate
my firm commitment to supporting the States of the
subregion and ECCAS in their efforts to build the
prosperous Central Africa that we want and that is
possible, given the abundant potential of the countries
of that African subregion.
The President: I thank Mr. Abarry for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo.
Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo (spoke in French): It is
a great honour for me to take the floor at this important
meeting devoted to examining the current situation in
Central Africa.
Allow me, at the outset, to express my heartfelt
thanks to Ambassador Lana Zaki Nusseibeh, President
of the Security Council for the month of June 2023, for
having kindly included the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) in today’s discussions.
In the same vein, I would like to congratulate the
Security Council on its decision to devote today’s
meeting to the situation in Central Africa. We at ECCAS
believe that this meeting comes at the right time, given

However, despite those rather positive signs, we
must recognize that Central Africa is also facing major
security challenges, the nature and scale of which vary
from country to country. Such challenges include the
persistent activity of armed groups, secessionist factions
and terrorist movements; the presence of cross-border
combatants; the illicit circulation of weapons; crime at
sea in all its forms; the illicit exploitation of natural
resources; intercommunal conflicts; the humanitarian
crises caused by armed conflict and natural disasters;
and the political and diplomatic tensions between the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda since the
re-emergence of the Mouvement du 23 mars group at
the end of 2021.
In addition to those internal challenges, the security
situation in Central Africa is being adversely affected
by the ongoing armed conflict between rival factions
of the Sudanese defence and security forces. It also has
been negatively affected for more than a decade by the
instability in Libya, the expansion of Boko Haram to all
the States bordering Lake Chad and the entrenchment
of terrorist movements in the Sahelo-Saharan area.
At the political level, the ECCAS member States
are continuing, despite various contingencies, their
determined march to establish the system of democratic
governance. To that end, the year 2022 and the first
quarter of this year were marked by the holding of
several more or less peaceful elections in a number
of countries.
Elections at several levels are expected to be held
in 2023 in the Central African Republic, Gabon and
the Democratic Republic of Congo. In addition to those
elections, constitutional referendums are also expected
in the Central African Republic and Chad.

23-158845/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

The more ECCAS continues to provide support to
member States in organizing electoral processes, the
more it becomes aware of the challenges they are facing.
Those challenges essentially concern disagreements
over the composition of the bodies responsible for
elections, the drafting of electoral legislation, the
credibility of voter rolls, the authenticity of election
results and so forth.
Whether the challenges are strictly linked to
security challenges or to political governance, ECCAS
now has, as part of its revised Treaty in force since 2020,
appropriate instruments to facilitate its work in the
areas of politics, peace and security. Those instruments
were recently activated in Chad and the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe.
With regard to Chad, for example, ECCAS is
continuing its support for the transition process under
way in that country, including through the opening
of a liaison office in N’Djamena headed by a Special
Envoy, the deployment of a mission to establish the
facts surrounding the events of 20 October 2022
and the establishment of a platform to facilitate
exchanges between the transition authorities and the
entities currently opposed to the transition process
under way. In accordance with the relevant decisions
of the Community’s highest decision-making bodies,
ECCAS will continue to support Chad until the holding
of the elections that are scheduled for the end of next
year and are intended to end the transition and mark the
return to a democratic constitutional order.
While ECCAS remains Central Africa’s principal
regional economic community, it is also true that
many of its member States are also members of other
intergovernmental organizations whose areas of
activity cover Central Africa. Based on the principle
of complementarity, ECCAS supports the efforts to
mediate between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda led by the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) under the leadership of
President João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço of Angola,
within the framework of the Luanda process. We also
support the work led by Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, former
President of Kenya, in facilitating the dialogue between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and armed groups as part of the Nairobi process.
Finally, ECCAS, six of whose member States are also
members of the ICGLR, has expressed its willingness to
incorporate into its work the 2013 Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
6/21

05/06/2023

Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region,
also known as the Addis Ababa Framework Agreement.
Looking ahead, we believe that the increasing
strength of ECCAS’s new governance, peace and
security architectures, which have been in place for
the past two years, as well as the implementation of
new mechanisms such as the recently approved revised
protocol on the strategy for securing vital interests at
sea and in the continental waters of ECCAS member
States, will gradually enable the Community to give
effective support to the States of our subregion in their
quest for peace, security, stability and democracy.
To achieve that objective, ECCAS will pursue and
strengthen its cooperation with the various relevant
United Nations mechanisms on issues of democracy,
peace and security in Central Africa, including the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the Office
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region and the United Nations Centre
for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa. I
would add to those four mechanisms the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. We believe that the
support provided by all those mechanisms, together
with ECCAS, towards the realization of the agenda for
democracy, peace and security in Central Africa could
be even more effective if their mandates were reviewed
with a view to adapting them to the ever-changing
subregional context.
On behalf of ECCAS, I want to conclude by once
again commending the Security Council for organizing
today’s important debate. I would also like to reiterate
my organization’s thanks to you, Madam President, for
involving ECCAS in today’s discussion.
The President: I thank Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tamoifo.
Ms. Tamoifo (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to address the Security Council on the theme
of women, youth, climate and peace and security in
Central Africa. My name is Marie Tamoifo Nkom, and
I am the Founder of the Association Jeunesse Verte du
Cameroun, the Regional Coordinator of the Network
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

S/PV.9338

of Young Leaders for Sustainable Management of
Central African Forest Ecosystems and Chair of the
development committee of the Batcham group in
western Cameroon. I am also an entrepreneur and
promoter of Greening Media TV, a goodwill ambassador
for the promotion of cybersecurity and a member
of a number of national, regional and pan-African
platforms, including the African Women’s Network
for Sustainable Development — of course — the PanAfrican Biodiversity Alliance, the Reflection Group
on Migration in Africa, the follow-up committee for
the One Forest Summit youth initiative, reflection
networks on the Sustainable Development Goals and
the Gic Accent Sur Elle cooperative.

why we have trained 100 young reporters and climate
and biodiversity ambassadors in order to support
the visibility of our members’ actions in Central
Africa and beyond, whenever we can find sustainable
financial partners.

In the 30 years that I have been doing this work,
more than a quarter of a century, I witnessed Nelson
Mandela become President and eventually depart this
world. Wangari Maathai worked for our planet, and she
too has left us. They are my role models and embody
my values. In my own way, I have been a mini Wangari
Maathai, working behind the scenes for our subregion
for 30 years. My father’s early death forced me to halt
my studies and to assume the responsibilities of an
orphaned family with few resources, my studies in law
and communications, my shattered family life and my
dashed hopes of a political career — the highs and the
extreme lows.

That statement, which I made as spokesperson for
African youth and the African diaspora to the Heads of
State at the Africa-France Summit in Bamako in 2005,
still holds true today. Unfortunately, States, the African
Union and the international community have not been
able to provide operational support for our actions,
despite the many pleas I have made at the international,
continental and regional levels.

In the end, my energy, my education and my
indestructible values brought me to where I stand
here before the Council today. My perseverance
and the business of hope have enabled me to create
and develop young people’s and women’s networks
and organizations in the 10 countries of Central
Africa — currently including Gabon, the Central
African Republic, Cameroon, Burundi, Rwanda, the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad,
Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe — to
date working together with more than 400 member
organizations and nearly 10,000 community relays and
beneficiaries of our daily awareness-raising messages
via our WhatsApp groups and social networks, without
any significant external support. In addition to using
standard communication networks, the launch of our
web TV channel via our company Greening Media
TV, which is going on now, will magnify the impact
of our awareness, alert and communication campaigns
within the context of our programme for training
communications managers. We have always believed
in the importance of training young people. That is

Imagine the results and transformations that can be
made possible with the ongoing support of long-term
partners. That is part of the work I do, and I am also
extremely proud of it.
“If politicians do not take care of young people,
the winds of change will drive young people to take
care of the politicians in order to ensure that their
commitments make sense”.

The historic Paris Agreement on Climate Change of
2015 and the hopes raised by the N’Djamena Declaration
of February 2021, as well as resolution 2250 (2015), are
facing real difficulties in terms of their implementation.
Vulnerable groups continue to be the hardest hit by
conflict and climate change, and it must be said that
women and young people often find themselves at the
heart of those scourges that hamper development.
Our organization, the Association Jeunesse
Verte du Cameroun-Network of Young Leaders for
Sustainable Management of Central African Forest
Ecosystems, works on sustainable development issues
with a particular focus on empowering young people,
women, local communities and indigenous peoples. We
work to build their resilience and raise awareness of
the need to protect forests and their territories. Equally,
we work to build their skills and encourage their
participation in decision-making processes.
Our Network mainly carries out voluntary activities
related to coordination, structuring, networking and
support for civil society in areas related to the blue,
green and circular economy. With that in mind, and
despite the difficult context, we are managing to
innovate and carry out commendable actions in the
field of biodiversity conservation and the fight against
the effects of climate change. That involves a range of

23-158847/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

capacity-building activities on emerging issues related
to the global conventions on biodiversity, climate
and desertification.
Our training workshops and Conference of the
Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change simulations, known
as COP Chez Nous, have enabled us to draw up joint
position papers and appoint climate and biodiversity
ambassadors in rural and urban areas. From COP15,
held in Copenhagen in 2009, to the present day, I have
conveyed that message from the youth and civil society
of the Congo basin and facilitated the participation of
members of our Network in ministerial consultations
with the support of the Congo Basin Forest Partnership.
Climate and biodiversity caravans and campaigns
for mobilization, for awareness-raising and for
education on environmental issues have been organized
at the local, national and subregional levels. Our
programme for the organization and development of
communities has provided solar electricity to more than
300 households. Forty rural health centres in Cameroon
have benefited from the installation of solar refrigerators
and photovoltaic kits for storing vaccines. As part of a
pilot project, solar-powered sewing machines have been
distributed to women and girls working as seamstresses
in rural and urban areas. Running community
reforestation projects, with national branches in 10
countries, has effectively enabled us to support the
Congo Basin Forest Partnership.
We are a generation of non-professional, selftaught organizers, women and young people, whose
actions support the development and stability of
our countries on a daily basis. Those actions remain
unseen and, unfortunately, underfunded, despite the
billions of dollars announced with great fanfare by the
international community. The members of my Network,
the young people and women leaders I mentor and the
local and national organizations I lead are non-State
actors who are organizers, unemployed, self-taught
volunteers who are trying to survive — and sometimes
they are resigned and discouraged. Behind the scenes,
they work tirelessly every day to maintain stability
in our countries. They are environmental diplomacy
actors who are invisible from the windows of New
York and Paris and ignored in Yaoundé, N’Djamena
and Kinshasa.
Through my statements and my commitment,
I want to defend our diversity, our history and our
8/21

05/06/2023

languages with respect and resolve from within a civil
society in the Lake Chad basin and the Congo basin
that is open to Africa and to the world. Central Africa
is rich in resources, in people, in its active and dynamic
youth, and it is poised to become the world’s leading
green lung. It is therefore a major investment and
conservation destination. Given its strategic position,
it promotes the development of the world’s cultural and
ecological heritage, in particular the Congo and Lake
Chad basins, which are exceptional ecosystems with
much to offer humankind.
As the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa so clearly demonstrated in a report published
in July 2022, the impacts of climate change on peace
and security in Central Africa are self-evident. The
increase in human mobility, the rise in intercommunal
violence, the increase in organized crime and the
activities of non-State armed groups, the added pressure
on coastlines, the rise in crime and maritime piracy,
human-wildlife conflicts, food insecurity, increased
pressure on the land and the growing threat to the
tropical forest of the Congo basin are all climate-related
security risks in the subregion.
The negative consequences of climate change also
have an impact on the availability of resources — a
problem that young people will have to face throughout
their lives. I wish to emphasize here the issue of the
forced displacement of young men and women, who
abandon all their possessions, sometimes risking
their lives. I would even go so far as to say that the
cause-and-effect relationship works both ways: the
impact of climate change on security, and the impact of
insecurity on climate change. One cannot be addressed
independently of the other. Human action is the driving
force, and women and young people are the primary
victims. All of that is therefore leading women and
young people in Central Africa to adapt and to show a
great deal of natural resilience, which I consider to be
nothing short of heroic in our countries. It is a constant
battle between David and Goliath that must be fought
with intelligence, negotiation and consensus.
We therefore open our arms to our leaders: let
us work together and support the actions of our
Governments, development partners and pan-African
and United Nations institutions that want to bolster
our programmes over the long term and give them
institutional status, framed by our Network’s strategy
document, as well as other structured youth and
women’s platforms at the local, national, regional
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

and international levels. Such actions must also be
undertaken in synergy with all stakeholders so as to
leave no one behind.
Let us implement programmes using bottom-up
approaches to complement top-down ones. We need to
build on the perspectives that young people and women
themselves bring to the table, as well as their innovative
contributions to solving the complex problems that the
world now faces. Let us support the empowerment
of young people and women through nature-based,
income-generating projects and encourage all sectors
to create green and decent jobs that will help to prevent
the radicalization of young people and the exposure of
young girls and women to all forms of violence.
Let us aim our financial resources towards players
recognized at the national level for their skills. Let us
do away with the surplus of international intermediaries
and conditionalities. Let us evaluate the effectiveness
of projects and put an end to overly complex procedures
for accessing funding and technologies to enable us
to act.
The relevant actors and networks in organized civil
society must be provided with sufficient resources, as is
the case for the Lake Chad Basin Commission, through
substantial programmes. A regional, autonomous and
independent international coordination mechanism that
works in conjunction with an intergenerational task
force of young people and women, with a permanent
technical secretariat and focal points, should
be established.
To conclude, I wish to tell our leaders to take a
chance on young people and women in civil society, to
invest in them and to have faith in them. They should
come with us to see the reality on the ground and in the
villages — in Elobi, Ntaba or Eligdzoa — areas that are
described as being difficult yet that are so human. They
must act differently and in new ways to bring about fair
and equitable societies.
If we must ask anything of our leaders in these
times of climate change and geopolitical uncertainty, it
is to aim high. We need a paradigm shift, because today
it is clearly no longer enough to act with Governments
alone. We need to do more with civil society, with
young people, with women, with ordinary citizens,
who are more numerous and more active and who are
showing an abundance of imagination in the face of the
risks in Central Africa.

S/PV.9338

The President: I thank Ms. Tamoifo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the Permanent
Representatives of the three African members of the
Security Council (A3) — Ghana, Mozambique and my
own country, Gabon.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/389) and thank Special Representative Abdou
Abarry for his comprehensive briefing and relevant
information on the situation in Central Africa. We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, and thank him for
his briefing. We listened closely to Ms. Marie Tamoifo,
President and founder of Association Jeunesse Verte
du Cameroun.
Our statement will focus mainly on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the region
covered by the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). On the political front, we
welcome the smooth conduct of elections in several
countries of the region and believe that future elections
will maintain the same dynamic.
At the regional level, the A3 welcomes crisis-exit
initiatives such as the Nairobi and Luanda processes, as
well as the deployment of the East African Community
regional force, whose mandate has just been renewed.
They demonstrate the willingness and commitment of
African States to restoring peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We welcome the commitment
of President João Lourenço of Angola and President
Evariste Ndayishimiye of Burundi to stabilizing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire
region. Such regional involvement is the essence of
the principle of African solutions to African problems
and reflects the clear interest of the countries in the
region in resolving the security crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the situation in Chad, the A3 notes
with satisfaction the measures taken by the transitional
authorities to ease political tensions and prepare for
the constitutional referendum and the presidential and
legislative elections. The release of several hundred
fighters from the Front pour l’alternance et la Concorde

23-158849/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

au Tchad and the amnesty granted to the demonstrators
of 20 October 2022 could help to foster a climate of
confidence in the country. It is therefore essential to
ensure that all political players, including civil society,
continue their dialogue.
We encourage the countries of the region to
continue their inclusive approach to the political and
peace processes in Central Africa, paying particular
attention to young people and women. In that regard,
we welcomed the holding in Libreville on 25 May of
the first Conference of ECCAS Ministers in charge of
Gender and the Advancement of Women, which has
enabled a review of the various national institutional
mechanisms designed to promote the advancement
of women within the region, as well as the holding in
Luanda on 25 May of the first International Women’s
Forum for Peace and Democracy, dedicated to the
struggle of women for equality, emancipation and the
development of the continent for peace and democracy.
It demonstrates the importance of including women
and young people in peace processes, an aspect that the
United Nations has repeatedly emphasized.
On the security front, the scourges facing several
countries in the region include terrorism and violent
extremism, cross-border crime, the persistence of armed
groups, maritime insecurity, illicit trafficking in natural
resources and intercommunal clashes exacerbated
by the growing effects of climate change. The A3
condemns terrorist groups’ increasing use of explosive
devices, attacks and kidnappings, which have kept
children out of school and led to mass displacements,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We strongly condemn the persistent terrorist attacks
by Boko Haram and dissident groups in Cameroon and
Chad. We also condemn the violence committed by
armed groups in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and ask that they
immediately and unconditionally join the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
and the political consultations under way. With
regard to DDR, it is important to remember that those
programmes, which are at the heart of peacebuilding
processes, are very often hampered by a lack of
adequate funding, which in many cases encourages a
resurgence of crises in post-conflict countries.
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon once again stress
the economic, security and humanitarian impact of
the crisis in the Sudan on the Central African region.
The Sudan shares borders with the Central African
10/21

05/06/2023

Republic and Chad. We encourage the strengthening
of cross-border cooperation in the subregion and
with neighbouring States. Cooperation against crossborder threats should be strengthened at the level of
the subregional organizations and United Nations
offices concerned. It is also important to continue
organizing joint bilateral operations, as Chad and the
Central African Republic did on 15 May, in order to
ensure a strengthened and coordinated response to the
subregion’s security challenges.
We note that maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea deserves particular attention in view of the
surge in attacks by pirates, particularly off the coast
of Gabon. The threat that maritime insecurity poses
to international peace and security is well known. In
that regard, it is essential to strengthen cooperation
and coordination between the regional and economic
communities of Central and West Africa and to continue
to support capacity-building in the countries of the Gulf
of Guinea in order to combat that scourge effectively.
The A3 notes the importance of the synergy
between the subregional organizations of the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States, together with
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, in providing a sustainable response to
the region’s security, economic and political challenges.
That cross-cutting approach will be essential to lasting
peace in both subregions.
On the humanitarian front, the A3 is concerned
about the consequences resulting either from human
factors such as armed violence or natural ones such as
floods and drought. We call for secure and unhindered
humanitarian access to countries in conflict and echo
the Secretary-General’s appeal to international donors
and partners to fund humanitarian response plans in
the region. We would like to remind the Council that
Africa is the continent that pollutes the least and is the
most vulnerable to natural disasters. Competition over
access to drinking water, natural resources, foodstuffs
and fertile land weakens populations’ resilience and
reinforces intercommunal violence and the recruitment
of young people by terrorist networks and armed
groups. The effects of climate change are particularly
visible in Africa with its recurring cycles of drought
and flooding, as shown by the recent floods in Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
claimed hundreds of victims. Such natural disasters
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

S/PV.9338

also increase the movements of climate refugees in
their quest for peace and stability.

and the release of protestors detained without due
legal process.

We are all aware of the crucial role that the Congo
basin rainforest plays in the fight against climate
change. The international community must respect its
commitments to financing adaptation and mitigation
policies, including those made at the One Forest
Summit held in Libreville. The A3 urges the members
of the Security Council to take regional priorities into
account when adopting its presidential statement on
UNOCA, the negotiations on which have been stalled
for several years owing to a lack of consensus on the
links between security and climate.

We pay tribute to Chad’s generosity in helping to
host tens of thousands of refugees fleeing the crisis
in the Sudan. The United Kingdom is also providing
over $3 million in humanitarian assistance to support
vulnerable refugees from the Sudan in Chad. We
encourage the Chadian transitional authorities to
use their influence with the Sudan’s generals to
encourage adherence to the ceasefire, the facilitation of
humanitarian access and progress towards a peaceful
resolution to the crisis.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
respecting the territorial integrity and intangibility
of borders, as well as the sovereignty of the countries
of Central Africa prey to chronic insecurity. We also
reiterate our full support for Special Representative
Abdou Abarry and his team for their tireless efforts on
the ground and hope that very soon the Council will
support him with a presidential statement on UNOCA.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abarry, the President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo, and Ms. Tamoifo
for their importing briefings.
I will make five points today on the challenges
facing Central Africa.
First, as the Secretary-General described in his
most recent report (S/2023/389), the subregion is
facing important electoral and transitional milestones.
Inclusive, peaceful and credible political processes
are critical for building and sustaining peace in the
subregion. We encourage Member States to facilitate
inclusive electoral and transitional processes and to
draw on the support of United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA).
Secondly, the transition in Chad is one such potential
milestone, but the Chadian transitional authorities must
honour conditions set out in the May 2023 African
Union Peace and Security Council communiqué if
this milestone is to be achieved. The response to last
October’s demonstrations was concerning. The United
Kingdom encourages the transitional authorities to work
with UNOCA and ECCAS to ensure accountability

Thirdly, the United Kingdom remains concerned
about the situation in Cameroon, especially the
humanitarian impact of the conflict in the North-West
and South-West regions. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that inclusive dialogue is critical to resolving
the crisis. The United Kingdom continues to call on all
parties to engage and to enable safe access to schools
and humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, as highlighted by my colleague the
representative of Gabon, climate insecurity is a major
threat to this region. The United Kingdom welcomes
UNOCA’s implementation of climate-security projects
in Central Africa. It is essential that UNOCA’s work
on climate security in the region continues and that
the Council supports efforts to mitigate the challenges
posed by climate change.
Finally, we cannot ignore the destabilizing role the
Wagner Group continues to play in this region. It is a
driver of conflict and resource competition motivated
by exploitation of natural resources and frequently
associated with human rights atrocities. They are a part
of the problem, not the solution.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Abarry, His Excellency Ambassador
Da Piedade Veríssimo and Ms. Tamoifo for their
insightful briefings.
Japan commends the essential work of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
in carrying out its good offices in coordinating
cooperation with and between regional organizations,
including the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). Such enhanced coordination
and partnerships are essential for regional peace
and security.

23-1588411/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

Today I will focus on four challenges facing
the region. The first challenge is establishing and
maintaining good governance and resilient democratic
institutions. This requires continuous effort. Civic
space, including freedom of expression, must be
protected, and political dialogue must be inclusive. The
electoral system must also be transparent and credible.
In this regard, Japan echoes the recent calls by the
African Union Peace and Security Council on Chad.
We expect the referendum on the new Constitution to
take place as planned on 19 November.
Secondly, persistent insecurity is of great
concern. We are seeing an increasing trend in armed
conflicts, growing violent extremism and heightened
intercommunal tensions. The spread of hate speech and
disinformation also has a destabilizing impact. Japan
values the regional initiatives and the efforts of States
in the region, along with UNOCA, to tackle these
challenges. At the same time, we emphasize that such
efforts need to respect human rights and include the
voices of women and youth.
Thirdly, we are gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in the region. The clashes in the
Sudan are compounding the already volatile conditions.
In this regard, Japan has decided to provide assistance
to the Sudan’s neighbouring countries to address the
needs of refugees and returnees.
Japan also notes the ongoing humanitarian
challenges in the North-West and South-West regions of
Cameroon and laments that more than 600,000 people
have been internally displaced. Japan expects all
stakeholders, including the Government of Cameroon,
to make further efforts to resolve the crisis in line with
the recommendations that emerged from the 2019 Major
National Dialogue. Japan reiterates its commitments
to supporting UNOCA’s role in promoting inclusive
political dialogue.
Finally, the adverse effects of climate change are
exacerbating the region’s insecurity and humanitarian
crises. The increasing scarcity of water and decreasing
amount of arable land are fuelling conflicts between
farmers and pastoralists. Heavy rains, flooding and
desertification are leading to loss of life and property
as well as displacement. Japan applauds the initiative
taken by UNOCA and other stakeholders in promoting
coherence between peacebuilding and climate-action
policies. For its part, Japan will continue to assist in
strengthening the resilience of climate-vulnerable
12/21

05/06/2023

groups through enhancing climate-change adaptation
and climate disaster risk reduction.
Let me conclude my remarks by stressing the
importance of ensuring a humanitarian-developmentpeace-nexus approach in an inclusive manner when
tackling the aforementioned challenges. Promoting
human security should be at the centre of the effort.
Coordination and cooperation are needed from
all stakeholders, including international financial
institutions and the entire United Nations system,
from the Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic
and Social Council to the resident coordinators. In
this respect, Japan has been providing development
assistance with an emphasis on institution-building and
human resource development. We remain committed
to continuing to play our part in promoting peace and
stability in the region.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Representative, the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States and Ms. Tamoifo for their briefings.
I would like to emphasize three points. First of all,
France welcomes the solidarity shown by the Sudan’s
neighbours, in particular Chad, in welcoming the
refugees. The crisis threatens to destabilize the entire
region, as the number of displaced people, refugees and
food-insecure people continues to rise. Together with
its European partners, France is mobilized to respond to
the humanitarian crisis and the needs of the population.
I would now like to return to the dramatic
consequences of climate change in Central Africa,
particularly for the population. The torrential rains
that have affected the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, to which the Special
Representative referred, have caused hundreds of
victims and remind us of the urgent need to act. In this
respect, we welcome the work carried out by UNOCA
in the face of the urgency of climate change. Last
March, France and Gabon organized the One Forest
Summit to seek solutions to protect tropical forests. It
is crucial that the Security Council listens to its African
members, as well as civil society, which are constantly
alerting us to the link between climate and security.
France calls on all Member States to take part in the
collective effort, in particular by joining the United
Nations Climate Security Mechanism.
Finally, efforts to bring democratic transitions to
a successful conclusion and to consolidate political
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

processes in the region must continue. With elections due
to take place in several countries in the coming months,
it is essential to work to ensure that the processes are
inclusive, credible and peaceful and to guarantee the
full participation of stakeholders, particularly women
and young people.
In Chad, following the events of 20 October,
measures have been taken to promote national
reconciliation. It is important to further encourage the
Chadian authorities to continue their actions to that end.
Dialogue must continue in an inclusive spirit, involving
all the country’s civic and political forces, particularly
with a view to the forthcoming elections, in order to
enable the transition to continue peacefully.
In Cameroon, France remains concerned about the
situation in the North-West and South-West regions.
We encourage the Cameroonian authorities to pursue
dialogue with a view to finding a political solution to
the crisis.
Following the events of November, France
reaffirms its commitment to the stability of Sao Tome
and Principe. It welcomes the work carried out by
UNOCA, in partnership with the Economic Community
of Central African States, to support the reform of the
country’s security and justice sectors.
In conclusion, France welcomes UNOCA’s action
to consolidate peace in Central Africa. It encourages
the Economic Community of Central African States
and its member States to pursue their efforts in terms of
regional integration. It also calls on the members of the
Council to provide Special Representative Abarry all the
support he needs to carry out his mandate, in particular
through the adoption of a presidential statement.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Abarry, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
for his briefing and his work. I would like to welcome
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), and civil society
representative Ms. Tamoifo.
The briefings we have just heard illustrate the
nature of Central Africa’s security challenges, which
are multidimensional, cross-border, interconnected and
significant. That is why UNOCA’s engagement with all

S/PV.9338

Central African States and its collaboration with other
United Nations missions and Offices remains crucial.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, the growing insecurity and deteriorating
human rights situation in some countries threatens
all of Central Africa. I am referring, first of all, to
the cross-border activities of armed groups, which
hamper efforts to consolidate peace and undermine the
protection of civilians.
Switzerland welcomes the collaboration between
the Central African Republic and Cameroon aimed at
strengthening the security of civilians in border areas
and encourages further enhanced cooperation with
other neighbouring countries. The arrival of people
fleeing the conflict in the Sudan has a direct impact
on the security and humanitarian situation in Central
Africa. We welcome the efforts of the countries of
the region to receive refugees. We are concerned
about the increase in the number of people in need of
assistance as a result of protracted humanitarian crises,
particularly in Cameroon. We call on all parties to
respect international humanitarian law, in particular
by allowing and facilitating rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access to civilian populations in need.
Secondly, strengthening good governance and
promoting inclusive and transparent political dialogue
remains essential for the region. Conflicts are often
political in nature, and security responses alone cannot
offer a lasting solution. The transition process under
way in Chad since 2021, for example, presents a unique
opportunity to initiate significant change in the country.
For that to happen, the full participation of civilian
actors, including the opposition, is essential. In that
context, we welcome the constructive role played by
UNOCA, including with the transitional Government
in Chad. Furthermore, several electoral cycles will take
place in the region in 2023. Peaceful, transparent and
inclusive elections are a powerful catalyst for advancing
peace and stability. That is why we are calling for the
respect for human rights, in particular by guaranteeing
political rights, as well as providing the necessary means
for the full and meaningful participation of women.
Thirdly, the impact of climate change on security in
Central Africa is visible and must be taken into account.
Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla, a civil society representative
from the Niger, reminded the Council of this last month
(see S/PV.9327). In the Lake Chad basin, 5.5 million
people have been affected by flooding and 1,000 have

23-1588413/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

lost their lives. In other places, droughts contribute to
the modification of transhumance corridors, to food
insecurity and to displacement, thus fuelling conflicts.
We congratulate the countries of the region on their
critical initiatives to tackle climate change, notably the
Central African Forest Initiative. We also welcome the
analytical work undertaken by UNOCA and the ECCAS
on the impact of climate change on peace and security.
We hope that the appointment of a special adviser on
climate and security for UNOCA will contribute to
addressing this critical issue in the region.
In view of the complex security challenges in
Central Africa, Switzerland reiterates its full support
for UNOCA. I call on other members to do likewise. In
that regard, Switzerland fully subscribes to the efforts
made by the Gabon and the United Kingdom to adopt
a presidential statement. After three years, it is time
for the Council to reiterate its support for the valuable
work of the Regional Office in all areas of its mandate.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I begin by thanking Mr. Abdou Abarry, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gilberto
da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), and Ms. Marie Tamoifo, civil society
representative, for their briefings this morning. I
also thank the Secretariat for the detailed report
(S/2023/389) on the latest developments in the region
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA).
Ecuador values the important work of UNOCA
and its joint work with countries and organizations in
the region, in particular with ECCAS, which is key to
addressing the root causes of violence and building
sustainable peace.
I would like to highlight the following points.
On the political front, we hope that the electoral
processes scheduled for this year in the region will be
conducted in a peaceful and transparent manner. The
participation of citizens, including women and young
people, will be important to consolidate democracy
and institutionality, which are necessary pillars for
achieving stability. We appreciate the efforts being
made in the preparation of a constitutional referendum
in Chad, as well as the support provided by UNOCA
to the transition process, including the visit made in
March. We are also following with interest the electoral
process in Gabon and wish our colleagues every success.
14/21

05/06/2023

On security, the continuation of violence by
non-State groups operating in the region, particularly
in Cameroon and the Lake Chad basin, is of great
concern to Ecuador. We condemn the acts of violence
that have occurred. We sympathize with the victims
and encourage the countries of the area to continue to
cooperate in a coordinated fight against terrorism in all
its forms, while recalling the obligation to respect, at all
times, human rights and international humanitarian law.
We also note with concern the effects of the Sudanese
conflict on the region and appreciate the welcome given
to those fleeing the violence.
With regard to the situation in Cameroon, we
call on the parties to continue dialogue with a view
to ending the crisis affecting the North-West and
South-West regions of the country. Peaceful talks are
the way to avoid further casualties and to protect the
civilian population.
Regarding the situation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, we note with concern reports of
restrictions and violations. The abduction and killing of
journalists is unacceptable and constitutes an alarming
attack not only on the victims but also on freedom
of expression, a fundamental pillar of democracy.
Similarly, the reports of the torture and the killing of
detainees are unacceptable. Those responsible for all
those acts must be held accountable for their actions.
Women’s participation in political processes
promotes social cohesion, development and the
prevention of violence. We therefore welcome the
appointment of the first women to the posts of
Vice-President of Gabon and Prime Minister of
Equatorial Guinea and invite all countries to make
greater efforts in that field.
In conclusion, I recall that the Council, on
31 October 2002, noted that despite its enormous
potential, which could make it one of the poles of
development of the continent, Central Africa had yet
to achieve the stability that would enable it to utilize its
resources to the maximum benefit of its population in
an equitable manner. That task of achieving stability,
identified two decades ago, is ongoing and, in that
regard, the work of UNOCA is crucial in coordinating
efforts and managing the interplay of factors as diverse
as terrorism, organized crime, food insecurity and the
effects of climatic phenomenona affecting the region.
We are convinced that sustainable peace will be
achieved only through development and therefore the
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

generation of opportunities for the population and the
improvement of their living conditions are necessary to
create and maintain conditions of stability and security.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa Abarry for his presentation and the good offices
he has offered since the assumption of his post, and we
encourage him to work closely with other United Nations
missions in the region. We also thank Ambassador Da
Piedade Veríssimo and Ms. Tamoifo for their briefings.
I will now focus on three key issues.
First, with regard to the political developments,
while we recognize that some progress has been
achieved, several challenges remain. Albania welcomes
the measures that the transitional authorities in Chad
took to reduce tensions following the deadly protests
of 20 October 2022 and calls on them to continue
to uphold and protect all human rights. For the
constitutional referendum and the eventual return
to constitutional order, it is important that all parties
pursue constructive dialogue.
Preserving the democratic gains made across the
region demands continuous efforts in safeguarding the
civic space, human rights and ensuring accountability.
In that vein, the political situation in the Central
African Republic remains worrisome, with violations
of human rights and humanitarian law committed by
all parties, including by the Wagner Group. At the same
time, obstructions to the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic are unacceptable, and the
status of forces agreement must be fully respected.
As far as Sao Tome and Principe is concerned,
we welcome the investigations and measures of the
authorities following the torture and death of the
individuals detained since the 25 November 2022 events.
Secondly, in terms of the security developments,
despite national and regional efforts, the activities of
armed groups in the region persist. The operations
conducted by the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Far North region of Cameroon and the wider Lake
Chad basin have brought together Cameroon and its
neighbours in the fight against Boko Haram and other
terrorist groups. Although a positive development, the
Force cannot end the violent activities of extremist
groups in the region if their exploitation of resources,

S/PV.9338

recruitment or propaganda as an alternative to State
weaknesses goes unchecked.
Albania acknowledges Cameroon’s encouraging
actions in addressing the crisis in the North-West and
South-West regions. Nonetheless, we remain concerned
about the humanitarian impact and human rights
violations. It is crucial for humanitarian operations to
go unhindered. The resolution of that conflict should
be nationally owned and duly supported, as requested
by international partners. As such, we encourage the
Government to foster a political environment that
enables broader political participation.
Thirdly, with regard to the regional developments,
Albania shares the concerns that the alarming escalation
of violence in the Sudan is a destabilizing factor in an
already extremely fragile region. The challenges on
the border between the Sudan, Chad and the Central
African Republic should be addressed with continued
dialogue and enhanced regional coordination.
That leads me to the next point: climate change
remains the underlying, silent driver of conflict and
hardship in the region. The mass flooding, displacement
and worsening of intercommunal tensions require
collective solutions to develop capacities against
climate change.
We strongly commend the continued engagement of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
in underscoring the implication of climate change, as
well as its cooperation with the Economic Community
of Central African States to promote joint efforts for
peace and security in Central Africa.
In conclusion, we think the Security Council should
be united in its support for the region and the Office
and should adopt a presidential statement in that regard.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry
for the informative briefing. I also wish to thank Mr. Da
Piedade Veríssimo and Ms. Tamoifo for their briefings.
I would like to begin by expressing the United
States’ firm commitment to supporting an inclusive
and sustainable democratic transition in Chad. While
we welcome Chad’s decision to end the suspension
of opposition groups involved in the 20 October
2022 protests, we encourage further steps to ensure
their meaningful participation in drafting Chad’s
new constitution and electoral law and developing
independent institutions to organize elections. We also

23-1588415/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

continue to call on the Government to hold accountable
those responsible for killings and abuses during the
20 October 2022 protests.
An inclusive and credible democratic transition,
based on guidelines in the African Union Peace and
Security Council communiqué of May 2021, offers
the best chance for Chad to emerge from decades of
conflict and to build a more stable and prosperous
democracy for the future. We stand ready to work
with other members of the international community
to support those priorities, including through a friends
group in N’Djamena.
We also remain concerned about the continued
violence in Cameroon and condemn all attacks against
civilians, including in the Far North, North-West and
South-West regions of the country. That violence
must stop.
A broader dialogue is needed to give voice to those
stakeholders seeking to address root causes and bring
the crisis to an end. And we fully support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry’s
efforts to promote inclusive political dialogue.
Turning to the Central African Republic, we urge
authorities to redouble their efforts to make progress
on the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region road map and to revitalize the 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
Further, we continue to encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic to further strengthen
its ties with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and others with a genuine commitment to
the country’s peace and stability. The Central African
Republic has many partners who wish to assist in its
development. The Wagner Group, however, is not one of
them. The Government’s relationship with the Wagner
Group hinders others from fully engaging with the
Government to bring peace and stability to the Central
African Republic.
Boko Haram and Islamic State West Africa Province
also continue to destabilize the region through attacks
on civilians that have displaced thousands. The United
States supports the coordination efforts of regional
States and the Multinational Joint Task Force to combat
those terrorist groups and implement holistic strategies
that address the underlying drivers of terrorism.
16/21

05/06/2023

Finally, we applaud Gabon’s leadership in efforts to
preserve the world’s tropical rainforests by hosting the
One Forest Summit in Libreville. We congratulate the
Gabonese Government on hosting a successful summit
and look forward to continuing to cooperate and engage
in the region to combat climate change.
Central Africa is vibrant, dynamic and full of
promise. The United States is proud to partner with the
region and others to help realize the vast potential of
the people who call it home.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I would like to thank Mr. Abarry,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), and Ms. Tamoifo for their insightful remarks.
At the outset, allow me to express Malta’s regret that
the adoption of a presidential statement on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
remain pending, notwithstanding the Council’s
commitment to addressing the multiple challenges that
threaten Central Africa. Malta hopes that an agreement
on such a statement can be reached in a timely manner.
We commend Special Representative Abarry for
ably steering the mandate and work of UNOCA and for
strategically addressing the challenges that individual
countries and the region face. We welcome the ongoing
coordination with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region and subregional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).
As we express concern about the significant
developments that took place last November in Sao
Tome and Principe, we also welcome the request by
President Vila Nova for the support of the United
Nations and ECCAS in strengthening the country’s
security and justice sectors.
We are also concerned about the difficult path
towards transition in Chad. The reports of arrests,
transfers to a high-security prison, public hearings
and convictions following the protests last October are
deeply worrisome. Malta acknowledges the findings
published by the National Human Rights Commission
in that regard.
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

As Cameroon is experiencing multiple crises,
from terrorism to competition for resources and to
the refugee crisis, we encourage the continued efforts
towards mediation by Special Representative Abarry in
support of the Cameroonian authorities.
Malta remains concerned about the shrinking civic
space in certain countries and the repeated threats to the
safety of journalists, which only fuel further violence
and misinformation, increasing the human cost.
As violent extremism continues to pose a threat to
entire communities, we condemn the recent killings of
protesters and the closure of schools in the Lake Chad
basin area. In that connection, Malta emphasizes the
importance of education. It is crucial for schools to
remain accessible for children and youth, ensuring that
their full potential is unlocked.
In welcoming the work of UNOCA in strengthening
democracy in the region and in providing good offices
and technical support on multiple aspects, we also
commend the Office for its role in addressing crosscutting issues that represent serious threats to the
stability and development of Central Africa. Existing
humanitarian needs are compounded by a difficult
socioeconomic context in the region, with growing
flows of displaced persons and refugees into multiple
countries, now further worsened by the conflict in the
Sudan. We also echo the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/389) that adverse climate
impacts further intensify the root causes of conflict,
triggering transhumance and intercommunal clashes,
thus jeopardizing peace and security in the region.
The increase in incidents of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea also reminds us of the importance of advancing
regional governance, in cooperation with the Yaoundé
Architecture, also funded by the European Union.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women must stay at the forefront of our considerations.
On that note, we welcome the latest efforts geared
towards women’s leadership in political offices,
including in Equatorial Guinea and Gabon. Those
efforts, among others, represent positive and sustainable
investments for the peace, security and development of
Central Africa.
In conclusion, Malta continues to support efforts
to spearhead inclusive dialogue between Governments
and citizens, partnerships with civil society and

S/PV.9338

confidence-building measures. We support UNOCA
and the countries of the region towards that path.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to start by thanking Mr. Abdou Abarry,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), for their briefings.
I also listened carefully to the presentation by
Ms. Marie Tamoifo.
China is a good friend and partner of the Central
African countries and a staunch supporter of peace
and development in the region. Recently, China invited
the leaders of Gabon, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other countries of the region to visit China,
injecting a strong impetus into the friendship and
cooperation between us. China stands ready to join
the rest of the international community to increase our
input and commitments in the region by rendering more
constructive support. In the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/389), allow me to make the
following three observations.
First, we need to support countries in the region in
their efforts to maintain political stability. Since the end
of last year, Equatorial Guinea has held a presidential
election and formed a new Government. Cameroon
has held elections for positions in its Senate, made
progress in decentralization and national reconciliation
and implemented economic and social development
programmes at the local level. Chad relaunched its
national dialogue. Gabon, Rwanda and other countries
are actively preparing for their general elections. The
ongoing situation across multiple African countries
proves that solutions to African issues must be found
from within. The vigorous efforts by the Central
African countries deserve full recognition. The
international community should respect the sovereignty
and ownership of the countries concerned and pitch in
to help to maintain regional political stability, with
positive energy. Meddling from outside or imposing
unilateral sanctions at every turn will not lead to a
solution but only aggravate tensions.
We hope that the Special Representative will, in
strict accordance with the Council’s mandate, provide
constructive support to the countries concerned in their
electoral preparations and dialogue processes. China
believes that the international community should arrive
at an objective assessment of human rights work based

23-1588417/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

on the realities of the countries concerned and the needs
of their people. Human rights must not be used as an
empty slogan, much less as an instrument to interfere in
the internal affairs of the countries concerned.
Secondly, we need to support regional organizations
in their response to security challenges. At the ECCAS
summit held in February this year, important consensus
was reached in areas such as how to deepen regional
security cooperation and address common challenges.
Nevertheless, illegal armed groups, terrorists and
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea remain rampant. The
spillovers from the situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the turmoil in the Sudan are
worrisome, as they are exacerbating the humanitarian
and refugee crisis in the region. We support ECCAS in
upholding common security and enhancing collective
security cooperation. The international community
should support the capacity-building of regional
counter-terrorism forces and increase its contribution
to maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. Efforts
must also be made to encourage countries in the
region to build greater trust and overcome differences
among them.
China takes very seriously the challenges posed
by climate change to the region. The international
community should provide concrete assistance in that
regard. The developed countries in particular should
honour their commitments as soon as possible, so
that countries in the region can access much-needed
financial, technological and capacity-building support.
Thirdly, we need to help countries in the region to
prevent and defuse conflict-related risks. According
to the Secretary-General’s report, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Burundi and the Republic
of the Congo are facing a wide range of energy, food,
humanitarian and fiscal risks, intensifying the stress
factors affecting social stability. Recently, a major
economy has adopted irresponsible financial and
monetary policies, passing on economic and financial
risks beyond its borders, while milking developing
countries for their wealth in a cyclical manner. As far as
African and other developing countries are concerned,
that is the biggest external risk factor. Developed
countries and international financial institutions
must make real efforts to genuinely understand the
difficulties faced by countries in the region, deliver
on their development assistance commitments and
maintain the current level of humanitarian funding to
help countries of the region tide over their difficulties.
18/21

05/06/2023

Countries in the region must also be supported, on
the basis of their national realities and development
needs, to bolster their capacities in poverty reduction,
employment, trade and infrastructure, in order to make
their development more resilient.
The Secretary-General’s report calls for tackling
the root causes of conflict from the perspective of
sustainable development in order to find the key
to bringing the region out of its security dilemma.
That is an area that merits our close attention and
further discussions.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abdou Abarry and President Gilberto da Piedade
Veríssimo for their highly informative briefings.
We also listened attentively to the representative of
civil society.
Let me start by highlighting the efforts of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
and the entire United Nations Africa team in preventive
diplomacy and mediation, as well as in coordination
with other international and regional organizations
present in Central Africa. Those efforts, while still
ongoing, have already produced important results,
including the continued engagement of UNOCA and
ECCAS in support of the political transition in Chad.
Brazil welcomes the progress made in the preparations
for the constitutional referendum in late November and
the reduction in tensions after the protests last October.
Brazil is also closely following the situation in
our sister nation of Sao Tome and Principe, which we
are particularly close to for linguistic and historical
reasons. The peaceful transfer of power in October
2021 and the orderly legislative and local elections
held last September were important developments that
were widely praised by international observers. In that
overall positive context, the attack on the headquarters
of the armed forces last November and the death of
alleged perpetrators in State custody is a worrisome
development. We are encouraged by the efforts of the
local authorities aimed at strengthening the reforms
of the country’s justice and security sector, and we
welcome the support provided by ECCAS and UNOCA,
as well as other United Nations agencies, in that regard.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is an area
that has seen positive results. That is an achievement by
the States of the region first and foremost, particularly
through their efforts in the context of the Yaoundé
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

Architecture. The recent uptick in maritime crime,
with instances of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea, shows that as we approach the tenth
anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture, there is no
room for complacency, lest hard-won gains be reversed.
As a member of the Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea and the South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation
Zone, Brazil stands ready to continue supporting
the countries of the region through cooperation and
naval operations, as we have done in recent maritime
operations such as Guinex, Obangame Express and
Grand African NEMO. In that regard, Brazil has
already started organizing Operation Guinex III, which
is due to take place in August and September and is
aimed at strengthening the partnership between the
Brazilian navy and the navies and coastguards of the
countries in the Gulf of Guinea.
Central Africa continues to face numerous
challenges. Long-running conflicts have been
exacerbated by many hardships, such as the increase in
global inflation. Central Africa faces multidimensional
and cross-border threats to peace and security.
Terrorism, including the presence of the so-called
Islamic State and of Boko Haram, is a grave threat in
the Lake Chad basin. We should therefore commend
the efforts of the authorities that have helped reduce
the activities of those groups. We are particularly
concerned about the situation in Cameroon, which is
affected by violence both in the Lake Chad basin and
in its English-speaking regions. Brazil condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack during the Mount
Cameroon Race of Hope, which was directly aimed at
civilians, including children.

S/PV.9338

Russia has always supported the work of the
United Nations Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
in strengthening peace and security in the region, and
considers UNOCA a key instrument of international
preventive diplomacy. We note that the good offices of
the Special Representative are in high demand in the
subregion and that mediation efforts are under way
in close contact with the parties in problematic areas,
as well as in coordination with regional mechanisms
and organizations.
The level of terrorist threats in Central Africa is
high, as are social and political tensions. The armed
forces of the States of the subregion have to contend
with illegal armed groups on a daily basis. The situation
is exacerbated by highly porous borders and inadequate
resources for effective border control, enabling illegal
armed groups to conduct cross-border raids. In the Lake
Chad basin, Islamic State West Africa Province and
Boko Haram are particularly active and have extended
their reach into parts of Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and
Cameroon. They are terrorizing local populations,
forcing them to coexist and sometimes collaborate
with them. The ideology of radical Islam is becoming
increasingly popular as it is being widely disseminated
by terrorists, especially among young people. We
note the increased capacity of illegal armed groups to
enhance their organizational structure, enabling them to
plan and conduct military operations, prepare terrorist
attacks, carry out kidnappings, conduct surveillance
and information-gathering, select and train recruits and
manufacture improvised explosive devices.

Finally, we believe that socioeconomic developments
will be key to the evolution of the situation in Central
Africa in future. Brazil has been working closely with
its African partners through South-South cooperation
initiatives to address challenges in the areas of health
and food security, but that has to be a global effort
aimed at reducing the economic and social disparities
between various regions of the world.

Effective counter-terrorism requires systematic
and collective efforts. We attached great importance
to the large-scale operation conducted last year by the
Multinational Joint Task Force of the countries of the
Lake Chad basin to eliminate terrorists from islands
along the borders of Chad, the Niger and Nigeria. We
believe it is vital to further strengthen cooperation
among the States of the region both bilaterally and
through various international platforms, including the
United Nations.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Abdou Abarry, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Da
Piedade Veríssimo, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of Central African States, and
Ms. Marie Tamoifo for their detailed briefings.

We are concerned about the continuing attacks
on commercial vessels in the Gulf of Guinea. It is
important to mobilize the international community’s
resources in order to build the capacity of coastal States
to combat piracy, especially in light of their current
lack of naval capacity.

23-1588419/21

S/PV.9338

Central African region

05/06/2023

We are monitoring developments in Cameroon,
where the problems faced by the Anglophone provinces
are rooted in the colonial period. It will be crucial to
ensure that they refrain from violence and find solutions
through negotiations. We are also watching the situation
in Chad in relation to its transitional institution-building
process and the implementation of the recommendations
resulting from its national dialogue.

First of all, I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry,
Ambassador Da Piedade Veríssimo and Ms. Tamoifo for
their insightful briefings today. I also wish to support
the remarks made by the representative of Gabon on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique — and
build on the views expressed in that statement.

We are closely following developments in the
Central African Republic. With the support of our
partners, including the Russian Federation, the Central
African authorities have managed to overcome the most
difficult phase in the fight against those who sought
to achieve an unconstitutional change of Government
by armed force. We appreciate the cooperation with
the Central African Republic, and we will continue
to help Bangui to combat the insurgency and extend
the State’s presence throughout the country with the
aim of reaching a final settlement. We call for the
Security Council to take more decisive steps in July
aimed at completely lifting the arms embargo on the
Central African Republic, which we feel is essential to
strengthening the country’s defence capabilities. The
African Union and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region are unequivocally in favour of
lifting the restrictions.

It is clear that the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) continues to pave the
way for the United Nations and regional partners to
better support the countries in the Central Africa
region, in particular through preventive diplomacy
and mediation — efforts that are essential in fostering
peace, security and prosperity. In that respect, I would
like to emphasize three points today.

We are concerned about the serious humanitarian
situation in the subregion, where experts have recorded
a large number of refugees, internally displaced persons
and people in need of humanitarian assistance of some
kind. We are aware of the gravity of the situation in the
Sudan and of the conflict-related risks and difficulties
for neighbouring States. There is a new flow of refugees.
According to the most recent United Nations data, Chad
alone has already hosted more than 100,000 people.
International support to the States in the subregion
must be increased, in line with growing needs.
The challenges faced by the countries of the
subregion are complex. However, we are convinced that
the key role in crisis prevention and conflict resolution
must be played by the States of the region themselves,
with the necessary support from the international
community, fully respecting their sovereignty,
independence and the decisions they take — in deed,
not just in word.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United Arab
Emirates.
20/21

First, UNOCA should continue its support to the
ongoing political and peace processes in the Central
Africa region. We see the true value of ensuring
that those processes are inclusive, allowing for the
meaningful participation of women and the engagement
of youth. On that point, I join the Secretary-General
in welcoming the recent appointment of women to key
political positions in Equatorial Guinea and Gabon, the
adoption of a national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in Chad and other similar
efforts in the region. We are also encouraged by efforts
to incorporate gender analysis in the reporting of
UNOCA’s activities.
Secondly, stakeholders at all levels must work
together effectively to enhance cooperation and
coordination on border management. The region faces
challenges that are mostly transnational in nature, and
the solutions must also be transnational. Local-level,
cross-border forums between Chad and Cameroon,
bilateral joint commissions and regional initiatives help
stakeholders in the region to better align their priorities
when it comes to managing borders. That is greatly
needed, in particular to tackle the issue of terrorism
and the activities of armed groups.
We know, for example, that adequate border
management can curtail the flow of arms and the illicit
trade of natural resources. We are therefore also deeply
concerned about the resurgence of Boko Haram attacks
in the Lake Chad basin. We reiterate the urgency in
tackling the immediate threats posed by terrorist
groups, while addressing the underlying causes of
violence and extremism.
23-15884

05/06/2023

Central African region

Thirdly, as other colleagues have mentioned,
climate change and peace and security in the region
must be prioritized. The rainy season has begun in the
region and, as every year, we are seeing increasingly
erratic rainfall and its consequences. Heavy flooding
across the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cameroon
and Rwanda have caused the loss of hundreds of lives,
destroyed thousands of homes, increased the numbers
of refugees and displaced people and damaged critical
infrastructure and agricultural plantations.
Southern Angola faces the worst drought in 40 years,
with 1.58 million people facing acute food insecurity,
according to the World Food Programme. It is welldocumented now that climate change is exacerbating
tensions among communities, especially between
herders and farmers across the region, and those issues
cannot be ignored. We are encouraged by the efforts
undertaken in the region, including through UNOCA’s
work to both mitigate and adapt to the ramifications of
the changing climate. Such initiatives are crucial for
protecting both ecosystems and livelihoods, but more
needs to be done.

S/PV.9338

To that end, together with Mozambique and
Switzerland, we hosted an informal briefing of the
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security
last Friday to highlight the link between climate and
security. And at the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which will be hosted in Dubai in
November, we will have an opportunity to address the
links between climate change and peace and security
across the globe.
To conclude, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its
support for UNOCA’s work in favour of the countries of
the Central Africa region and their people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-1588421/21
