United Nations

A/52/PV.69

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

69th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 December 1997, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Statement on the occasion of Human Rights Day
The President: Before turning to the items on our
agenda for this afternoon, I would like to recall that today
is Human Rights Day; by commemorating this international
Human Rights Day, we mark the beginning of the fiftieth
anniversary year of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
Promotion of human rights has been at the core of
United Nations activities since the inception of our
Organization. At the very outset the United Nations Charter
reaffirmed faith in “fundamental human rights” and in the
“dignity and worth of the human person”. Adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights only three years
after the establishment of the United Nations reflected a
common understanding that fundamental freedoms and
respect for human dignity provide the most solid foundation
for peace, democracy, development and fruitful
international cooperation in every field of human activity.
As we look back today at the United Nations work in
the field of human rights, we can be proud of what has
been accomplished, in particular in standard-setting and
human rights advocacy. We cannot pretend, however, that
the gap has been bridged between aspirations and
achievements. Arbitrary arrests, torture, imprisonment
without trial, exploitation of children, denial of equal rights
to women, discrimination on the basis of race — these
violations of human rights continue to be a sad reality in
today's world and to call for our urgent and decisive action.

97-86728 (E)

As we are launching today the year of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, let us renew our commitment to the ideals
enshrined in this historic document. Let us make sure that
1998 becomes a milestone in the long struggle for the
achievement of one of the most noble purposes of the
United Nations.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/52/23 (Parts
I-VII), A/AC.109/2071-2072, 2074-2078, 20802082, 2084-2090)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/364 and
Add. 1)
Draft resolutions (A/52/L.64, A/52/23 (Part II),
Chapter III, para. 10)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: I call on the Rapporteur of the Special
Committee to introduce the Committee's report and the
draft resolution contained in paragraph 10, part II, chapter
III of the report.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (Rapporteur of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples): I have
the honour to present to the General Assembly for its
consideration the report of the Special Committee covering
its work during 1997, which is contained in document
A/52/23.
The report is submitted in accordance with paragraph
11 of resolution 51/146 on the implementation of the
Declaration, by which the Assembly requested the Special
Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the
immediate and full implementation of the Declaration; to
carry out those actions approved by the General Assembly
regarding the International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism in all Territories that had not yet exercised
their right to self-determination; and, in particular, to
formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the
remaining manifestations of colonialism.
At its forty-sixth session the General Assembly, by
adopting resolution 46/181, entitled “International Decade
for the Eradication of Colonialism”, and the plan of action,
mandated the Special Committee to undertake a series of
activities during the Decade including organizing during the
Decade seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions
alternately.
During this year the Special Committee was able to
discharge the tasks entrusted to it by the Assembly and to
submit appropriate recommendations on all the items
referred to it for consideration and report, by meeting
between January and July and by holding extensive
consultations among its members throughout the year.
Bearing in mind in particular the specific requests
addressed to it by the General Assembly in resolution
51/146, the Special Committee reviewed the implementation
of the Declaration relating to the remaining Territories and
formulated a series of recommendations with a view to
enhancing the pace of decolonization and to promoting the
political, economic, social and educational advancement of
the peoples in those Territories.
In addition, the Special Committee submitted
recommendations specifically relating to economic and

2

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
other activities that affect the interests of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories; military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration; the implementation of the Declaration by
the specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations; and information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter. In this
connection, I would like to draw the attention of Members
to the fact that the text of the draft resolution on
economic and other activities is a result of the
consultations between the Special Committee of 24 and
the European Union, and has been updated in order to
fully reflect the realities and a general understanding
among Member States concerning decolonization.
During the year, the Special Committee devoted
considerable attention to the decolonization of the small
island Territories. In that connection, the Special
Committee was especially mindful of the fact that the
United Nations visiting missions had provided an
effective means of assessing and ascertaining the wishes
and aspirations of the peoples of those Territories
regarding their future status. Accordingly, it once again
stressed the importance of dispatching such missions to
colonial Territories in order to facilitate the
implementation of the Declaration. In that respect, the
Committee will continue to seek the full cooperation of
the administering Powers so that visiting missions to
Territories under their administration can be undertaken.
On the question of publicity to be given to the work
of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, and
as reflected in chapter III of its report, the Committee
again reiterated the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on decolonization
as an instrument for furthering the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and for
mobilizing world public opinion in support of the peoples
of Non-Self-Governing Territories in their efforts to
achieve self-determination, freedom and independence.
Bearing in mind the important role being played by
non-governmental organizations in the decolonization
process and the dissemination of information on the
situation in all the remaining small island Non-SelfGoverning Territories, the Special Committee requested
the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Public Information to continue their cooperation with
those organizations in the dissemination of information on
decolonization issues.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
I have the honour to introduce for adoption by the
General Assembly the draft resolution on dissemination of
information on decolonization, contained in paragraph 10,
chapter III, Part II of document A/52/23.
During the year, in the light of the constructive results
achieved and in keeping with related decisions of the
Assembly, the Committee decided to continue to maintain
close contact with the organizations concerned and to
participate in the conferences arranged by those
organizations, as well as by other United Nations bodies.
The objective of those contacts was to facilitate the
effective implementation of the decisions of the various
United Nations bodies and to foster cooperation between
the specialized agencies and those regional organizations in
their assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in
those regions.
I should like to draw members' attention to the
proposals outlined in section J of chapter I, entitled “Future
work”, which, the Committee hopes, will meet with the
Assembly's approval in order to enable the Committee to
proceed with the effective discharge of the task that
remains to be completed. It should be noted that, during
1997, the Special Committee undertook important decisions
aimed at streamlining its work and increasing its
transparency. We have integrated the Subcommittee with
the Special Committee. We have also abolished the
Working Group, whose functions are now being performed
by the Committee's Bureau, which has become open-ended.
The Special Committee recommended that the General
Assembly renew its appeal to the administering Powers
concerned to take all necessary steps for the implementation
of the Declaration and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories. In
that connection, the Special Committee, bearing in mind the
useful results achieved as a consequence of the active
participation of the administering Powers, recommended
that the Assembly again request the administering Powers
to resume formal cooperation or continue to cooperate with
the Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate and,
in particular, to participate actively in its work relating to
the Territories under their respective administration.
The General Assembly may also wish to renew its
appeal to all States, the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system to meet
various requests addressed to them by the United Nations
in its resolutions on the question of decolonization.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
The Special Committee devoted considerable time to
discussing the question of the decolonization programme
in the United Nations system. It is gratifying that the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in his letter addressed
to the Chairman of the Special Committee of 24, as
contained in document A/52/531, reaffirmed his
commitment to the full implementation of subprogramme
1.6 of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001.
We hope that this commitment of the Secretary-General
will be fully implemented, without any delay, and that the
stand-alone Decolonization Unit in the Department of
Political Affairs will be adequately staffed. This would
assist the Special Committee in continuing efficiently to
discharge its noble mandate entrusted to it by the General
Assembly.
On behalf of the Committee, I commend the report
to the attention of the General Assembly.
Before concluding, allow me to express to all the
members of the Special Committee and, in particular, to
Ambassador Utula Utuoc Samana of Papua New Guinea,
Chairman of the Special Committee, Ambassador Bruno
Rodríguez Parilla of Cuba and Ambassador Moctar Ouane
of Mali, Vice-Chairmen, my deep gratitude for their
cooperation and support.
I also thank Mr. Amer Araim, the Secretary of the
Special Committee, and his colleagues and other
associated members of the Secretariat for their assistance,
which facilitated my task as Rapporteur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/52/L.64.
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): As this is my
maiden address to this Assembly, it gives me great
pleasure to address the General Assembly on behalf of
my Permanent Representative, Ambassador Utula Samana,
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
I am speaking today to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/52/L.64 on the question of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which
is sponsored by Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Fiji, Grenada,
Indonesia, Mali, Saint Lucia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and my own country, Papua New Guinea.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
After some consultations, the sponsors have agreed to
revise operative paragraph 15 to reflect some of the
concerns that have been expressed to us.
While adhering to the principles inherent in the
Declaration, the Special Committee has in recent years
considered the question of decolonization in a more realistic
and pragmatic manner, taking into account the prevailing
international situation, as well as recognizing the specific
conditions in the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories.
It is universally recognized that decolonization is one
of the greatest achievements of our Organization. The vast
majority of the States here today are here because of the
Special Committee. Should this world body, after having
achieved so much in the field of decolonization, ignore the
plight of the peoples of the remaining 17 Non-SelfGoverning Territories? Should we, at this juncture in the
work of the United Nations, ignore our moral
responsibilities to assist the peoples of the remaining NonSelf-Governing Territories to have the opportunity to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination, in
conformity with the international legal norms we are
obligated to uphold? The answer is definitely no.
On the basis of the existing mandate of the United
Nations and the moral responsibilities incumbent upon us,
the agenda on decolonization deserves adequate recognition
and priority with respect to the defence of the rights of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories. I am sure
that the General Assembly will continue to stand firm, as
it has always done, in fulfilling its obligations in the field
of decolonization.
The peoples of the remaining 17 Non-Self-Governing
Territories, through their elected representatives, have
consistently and rightfully called upon the United Nations
to maintain vigilance and, specifically, to urge the
international community to focus particularly on the social,
economic and political developments of their Territories in
a manner that will facilitate their progress towards selfdetermination.
The international community, and the administering
Powers in particular, have an obligation under the legal and
customary norms of the United Nations to implement the
goals of the Declaration. Where administering Powers have
cooperated in the work of the Special Committee, both in
terms of participating in its formal sessions and in allowing
visiting missions to visit Territories to ensure transparency
in the implementation of the requirements of the
International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,

4

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
much progress has been achieved in assisting the
constitutional, political and economic development of the
Territories, thereby enabling the peoples of the Territories
to gain greater autonomy and responsibility in governing
themselves.
Some have argued that, given the changing
international climate and the difficulties faced by these
Territories, complete independence may not be viable and
that therefore the question of decolonization may be a
non-priority, and that the international community may be
wasting time and energy in considering these issues.
However, the great majority of the Assembly is
committed to seeing to it that the goals of the
International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism
are achieved by the year 2000.
It is precisely because of our recognition of the
specific and peculiar problems faced by the remaining
Non-Self-Governing Territories — most of which are
small island Territories that suffer from impediments
created by the interplay of such factors as economic and
geographic size, isolation, vulnerability to natural disasters
and lack of technological and financial resources,
including problems of accessibility to international credit
markets — that the international community should give
specific priority and attention to the process of
decolonization affecting the peoples of those Territories.
The Special Committee is fully aware of the
impediments that may limit the options for full and
complete independence, but they should not therefore be
used as a rationale for maintaining colonial situations.
They should not be used as an excuse to undermine and
deprive the peoples of the Territories concerned of their
ability to gain their rightful political status and autonomy,
to control and develop their resources and to pursue
development goals and objectives suited to their political,
economic and cultural interests. The Special Committee,
however, made serious efforts, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV), to look at
options that are more suited to responding to the
circumstances of the remaining Non-Self-Governing
Territories. This would not have been possible without the
product of the work of the regional seminars.
The principles inherent in the Declaration are
specific and clear on the question of the right of peoples
freely to determine their political status in accordance
with their own wishes. Within the framework of the
Declaration, the Special Committee is entrusted with the
task of continuously seeking suitable ways and means of

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
implementing requirements of the Declaration, with the
cooperation of the administering Powers.
The Special Committee has continued to carry out its
mandate judiciously and faithfully. Over the years it has
diligently pursued its task of reviewing the situation in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, hearing petitioners, sending
visiting missions to the Territories, disseminating
information on decolonization with a view to mobilizing
public opinion and making suggestions and
recommendations on the progress and the extent of the
implementation of the Declaration and reporting to the
General Assembly.
This noble mission of eradicating colonialism remains
unaccomplished. The Special Committee has constantly
reviewed its approaches and rationalized its methods of
work, improving its efficiency and making adjustments
where appropriate in response to the changing
circumstances and in line with the new developments in the
international community.
In its endeavour to keep up with changing
circumstances and situations, the Special Committee,
however, has remained conscious of its ultimate
responsibility for safeguarding and protecting the interests
and welfare of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, guided by their specific needs and aspirations.
The adoption by the General Assembly in 1991 of a
Plan of Action for the International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism gave further impetus to the
work of the United Nations in the process of eradicating
colonialism. The International Decade's specific Plan of
Action is aimed at ushering in a world free of colonialism
in the twenty-first century.
While the General Assembly has repeatedly reaffirmed
that such factors as population size and remoteness should
not prevent the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories from freely exercising their rights to selfdetermination, the Special Committee is cognizant of the
fact that complete decolonization by the year 2000 will
require innovative and realistic solutions that can be
achieved only with the cooperation and active participation
of the administering Powers in the work of the Special
Committee. The Special Committee will continue to open
its doors to dialogue and consultation in order to reach
consensus and cooperation with the administering Powers,
which we all believe are critical in facilitating speedy
progress towards achieving the objectives of decolonization.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
However, such dialogue and consultation must have
a clear objective of serving the interests of the peoples
concerned, interests that the international community is
obligated to uphold. Dialogue and consultation must focus
on how best we can collectively pursue the process of
decolonization within the framework of the legal and
customary norms of the United Nations, and must not be
aimed at redefining and shifting basic principles to suit
other interests that may be contrary to the wishes of the
peoples.
It is extremely important that the cooperation
between the Special Committee and the administering
Powers play a critical role in the search for specific
measures that would promote the kind of development
that will eventually enable the peoples of those Territories
to exercise their right to self-determination.
The sponsors of this draft resolution are concerned
about the attempts to prevent the implementation of a
decision of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/52/531, thereby diminishing the decolonization
programme in the United Nations system.
The recently published document A/52/303/Add.1
does not reflect the commitment of the Secretary-General
regarding the full implementation of subprogramme 1.6 of
the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001. It is
therefore our understanding that the implementation of the
medium-term plan entails that the stand-alone
Decolonization Unit be maintained in the Department of
Political Affairs and that it be viable and properly
staffed — including by the Secretary of the Special
Committee and officers at the P-5 and P-4 levels. At this
critical juncture of the global efforts to eradicate
colonialism by the year 2000, the Decolonization Unit
should be availed of all the resources required by the
programme, in accordance with the medium-term plan,
which without any doubt would enhance our progress
towards a world free from colonialism and better for all.
In conclusion, I should like to propose that the
General Assembly adopt the draft resolution, which is the
same as the previous year's, with the minor revisions that
I will present. And in the light of the changing mood to
improve cooperation and consultations between all parties,
I should like to urge that we adopt this draft resolution
without a vote.
The revisions that I will introduce refer to operative
paragraph 15 of draft resolution A/52/L.64. The revisions
are as follows:

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
“Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General
on 27 October 1997:
(a) that the substantive responsibilities for the
Decolonization Programme will be maintained in the
Department of Political Affairs;
(b) to establish a stand-alone Decolonization
Unit with the necessary resources to provide
substantive input for the work of the Special
Committee of 24;
(c) that the Department of General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Services will be responsible
for the technical secretariat servicing relating to the
Decolonization Programme, as outlined in his letter of
17 March 1997;
(d) and his commitment to implement
subprogramme 1.6 of the medium-term plan, 19982001”.
These revisions are necessary because of the
difficulties that some delegations encountered during the
consultations.
The President: Members have just heard the
representative of Papua New Guinea orally revise operative
paragraph 15 of draft resolution A/52/L.64 and present the
new version to members. For the convenience of
representatives, this text will be distributed shortly to all
delegations in the Hall.
Mr. Núñez-Mosquera (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): The decolonization of peoples under colonial
domination is one of the areas in which the United Nations
has accomplished praiseworthy work. Since the adoption in
1960 of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, many States have attained
independence and swelled the ranks of our Organization.
But we cannot remain satisfied with what has been
achieved so far. We are commemorating today the fortyninth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which regards the right to self-determination as an
inalienable human right. But regrettably, as we stand today
on the threshold of the twenty-first century, many peoples
are being denied that right. Year after year, dozens of
petitioners come to seek the assistance and help of the
United Nations in their struggle to exercise the right to selfdetermination and independence, and we cannot close our
eyes to this fact.

6

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
We note with satisfaction the dialogue that took
place last year between the members of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee and certain
administering Powers. This is a positive sign, but the
dialogue must be established on a formal basis, and its
results must yield tangible benefits for the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The United Nations has a responsibility to discharge
in this area, and the machinery available to us for this
purpose is the Decolonization Committee. It is for that
reason that we attach key importance to strengthening the
Decolonization Committee and to the need to endow it
with the resources it vitally needs for its work.
The report submitted to us by the Committee is clear
and precise. It is very important to promote its activities
by means, among other things, of holding seminars on
decolonization issues and by sending visiting missions to
the Non-Self-Governing Territories, making it possible to
obtain firsthand information concerning the real state of
affairs there.
Decolonization activities, by their very nature, are
essentially political. For this reason, we note with
satisfaction the Secretary-General's decision to keep the
Decolonization Unit in the Department of Political Affairs
and to provide it with all the necessary resources, in
accordance with the medium-term plan for the period
1998-2001.
In order to achieve this objective and to make the
work of the United Nations in the area of decolonization
genuinely effective, the human and financial resources
earmarked for the execution of the activities of subprogramme 1.6 of the medium-term plan, as well as those
associated with the activities of the Decolonization
Committee, must be retained in the Department of
Political Affairs. The Cuban delegation accordingly hopes
that a clear-cut decision to this effect will be taken in the
context of the negotiations to be held on the programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
the debate on this item.
I should like to inform members that action on the
draft resolutions submitted under this item will be taken
after the General Assembly has concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee. Action will therefore be taken
before the meeting is adjourned.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)

8 of document A/52/614, the adoption of one draft
resolution.

The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on agenda
items 84 to 90, 91 and 18, 92 and 12, 93, 94, as well as 18.

Under agenda item 85, entitled “International
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space”, the
Fourth Committee recommends, in paragraph 11 of
document A/52/615, the adoption of one draft resolution.

I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, Ms. Riitta Resch of Finland, to
introduce the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in one intervention.

Under agenda item 86, entitled “United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East”, the Fourth Committee recommends, in
paragraph 29 of document A/52/616, the adoption of
seven draft resolutions.

Ms. Resch (Finland), Rapporteur of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee): It is my pleasant duty to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) for its
consideration and approval.
This year the Assembly allocated agenda items 12, 18,
and 84 to 94 — that is 13 agenda items — to the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
for its consideration. The Committee held 25 meetings and
concluded its work on Wednesday, 26 November 1997,
thereby responding to the Assembly's appeal that it conduct
the work of this session in a new spirit of rationalization
and in a way making better use of the Organization's
conference resources and facilities. This result was possible
thanks to various factors including the spirit of open
cooperation and conciliation that prevailed in the
Committee.
It is my pleasure now to introduce the following
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) to the General Assembly
for its consideration and approval.
Under agenda item 18, entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples”, the Fourth Committee
recommends, in paragraph 31 of document A/52/613, the
adoption of 16 draft resolutions. In this connection, I wish
to draw attention to a minor technical error in that
document. The heading “Consideration of proposals”, which
precedes paragraph 11, should be enumerated “II”, and the
following line, “Draft resolution A/C.452/L.4 and Rev.1”,
should be enumerated “A”.
Under agenda item 84, entitled “Effects of atomic
radiation”, the Fourth Committee recommends, in paragraph

Under agenda item 87, entitled “Report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”, the Fourth
Committee recommends, in paragraph 16 of document
A/52/617, the adoption of five draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 88, entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects”, the Fourth Committee recommends,
in paragraph 9 of document A/52/618, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 89, entitled “Questions relating
to information”, the Fourth Committee recommends, in
paragraphs 8 and 9 of document A/52/619, the adoption
of two draft resolutions and one draft decision.
Under agenda item 90, entitled “Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nations”, the Fourth
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/52/620, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda items 91 and 18, entitled respectively
“Activities of foreign economic and other interests which
impede the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in territories under colonial domination” and
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”, the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
recommends, in paragraphs 10 and 11 of document
A/52/621, the adoption of one draft resolution and one
draft decision.
Under agenda items 92 and 12, entitled respectively
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations” and “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of
document A/52/622, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 93, entitled “Offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories”, the Fourth Committee
recommends, in paragraph 6 of document A/52/623, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
In connection with agenda item 94, entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Croatia”, the Fourth
Committee, on the recommendation of the Chairman and in
order to meet the wishes of the sponsor of the item, decided
not to take any action on that agenda item. In accordance
with that decision, this agenda item will not be included in
the agenda of future sessions of the General Assembly.
That concludes my presentation of the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee). I may have unduly taxed the patience of the
Assembly, but I hope that delegations will agree that the
work and the achievements of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee at this session deserved an itemby-item presentation, no matter how sketchy.
Before I leave the rostrum, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay a special tribute to all those who
contributed to the success of the work of the Committee at
the fifty-second session. First of all, I wish to congratulate
all representatives and colleagues in the Committee, who
demonstrated their high professional skills and their
willingness to cooperate in reaching mutually satisfactory
solutions, and who made it possible for the Committee to
carry out its work in a very constructive and efficient
manner.
I should like to address a special word of thanks to the
Chairman of the Committee, His Excellency Ambassador
Machivenyika Tobias Mapuranga, whose diplomatic skills
and patience helped the Committee to conduct its
deliberations efficiently and in a businesslike manner. The
Chairman was assisted by two able Vice-Chairmen,
Mr. Petru Dumitriu and Mr. Ravjaa Mounkhou, with whom,
in my capacity as Rapporteur, I had the honour to serve in
the Bureau of the Committee.
I should also like to express my appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and

8

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Conference Services, Mr. Jin Yongjian, for his valuable
contribution, and to the Director of the General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council Affairs Division,
Mr. Vadim Perfiliev, for his assistance and contribution.
I also take great pleasure in warmly thanking the
Committee Secretary, Mr. Mohammad Sattar, whose
ability and vast experience contributed greatly to the
successful and timely conclusion of our work. I should
also like to thank all the staff of the secretariat of the
Committee, who provided such dedicated services to the
Committee and who made a real contribution to the
smooth functioning of the Committee's work.
Last but not least, my thanks go also to all the
interpreters, translators, conference officers and
documents officers who contributed to the work of the
Committee and to its successful conclusion.
The President: I would like to commend the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) and its Chairman for the timely conclusion of
its activities in accordance with the decision the General
Assembly adopted at the beginning of our work.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) which
are before the Assembly.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee”.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 11 of its report.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified to the contrary in advance. This means that where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same.

The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were adopted
without a vote in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee).
Agenda item 84

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/56).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East

Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/614)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/55).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/615)

Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/616)
The President: Before the Assembly takes decisions
on the draft resolutions recommended in the report of the
Committee, I shall call on the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, who wishes to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates)
(interpretation from Arabic): My delegation, which is
chairing the Arab Group this month, wishes to make a
statement in explanation of vote on draft resolution I, on
assistance to Palestine refugees. Despite the fact that we
will vote in favour of the draft resolution, we would like
to express a reservation about the fourth preambular
paragraph, which refers to the Multilateral Working
Group on Refugees in the context of the Middle East
peace process. This reservation is based on the decision
of the Council of Arab Foreign Ministers to suspend Arab
participation in the multilateral committees until tangible
progress is achieved in the peace process, particularly on
the bilateral tracks, and until the Israeli Government has
fulfilled its commitment to implement the signed
agreements and obligations already subscribed to in
accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and other resolutions.
We have strenuously endeavoured to reach
agreement on this issue with the sponsors of the draft

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
resolution. However, regrettably, the sponsors insisted on
maintaining the paragraph as it was, thus ignoring the Arab
position on this issue. As the Arab countries are directly
concerned with this question, we had hoped that this
paragraph would reflect Arab concerns as well as the fact
that these Committees had not met since the stalling and
freezing of the peace process because of the behaviour, the
measures and the policy adopted by the present Israeli
Government, which do not contribute to the achievement of
peace, security and stability in the area.
Although we highly appreciate European efforts and
their continuous support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, we
regret that they have not taken into account the positions of
the parties directly concerned. This is particularly so, in
view of the fact that these positions are in line with the
decisions of the international legitimacy relevant to the
issue.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the seven draft resolutions recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 29 of its report. After all the votes have been
taken, representatives will again have an opportunity to
explain their votes and positions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, “Assistance to
Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,

10

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of
America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 159 votes to 1,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 52/57).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution II,
“Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/58).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution III,
“Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and
subsequent hostilities”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution III was adopted by 159 votes to 2,
with l abstention (resolution 52/59).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution IV,
“Offers by Member States of grants and scholarships for
higher education,

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
including vocational training, for Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Israel
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 163 votes to none,
with l abstention (resolution 52/60).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution V,
“Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East”.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 158 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/61).

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe

12

The President: We come now to draft resolution
VI, “Palestine refugees' properties and their revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Liberia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of)
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 158 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/62).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution VII,
“University of Jerusalem Al-Quds' for Palestine refugees”.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Liberia, Micronesia (Federated States of), Zambia
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 158 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/63).

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote.
Mr. Tourgeman (Israel): My delegation considers
the Palestinian refugee problem as a purely humanitarian
problem and cooperates fully with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). My delegation would have
supported the draft resolutions on UNRWA, which could
have also been combined into one or two instead of seven
draft resolutions, had they not included a paragraph with
political implications, which my country cannot accept.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/617)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by the

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 16 of its report (A/52/617). After all the votes
have been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,

14

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 83 votes to 2,
with 72 abstentions (resolution 52/64).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution II,
entitled “Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab
territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Swaziland
Draft resolution II was adopted by 156 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/65).
The President: Now we shall turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian
Golan”.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Liberia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nicaragua, Swaziland,
Uruguay
Draft resolution III was adopted by 149 votes to 2,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 52/66).

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,

The President: We turn now to draft resolution IV,
entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nicaragua,
Swaziland, Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 151 votes to 2,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 52/67).
The President: We turn last to draft resolution V,
entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,

16

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nicaragua, Swaziland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 152 votes to 1,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 52/68).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic who wishes to
make a statement in explanation of vote.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): It will be extremely difficult to express the
depth of our appreciation to the Member States that
sponsored and voted in favour of the draft resolution on
the occupied Syrian Golan, whether in the Fourth
Committee or in this Assembly.
This is particularly so since voting in favour of the
draft resolution by such an overwhelming majority
constitutes a clear message which coincides with today's
United Nations commemoration of the anniversary of the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

Universal Declaration of Human Rights, presided over by
you, Mr. President.

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?

And it is particularly so in view of the fact that Israel
continues to occupy Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon. The will of the
majority in the international Organization is an embodiment
of world democracy and is therefore an absolutely clear
message addressed to Israel, a message that condemns
Israel's violations of the 1949 Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and
requests Israel, as the occupying Power, to put an end to its
imposition of Israeli identity cards and nationality on the
Syrian citizens in the Golan and to end other repressive
measures against the Syrian population there.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/69).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 88?
It was so decided.

To support this resolution is indeed to support human
rights, which are the basis of our humanity, particularly in
view of the fact that human rights are universal and
comprehensive and allow human beings to enjoy their true
humanity. The struggle for international human rights is a
struggle against all forms of oppression and injustice at all
times and in all places.
It is indeed considered a struggle against colonialism
and apartheid. This is what was stated and confirmed by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations in his message
today on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 88
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/618)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 9 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote.

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

Agenda item 89

Agenda item 90

Questions relating to information

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations

Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/619)
The President: The Assembly has before it draft
resolutions A and B recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision recommended
by the Committee in paragraph 9 of the same report.
The Assembly will first turn to draft resolution A,
entitled “Information in the service of humanity”.
The Committee adopted draft resolution A without a

Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/620)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 52/70 A).
The President: Draft resolution B is entitled “United
Nations public information policies and activities”.
The Committee adopted draft resolution B without a
vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 52/70 B).
The President: The Assembly will next turn to the
draft decision entitled “Increase in the membership of the
Committee on Information”, recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft decision without a
vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 89?
It was so decided.

18

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 161 votes to 0,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 52/71).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 90?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 91 and agenda item 18 (continued)
Activities of foreign economic and other interests which
impede the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Territories under colonial domination
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/621)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report (A/52/621) and the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 11 of the
same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Economic and other activities which affect the interests of
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Equatorial Guinea, France, Micronesia
(Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to 3,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 52/72).

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:

19

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: We now turn to the draft decision,
entitled “Military activities and arrangements by colonial
Powers in Territories under their administration”.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Korea
The draft decision was adopted by 108 votes to 51,
with 3 abstentions.

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:

20

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda item 92 and agenda item 12 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by
the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (A/52/622)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report (A/52/622).
The draft resolution is entitled “Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with
the United Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The draft resolution was adopted by 117 votes to
none, with 50 abstentions (resolution 52/73).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 92?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 12.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
Agenda item 93
Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/623)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report (A/52/623).
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/74).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94
The situation in the occupied territories of Croatia
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/624)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) contained in document A/52/624?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 94?
It was so decided.

21

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/52/613)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 31 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 32 of the
report.
We turn first to the three draft resolutions contained in
paragraph 31 of the report.

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
The President: We turn now to the draft decision
contained in paragraph 32 of the report.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted the draft decision, entitled “Question of
Gibraltar”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 18.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of all the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).

Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of Western
Sahara”.

Agenda item 18 (continued)

The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

Draft resolutions (A/52/L.64, A/52/23 (Part II),
Chapter III, para. 10)

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 52/75).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Question of New Caledonia”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution II without objection.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 52/76).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Tokelau, the Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands”.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 52/77).

22

The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolutions submitted under this
item.
We shall proceed to consider draft resolution
A/52/L.64, as orally revised, and the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 10,
part II, chapter III of the report of the Special Committee
[A/52/23].
I would like to announce that since the introduction
of draft resolution A/52/L.64 Trinidad and Tobago has
become a sponsor.
The Assembly will now turn to the two draft
resolutions.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.64, entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples”, as orally revised.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Israel, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/52/L.64, as orally revised, was
adopted by 139 votes to 2, with 23 abstentions
(resolution 52/78).
The President: The Assembly will next take a
decision on the draft resolution contained in paragraph 10

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
of part II, chapter III, of the report of the Special
Committee (A/52/23), entitled “Dissemination of
information on decolonization”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

23

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Abstaining:
France, Micronesia (Federated States of), Russian
Federation
The draft resolution was adopted by 159 votes to 3,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/79).
The President: I now call on the representative of the
United Kingdom, who wishes to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting.
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation
regrets that it has again found it necessary to vote against
the draft resolutions on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and on the dissemination of
information on decolonization — draft resolution A/52/L.64
and the draft resolution contained in paragraph 10 of part
II, chapter III of document A/52/23.
The latter text does contain elements which, as an
administering Power, the United Kingdom can welcome. In
particular, we note the recognition that self-determination
does not automatically equate to independence and that
there are other options available. However, my delegation
believes that, at a time of ever more acute financial crisis
in the United Nations, placing an obligation on the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Public Information to publicize decolonization issues
represents a serious waste of scarce resources. The basic
aim of this resolution is therefore unacceptable to the
United Kingdom.
This delegation also regrets that the resolution on the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples continues
to contain many egregious examples of language and
assumptions that do not reflect the present situation in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories. We do not accept that the
presence of military bases could in any way constitute an
obstacle to the granting of independence or impede their
inhabitants from expressing their views on selfdetermination. Similarly, the text of the resolution appears
to accuse the administering Powers of economic
exploitation and even of violations of basic human rights.
These are claims which we wholeheartedly reject and are
without any foundation.
My delegation also finds unacceptable the continued
references to colonialism, colonial rule and colonial
countries. The presence of such language in this text is all
the more regrettable because it is so clearly out of step with

24

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
the major improvements in other resolutions on
decolonization issues over the last year. I am thinking
particularly of the so-called omnibus resolution, which has
been adopted by consensus for the second year running,
and the resolution on economic activities, on which many
delegations have been able to change to a more
favourable position this year. This delegation's hope
would be that the drafters of the two resolutions before us
will follow these examples in the future.
My delegation joins with others in recognizing that
decolonization is one of the great success stories of the
first 50 years of the United Nations and that the principles
upheld by this Organization have an enduring validity.
We pay tribute to those who have worked successfully
and with goodwill in this field, and will continue to fulfil
our obligations with regard to the United Kingdom's
dependent Territories.
I have already referred to the recent welcome signs
of flexibility and compromise shown by the Special
Committee of 24. However, the United Kingdom
continues to take a different view of the need for a
decolonization programme on the current scale. In our
view, this is wholly disproportionate to the real remaining
problems. The United Nations has more pressing goals,
affecting vastly greater numbers of the world's population,
and more relevant to today's needs. The activities and
structure of this Organization should reflect the world's
present and future priorities and not those of the past.
In conclusion, the two resolutions submitted to this
General Assembly do nothing to advance the wishes and
interests of the peoples of the remaining dependent
Territories, which remain the foundation of my
Government's policy towards them.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 18?
It was so decided.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

Programme of work

Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for
Women”; followed by agenda item 17 (i), “Appointment
of members of the Committee on Conferences”; agenda
item 47, “The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina”; and
agenda item 44, “The situation of democracy and human
rights in Haiti”.

The President: I should like to inform members that
there will be no plenary meetings tomorrow, Thursday, 11
December.
On Friday, 12 December, in the afternoon, the General
Assembly will take up the reports of the Third Committee.
On Monday, 15 December, in the morning, as the first
item, the General Assembly will take up agenda item 17
(h), “Appointment of the members of the Consultative

In the afternoon of the same day, as previously
announced, the General Assembly will take up the reports
of the Sixth Committee.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

25
