S/PV.8105

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8105th meeting

Thursday, 16 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-38592 (E)
*1738592*

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I will be very brief. My
delegation would like to place on record its support for
draft resolution S/2017/933, submitted by the Russian
Federation and China.
The President: The Council has taken note of
the Bolivian delegation’s support for draft resolution
S/2017/933.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2017/933 and S/2017/962, which contain
the texts of two draft resolutions, respectively.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. President, we would like to request that
draft resolution S/2017/933, submitted by the Russian
Federation, be put to the vote second and that draft
resolution S/2017/962, submitted by the United States
of America, be put to the vote first. We know that the
United States has told you and the Council that we
should vote on our draft resolution first, in accordance
with rule 32 of the Security Council’s provisional rules
of procedure. We do not agree with that reasoning,
however. It is impossible for our draft resolution to
be put to the vote first without our permission, for the
following reasons.
The priority provided for in rule 32, on the
consideration of draft resolutions in accordance with
the order of their submission, allows for the possibility
and right that whoever submits a draft resolution first
can request that it be put to a vote first in cases when
2/21

16/11/2017

there is a counter draft before the Council, which in
this case is the draft resolution submitted by the United
States. However, that is a privilege that one can refuse
to avail oneself of. Submission under rule 32 is not the
same as publication in blue. The two terms are often
confused, in fact, but incorrectly. If we follow the rules
of procedure, submission should include publication
in blue and the request for a vote. The United States
delegation was the first to request a vote, and in that
case our draft resolution should be put to the vote
second, because we asked for the vote after them. We
therefore insist on our draft resolution being put to the
vote second.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to read out the first part of rule 32 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, which says
“Principal motions and draft resolutions shall have
precedence in the order of their submission.”
My Russian friends have chosen once again to say
that they go according to procedure, except when it
applies to something they do not like. What we have
to do is go according to procedure. Rule 32 spells out
exactly how that order should be. We do not need the
Russians coming in and saying “We do not like the
answer to this, so we want you to change it”. I think that
the Council should be disciplined, abide by rule 32 of
the provisional rules of procedure and take the politics
out of the situation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are not playing political games here. On
the other hand, perhaps we are, because if we were not
playing political games, we would not be having this
discussion today. But while we have studied this issue,
and the Council’s practice on it varies. we will not delve
into that at the moment, as we see no purpose in getting
mired in procedural discussions. We merely ask that
you, Mr. President, put the question to a procedural
vote. We propose that the Russian draft resolution
(S/2017/933) be put to the vote second, after the draft
resolution submitted by the United States (S/2017/962).
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Rule 32 of
the provisional rules of procedure states that principal
motions and draft resolutions shall have precedence in
the order of their submission.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Let us put it to a procedural vote.
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8105

The President: I thank Mr. Nebenzia and Mrs. Haley
for the points they have made. In our understanding,
in accordance with rule 32 of the provisional rules of
procedure, which states that principal motions and
draft resolutions shall have precedence in the order
of their submission, the draft resolution submitted by
Russia (S/2017/933) should therefore be put to the vote
first. The representative of the Russian Federation has
requested a procedural vote on the question of whether
the Russian draft resolution should be put to the vote
second and the United States draft resolution first
(S/2017/962).

Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Russian Federation

I shall put the procedural motion to the vote now.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations gives the
Council the responsibility to

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Russian
Federation
Against:
France, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Egypt, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Senegal, Uruguay
The President: The proposal received 3 votes
in favour, 7 votes against and 5 abstentions. The
procedural motion was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In this case, Mr. President, in accordance with
rule 35 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, which says that a motion or draft resolution
can be withdrawn at any time as long as no vote has
been taken on it, the sponsors of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2017/933 wish to withdraw it.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/2017/962, submitted
by France, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay

Abstaining:
China, Egypt
The President: There were 11 votes in favour,
2 against and 2 abstentions. The draft resolution has not
been adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

“determine the existence of any threat to the peace,
breach of the peace, or act of aggression and shall
make recommendations ... to maintain or restore
international peace and security”.
Among the greatest threats to peace and security is the
use of chemical weapons. That is why for more than two
decades, the international community has outlawed the
production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons.
For almost half a decade, the Council has worked
tirelessly to put an end to the use of such weapons
in Syria.
But for the tenth time regarding Syria and for the
fourth time regarding chemical weapons, Russia has
actively obstructed the international community’s
ability to identify the perpetrators of chemical-weapon
attacks. Russia has issued vetoes before in order to
prevent Council action and ensure accountability in
Syria. Russia has invented reasons not to support a
mechanism that it helped created, because it did not like
its scientific conclusions. Russia has acted to obstruct
those investigations many times, but today it strikes
a deep blow. Russia has killed the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which has the
overwhelming support of the Council.
By eliminating our ability to identify the attackers,
Russia has undermined our ability to deter future
attacks. Al-Assad and ISIS will no longer be on notice
for the use of chemical weapons as a result of Russia’s
actions today. The message to anyone listening is clear.
In effect, Russia accepts the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. How then can we trust Russia’s supposed support

17-385923/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

for peace in Syria? How can anyone take Russia’s
proposal for political talks in Sochi seriously?
I have lost count of how many times I have stood
in this Chamber and implored Russia to do the right
thing in Syria. But instead Russia has played games.
Russia wants a mechanism, but not an independent
one. It wants reporting, but not if it blames Syria. If
Council members pay attention, they will notice that
the Russians think the JIM works great when it finds
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant at fault for
chemical weapons, but when the perpetrator is one of
its own friends, the problem is suddenly the JIM, not its
friend that committed the crime.
But Russia knows how bad it looks to defend a
regime’s use of chemical weapons, so it attempts to
create a distraction. In this case, the distraction is the
draft resolution that it offered. The draft resolution
would also allow Russia or any other member to
micromanage the JIM and it would put the Council in
the absurd position of putting the fox in charge of the
henhouse, having countries such as Russia and Syria
dictate how, when and where we investigate the use of
chemical weapons.
In recent weeks, the United States has taken
great pains to work with Russia in drafting our draft
resolution. It is a shame that we found out today they
had planned to veto it the entire time. We revised our
draft resolution three times to incorporate Russia’s
concerns and those of all Council members. At the
same time, Russia refused to hold a single consultation
on its own draft, while we held many consultations. It
is clear now that the only concern Russia had was that
the JIM even existed and that it was capable of finding
the truth. Russia had hoped to bury the truth about
chemical weapons in Syria, but it has failed. We know
who is behind these attacks. The JIM has provided that
information time and time again. The United States will
not give up on trying to achieve justice for the victims
in Syria.
Tragically, these attacks are ongoing. New cases
are being alleged. Russia has destroyed our best tool for
attributing these attacks, but it is not our only tool for
ending this barbaric practice. There is the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic. There is the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
4/21

16/11/2017

in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
is mandated to generate the evidence to bring fair and
independent criminal proceedings against those who
commit atrocities in Syria.
And if and when it is necessary, there is the
United States of America. Regardless of what its
Russian protectors do in the Security Council, the
Al-Assad regime should be on clear notice that the
United States does not accept Syria’s use of chemical
weapons. As we did in April, we will do it again if
we must — we will defend the international standard
against chemical-weapons use. It would be wise for the
Al-Assad regime to heed this warning.
The Security Council created the JIM in a rare
moment of unity. I thank the other members of the
Council for their support, but what a shame it is that
Russia has brought us to this point. What a shame it
is that Russia has revealed itself to be a Government
whose allegiance is to the Syrian regime, not to the
truth or the protection of innocent civilians. Russia may
have succeeded in silencing one independent voice in
Syria today, but there are others that will carry on this
work, and we will not stop until there is justice for the
victims and accountability for the perpetrators of the
chemical-weapons attacks in Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France is
appalled by today’s vote and the result of the Russian
veto. This result is particularly serious in and of itself,
but it is also potentially fraught with consequences for
the future. The situation we are confronted with — the
proven use of chemical weapons in Syria — is indeed
one of those case studies that should provoke a
unanimous and immediate mobilization of the Security
Council.
All conditions are there for that result. Faced with
the despicable use of chemical weapons in Syria, the
Security Council created the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigation Mechanism (JIM) to establish facts
and responsibilities. In keeping with its mandate,
this investigative mechanism works tirelessly with
undeniable professionalism and impartiality. It leads to
clear, well-documented conclusions that unambiguously
prove the responsibility of the Syrian regime in several
cases and that of Da’esh in others.
Contrary to what the professionals of confusion
would have us believe, we are not in a gray zone here.
The situation in all its horror is crystal clear. In the
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

twenty-first century, terrorists — and a State — are
intentionally using chemical weapons to kill women
and children, among others. Their faces disfigured by
an atrocious death will long haunt our memories and
our consciences.
And in the face of this situation, one of the major
players in the international community — one of the
major partners of my country, to which we are bound
by so many links — has decided for the fourth time to
veto the renewal of the Mechanism in order to protect
the Damascus regime. Such an attitude leaves those
who deeply respect Russia speechless. This cannot be
the last word of that great country whose role in the
international balance of power is decisive.
It is even more true that the raison d’être of the JIM is
more justified than ever. More than 60 cases of use need
to be examined. The Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons has already confirmed for us
the use of sarin gas on 30 March in Latamneh. That is
why France supported the draft resolution prepared by
the United States and would like to acknowledge the
efforts of our American friends who worked with all
the delegations to propose the renewal of the JIM by
presenting a balanced text which contains substantial
concessions aimed precisely at trying to bring members
of the Council together.
Let us carefully assess the seriousness of the
issues together. Beyond Syria, what is at stake first
and foremost is the safeguarding of the most basic
human rights and the fight against impunity. The use
of chemical weapons is not only morally untenable
and legally unacceptable; it is also a terrifying step
backward for all of us, as the Syrian regime and Da’esh
are trying to outdo one another to see who is the more
horrific and barbaric.
Let us also not forget that these atrocities are war
crimes, and they have made chemical terrorism into
a dangerous reality. What is also at stake today is the
future of the international non-proliferation regime.
While international non-proliferation regimes are one
of the major achievements of recent decades, we should
not let the most successful of them — the chemical
regime — be undermined by political calculation and
division. It would be a deadly precedent for the other
non-proliferation regimes and an irresponsible attitude
for which we would all pay a high price.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone is not just a
moral abomination against the most basic principles of

S/PV. 8105

humanity: to look away — to accept the use of chemical
weapons in Syria without reacting — would amount
in fact to giving a blank check or a green light to the
proliferation and the use of these weapons elsewhere
and would create, moreover, the most favourable soil
for the very chemical terrorism that all of us fear.
We created the JIM upon the joint initiative of
Russia and the United States in order to transcend
political disagreements and establish the truth. That
is why we established it. It is therefore a moral failure
and a strategic mistake on the part of those who renege
on their word and commitments when the truth comes
to light.
The JIM was never a Western tool. It belongs to the
entire international community and we are duty-bound
to strengthen it. The Mechanism cannot and must not be
held to ransom by political squabbles, or worse, tactical
games. Undermining the JIM is tantamount to playing
with fire, and could, in the long-term, jeopardize the
non-proliferation regime, in particular with regard to
chemical weapons, which we all built block by block.
The JIM should be able to conduct its activities without
preconditions or interference.
A political solution alone will enable us to put an end
to the horrendous conflict in Syria, through a negotiated
and credible democratic transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva Communiqué.
However, there will be no sustainable peace in Syria
in an environment of impunity. Peace will depend on
justice and justice requires the means for determining
those responsible for committing atrocities in Khan
Shaykhun, and other chemical attacks, who must be
held accountable for their criminal acts.
I would like to share a profound belief with the
Council. Today’s vote cannot be the final word. France
will not resign itself to failure or resort to playing
political games that will not address the current
challenges. Given the gravity of such challenges,
we have no right to give up or to lose heart. The
Council can count on France’s continued efforts in
all relevant forums to combat impunity in Syria and
elsewhere, and to promote, forever and everywhere, the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime on which
our security depends.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Today’s meeting is indeed
a regrettable one. I hope that the victims of chemical
weapons attacks have not been watching our debate
so far, and, in particular, the vote on today’s draft

17-385925/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

resolution, which we strongly supported. I must say that
it is highly regrettable that the Council has again failed
to unite behind an extension of the mandate of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
Many commendable efforts have been made, in
particular in the past few days to make that happen. The
Mechanism was unanimously set up by the Security
Council and with a clear objective. That objective
remains; so too does opposition. Nonetheless, allow me
to reiterate a few points.
We unequivocally and in the strongest terms
condemn the repeated use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The Joint Investigative Mechanism and its
objective, impartial and independent investigations
have our full support. We have confidence in its
professionalism, technical expertise and comprehensive
forensic analysis. We have provided technical expertise
and financial support. The mandate of the JIM must
urgently be extended for the following well-known
reasons.
First, the JIM plays a critical role in protecting
the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture, as the French Ambassador just stated.
Secondly, there are still some 60 cases of alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria being examined
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons that could be referred to the JIM. The sarin
attack in Lataminah on 30 March, cited in the most
recent report of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic (S/2017/931), is a case in point. It is our
duty as members of the Council to do what we can to
enable all of those attacks to be investigated, and to
hold those responsible to account. Chemical weapons
use is illegal; it constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and can amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. There can be no impunity for
such crimes.
Thirdly, we believe that the JIM has an important
deterrent effect. The risks of new chemical weapons
attacks in Syria might increase on our watch if we do
not renew the JIM.
We have listened carefully to all arguments made
by members of the Council over the past few weeks. It
is our assessment that there should be room to reach
compromise. The JIM was set up by the Council with a
very clear objective. That objective remains. Renewing
the JIM’s mandate should be possible, but it can be
6/21

16/11/2017

achieved only if the Council unites. We believe that
all efforts to reach agreement must continue. We will
support all serious and genuine attempts to renew the
JIM’s mandate. We will continue to engage to find a
way forward.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine co-sponsored
and voted in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2017/962 on the basis of the
following position.
Continuous allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, which cause enormous suffering and
are a blatant violation of international law, require an
uncompromising and firm response from the Council,
not only by condemning such horrible crimes, but by
taking effective action, including through mobilizing
all tools available to that end and without undermining
their efficiency to ensure accountability. Ukraine
commends the efforts of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) in executing
its mandate, based on the principles of impartiality,
objectivity and independence. It is the only tool at the
Council’s disposal with the mandate to identify the
organizers and perpetrators of chemical weapons use.
No outstanding differences or opinions on the Syrian
chemical file should be used to justify actions aimed at
destroying the JIM, as doing that effectively amounts
to shielding those responsible for atrocious crimes
from justice.
Today the Council again failed to exercise its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council’s continuous inability to address
chemical attacks in Syria is leading to further impunity
and sending a signal to perpetrators that they can get
away with murder. Despite overwhelming support, it
has already become routine that one Council member
continues to block each and every decision that could
move us closer to bringing the perpetrators of atrocities
in Syria to justice.
Playing the JIM card in one’s political game is
utterly cynical and cannot be understood or accepted by
responsible members of the international community.
I wish to sincerely commend the dedication and
flexibility shown by the delegation of the United States,
which made every effort to preserve the JIM, including
by inserting the maximum number of concerns from
various Council members into the final text, while
preserving the primary part of the JIM mandate, which
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

is investigating and identifying those responsible
for chemical weapons use in Syria. But, regrettably,
different approaches to the subject are not the issue.
The issue is that of a single-minded pursuit to destroy
an international system built around respect for norms
and principles of international law, which we, and our
predecessors, have all so carefully constructed for
many decades.
Despite the results of the vote, I believe we must
continue our joint efforts in defending and restoring
respect for international law. I wish to reiterate that the
time for justice will come.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Today we have
reached the end of the road for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It was a road that all
members of the Security Council set out on together
two years ago. We did so in the hope that those using
chemical weapons in Syria would be identified and
held to account. Thanks to today’s veto, that hope has
suffered a serious blow.
Under the current and previous leadership panels,
the staff of the Mechanism worked patiently and
diligently to uncover the truth. I pay tribute to them
today. Thanks to their efforts, the world now knows
what happened in Talmenes, Sarmin, Marea, Qamenas,
Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh.
Let us make no mistake — the JIM has succeeded.
It is Russia that has failed. It has failed in its duties as a
permanent member of the Security Council. It has failed
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
It has failed as a supposed supporter of peace in Syria.
We have been here before. This is not the first
time this year that we have attempted to renew the
JIM’s mandate. Less than a month ago, we all sat in
this very Chamber and watched as Russia vetoed
a simple technical rollover of the mandate (see
S/PV.8073) — a rollover that did not judge any party or
add any conditions. We have worked tirelessly through
extensive consultations between Council members to
try to understand Russia’s concerns and find a renewal
on which we could all agree. The United States draft,
in favour of which we are proud to have voted, was
balanced and reasonable.
Russia, on the other hand, has refused to engage
constructively. Last month, it quoted fantasy and fiction
in the Chamber to justify its veto. But in negotiations,

S/PV. 8105

its experts made abundantly clear why they would not
support the JIM’s renewal. Put simply, they cannot,
or rather they will not accept any investigation that
attributes blame to their Syrian allies, no matter how
robust the investigation, no matter how clear and solid
the evidence. Russia will say that it engaged, that it
put forward an alternative text, yet its text sought only
to undermine and discredit what has already been
painstakingly demonstrated — that the Syrian regime
is responsible for the blatant repeated use of chemical
weapons against its own people.
The seventh report of the JIM (S/2017/904,
annex), as we heard last week from the Head of the
Leadership Panel (see S/PV.8090), details the thorough
methodology of the investigation. Its consideration of
alternative hypotheses, the careful corroboration of
sources and the use of independent, internationally
recognized forensic experts for analysis of data. Faced
with this clear, careful consideration and conclusion,
Russia made a string of entirely destructive demands in
its text and attempted to weaken significantly the remit
of the JIM. It demanded that the JIM take samples from
a Syrian airbase, when the JIM has made crystal clear
why doing so would not advance the investigation. It
demanded that the JIM visit Khan Shaykhun, where it
would face unacceptable risks of attack. It maligned
the impartiality, experience and expertise of the JIM’s
staff, ignoring the thorough professional report they
had produced and Russia’s own original support for
the group. Russia demands that the JIM listen only
to Syrian-approved witnesses and Syrian accounts
of events. Why should evidence from a party to the
conflict accused of war crimes carry more weight than
the corroborated testimony of victims and observers
and the cold laboratory analysis of physical evidence?
Thanks to Russia’s veto today, Da’esh fighters will
be joining Al-Assad in celebration. The Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is currently
investigating other cases. This vote means that the
JIM will not investigate who is responsible for these
atrocious crimes. Russia’s transparent use of its Security
Council status to block this investigation again shows
that, as a party to the conflict, it cannot credibly play a
leading role in the political process, such as convening
the Syrian parties in Sochi.
Most of us here are totally committed to upholding
the norm against the use of chemical weapons. We will
not be stopped by what has happened today. We will
keep working to identify and bring to account those

17-385927/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

who have used these vile weapons and to deter those
who might think of doing so in the future. Russia once
played a responsible role in securing the destruction of
much of Syria’s chemical arsenal and in creating the
JIM. Regrettably, today the world can see that Russian
policy now is to protect the Syrian State — whatever
the cost to Russia’s reputation.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay regrets that for the second time in less
than a month, the Security Council has been unable
to renew the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). In my country’s
view, the JIM has been an invaluable instrument for
carrying out investigations for the two past years on
the responsibility for incidents in Syria in which the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
established that chemical weapons had been used
against the civilian population.
Time and again, we have expressed in the Chamber
our total confidence in the serious, independent,
impartial and objective work of the JIM, whatever the
conclusions it reaches in its investigations. In fact, to
date, the Mechanism has attributed responsibility for
the use of banned chemical weapons to agents in the
Syrian Government and to Da’esh terrorists. These are
serious crimes for which there can be no impunity.
Through the JIM’s investigation, we have been able
to determine, in many of those cases, who was behind
the use of such weapons. But once again, in February
the Council was also unable to adopt a resolution to
sanction the responsible parties (see S/PV.7893). That
is why we reiterate our position — which is shared
by the almost 120 signatory parties to the Code of
Conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group — that Council members that
enjoy veto privileges should abstain from its use in the
case of atrocious crimes, such as the attacks currently
under investigation by the JIM.
It is paradoxical, frustrating and even sad to
see so many roadblocks to a mechanism that was
established by the Council itself only two years ago (see
S/PV.7501). For serious crimes, such as those the JIM
tries to investigate, not investigating is tantamount to
concealing. We repeat that these abhorrent crimes must
not go unpunished, whoever the perpetrators. We call
on all members of the Council to continue to work on
8/21

16/11/2017

garnering consensus with a view to extending the work
of the Mechanism.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to
echo the words of deep frustration voiced by several
members of the Security Council this afternoon. This
is undoubtedly a collective failure, but those who are
watching can see that it was a predictable result. We all
came here today prepared with our written statements
knowing that we would not reach the needed consensus
for the adoption of a resolution. The Security Council
once again leaves a poor impression of a lack of unity
on such a sensitive topic.
Bolivia reiterates its most firm and categorical
condemnation of the use of chemical agents as weapons.
It is an unjustifiable criminal act wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever it is carried out, as its use is a
serious violation of international law and a threat to
international peace and security. We also note once again
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) must carry out its work in the most methodical,
transparent and fundamentally depoliticized manner so
as to avoid the instrumentalization of its work.
The renewal of the mandate must maintain
the integrity and independence of the Mechanism.
Therefore, we must consider only the purpose for
which it was created through clear working methods
in order to avoid mistakes of the past. Its work must
be carried out in the most methodical, technical and
reliable manner possible, with the help of independent,
impartial, complete and conclusive investigations.
In our most recent meeting on this issue (see
S/PV.8090), some delegations expressed certain
technical inconsistencies in the JIM’s most recent report
(S/2017/904, annex). We believe that such extremes
must be addressed, resolved and serve as a basis for
improving the work of the Mechanism so as to prevent
them in future investigations. Bolivia voted against
the draft resolution cotnained in document S/2017/962
because it explicitly asked the JIM and the Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic to travel to the
scenes of incidents in order to gather more verifiable
evidence in situ so as to ensure a thorough investigation.
We are committed to continuing to work towards
strengthening investigation processes in a more
transparent manner, and for that, we call on the
Council to resolve its differences and unite its efforts
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

to maintain unity on such an important issue for the
international community.
As we stated at the beginning of this meeting,
within the framework of and in accordance with
article 35 of the Security Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, Bolivia supported the draft resolution
(S/2017/933) presented by the Russian Federation and
China. That having been said, my delegation requires
the presidency to put the draft resolution to the vote, as
stipulated in rule 35 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
The President: I have taken note of that request.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to say, quite
frankly, that we do not feel that what has happened
today in this Chamber has been very dignifying for
the Council — the organ of the United Nations with
great responsibility, the primary responsibility for
international peace and security. That is perhaps a
signature of the times we are in. We know that the way
by which the international community will succeed in
controling chemical weapons and eliminating their use
is for countries such as the United States and Russia
to work together to ensure that that noble objective is
achieved. There is no other way.
Frankly speaking, the issue has become so
politicized that it seems it is becoming extremely
difficult to focus on the real problem. Incidentally, we
have always felt that the situation in Syria — not only
on this issue, but on others as well — has always been
politicized. In our view, it is not wise to blame this or
that State for the logjam that we are in. All the problems
we are facing appear to be the result of a lack, of failure
to focus on the major issue, which is a common danger
and a reflection of a much more complex issue that we
are currently facing.
Allow me to explain why we decided to vote in
favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/962). First of
all, we are very keen to contribute to the renewal of
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM). We believe that it is and will
continue to be useful. Sweden has explained why, and I
do not want to repeat what was said.
Secondly, we had some doubts about whether it was
time for the JIM to draw the conclusion it made in its
seventh report (S/2017/904, annex). With regard to that
issue, the United States showed sufficient flexibility,

S/PV. 8105

for which we were very grateful. There was therefore
no reason for us not to support the American draft
resolution, all the more so because that country was
ready to engage with us and accept amendments, which
we appreciate.
However, we are again in a stalemate, a logjam.
The future of the JIM is in the balance. We only have
one day to save it. We are hopeful that we will come to
some consensus to ensure that the JIM will exist beyond
tomorrow, for which we need the support of everybody.
We hope that a technical rollover is something that we
could consider. We do not believe that we have come to
the end of the road; we disagree with that contention by
the United Kingdom. We can still proceed and achieve
something meaningful to ensure that the life of the JIM
is protected and assured.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): For Kazakhstan, the
fight against proliferation and the use of weapons of
mass destruction remains one of the most important
priorities of its foreign policy. For that reason, we are
most seriously concerned about the current state of
the non-proliferation regime in Syria, as well as in the
region as a whole. We must recognize that the use of
chemical weapons in Syria continues, with persistent
threats of chemical terrorism a grave reality. In addition,
many allegations on the use of chemical agents in Syria
are still undisclosed.
Based on those circumstances and on our
understanding of the need to preserve the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), we
intended to support both draft resolutions that were to
extend the mandate of the JIM. Having read its seventh
report (S/2017/904, annex), we became even more
convinced that the investigation should continue and
that the methodology behind the investigation should
be fully and strictly enforced.
However, to our great regret, we again saw an
extremely disappointing picture when the Council
could not act with a single voice, meaning that as a
collective body, we have failed to act as one. The results
of the voting clearly show, yet again, that we have to
work more to be inclusive of all opinions in order to be
successful. It is always important and relevant for all
parties to work closely in the search for a compromise,
despite the existing principled positions.
It was commendable that during the latest
consultations, the United States demonstrated the

17-385929/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

willingness to accommodate some changes. At the
same time, we are also sympathetic to the concerns of
the Russian delegation regarding the JIM report and its
conclusions. We support the need to further improve
the work of the Mechanism. But both sides must work
out their differences, and we are here to make sure that
we achieve a solution.
I want to emphasize once again that for Kazakhstan,
the main priorities are to relentlessly continue to fight
against the threat or the use of chemical weapons, in
Syria as well as anywhere in the world. The situation
today is that all members of the Council are convinced
of the need to continue the work of the JIM. But
clearly it needs to undergo some changes to meet the
expectations of all member countries of the Security
Council. We therefore call on all, first and foremost
those countries that initiated the creation of the
Mechanism, to actively continue consultations and
search for mutually acceptable language, so that the
Mechanism can resume its work.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As we
inevitably move towards the expiry of the mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), the Security Council — our Council — which
is responsible, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, for the maintenance of international peace
and security, is unfortunately once again divided on
the critical issue of chemical weapons use in Syria.
Everybody around this table agrees about the relevance
of the Mechanism, not only with respect to deterrence
but also to dealing with ongoing allegations about the
use of chemical weapons in Syria, in a context where
there is a risk of chemical terrorism.
The delegation of Senegal voted in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2017/962), bearing in mind the indescribable
suffering of the Syrian population. They have been the
victim of all kinds of atrocities, including painful, slow
deaths as a result of burns from chemical weapons.
We did so as well because we are persuaded of the
utility of the Joint Investigative Mechanism tasked
with implementing, in an independent, impartial and
objective manner, the mandate conferred on it by 2235
(2015), a mandate unanimously renewed by resolution
2319 (2016). That is why we welcome the openness and
spirit of compromise demonstrated by the United States
as the penholder, including by taking into account
the legitimate concerns of many Member States with
10/21

16/11/2017

respect to improving the methodology of the work of
the Mechanism so as to ensure the quality of its reports.
Despite the outcome of this vote and the deeply
diverging views in the Council on the seventh report
(S/2017/904, annex) my delegation is of the view that
it is still possible for us to arrive at a consensus, at
the unanimity that prevailed at the establishment of
the Mechanism and to arrive at its renewal. We also
welcome the reaffirmation by the American delegation
to persevere in its efforts along those lines. We invite all
other members to pursue those efforts, to demonstrate
compromise to preserve the Mechanism, which for us is
an important component of the global non-proliferation
architecture. Hence, my delegation reiterates its
complete support for the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which has made commendable efforts, pursuant to the
relevant Council resolutions, to establish responsibility
for the unacceptable use of chemical substances as
weapons against the civilian population in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the imperative
of arriving at a negotiated political solution to the Syrian
crisis on the basis of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2354 (2017).
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is gravely concerned about chemical weapon attacks
in Syria and expresses its sympathy to the Syrian
people for their sufferings. China is firmly opposed
to the use of chemical weapons by whichever country,
organization or person, for whatever purposes and
under whatever circumstances.
We have always maintained that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) should
carry out comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigations into chemical weapon attacks in Syria,
basing its work on solid evidence, and draw conclusions
that can stand the test of time and reality. Only if it does
so can the perpetrators of chemical weapon attacks
in Syria and those accountable be brought to justice
and can the Syrian people be free from the sufferings
caused by chemical weapon attacks.
China has noted that in its recent report (S/2017/904,
annex), the JIM has indicated that for security reasons,
and because the attacks occurred too long ago, it decided
not to go to Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh for on-site
visits. We have also noted that some Council members
have different views regarding the methodology and
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

conclusions of the JIM. China supports the Mechanism
in further carrying out its work. At the same time, we
also hope that it will improve its working methods
and procedures, overcome difficulties and problems
relating to on-site investigations, use more scientific
and rational methods for investigation and evidence
collection, and further improve its performance so as to
ensure the reliability and credibility of the conclusions
and address the concerns of all the parties.
By the draft resolution that was just put to a vote
(S/2017/962), the Council would have decided to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism by
one year. It contained some positive provisions, such as
condemning chemical weapon attacks in Syria, calling
for investigations into the incidents, calling upon all
the parties to assist the Mechanism in carrying out
on-site visits, and expressing concerns about the use
of chemical weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorist organizations. However, with regard to specific
measures to improve the working methods, the draft
did not fully address the legitimate concerns of some
Council members. In view of those considerations,
China abstained.
With the joint efforts of all the parties, the Astana
talks registered good results. A new round of Geneva
talks will soon be held. A political settlement of the
question of Syria is now at a critical stage. The Council
should proceed from the overarching goal of reaching
a political settlement on the question of Syria, remain
united on the question of chemical weapons in Syria and
create favourable conditions for a political settlement.
On that question, the international community should
join hands and push all the parties in Syria to pursue,
under the auspices of the United Nations, a political
process that is owned and led by the Syrians so as to
reach a solution that is acceptable to all.

S/PV. 8105

latest Council meeting on this item, on 7 November (see
S/PV.8090).
Japan has repeatedly stated that we have confidence
in the expertise, impartiality and professionalism of the
JIM. Its work should continue until all perpetrators of
the use of chemical weapons have been identified.
It is deeply regrettable that the Security Council
has again failed to overcome its differences. There is
no change in the fact that the Council is ultimately
responsible for ensuring accountability for the use
of chemical weapons. I call on Council members not
to abandon our efforts to prevent the further use of
chemical weapons and not to allow impunity.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
reiterates its complete rejection of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, based on our firm position against
the use of any kinds of weapons of mass destruction and
their ownership, development or attempts to acquire
such weapons. We continue to safeguard and care about
the well-being of the fraternal Syrian people who are
suffering from the use of those chemical weapons.
For many years, their suffering has been unspeakable
because of the conflict in that country.
In that context, Egypt reiterates once again its
position, demanding the identification of the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
by means of an investigation that would meet all the
substantive criteria to perform the task at hand.

China will continue to play a constructive role
in seeking a political settlement so as to find a
comprehensive, just and proper solution to the question
in Syria at an early date.

Experience has proven throughout the existencce
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) that there is a pressing need to improve its
methodology, particularly through carrying out field
visits to the sites that are under investigation because
they have witnessed the use of chemical weapons.
These visits should include the excavation, recording
and collection of evidence and samples. The JIM should
also study and explore all possible scenarios related to
incidents of the use of chemical weapons.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan supported and
co-sponsored the draft resolution submitted by the
United States (S/2017/962) because we believe that it
would have been the best way to keep the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) in
operation, while addressing various issues raised during
the discussion on improving the work of the JIM at the

Egypt has sought to include in any draft resolution
on the renewal of the JIM mandate before the Security
Council all the bases and principles that would ensure
that it is able to operate, without excessive technicalities
that could obstruct its implementation and in a way
that would help to collect solid, trustworthy evidence.
However, our proposals have not been received very
positively or realistically. On the other hand, Egypt

17-3859211/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

has underscored the importance of the work of the JIM
and of improving its methodology, which would require
separating the renewal of its mandate from the issue of
addressing its reports. The reports are the substantive
aspect of the Mechanism’s work and its results, and
should be addressed independently of the issue of
renewing the mandate and developing its methodology.
This principled position led Egypt to support the draft
resolution submitted by the United States in October
(S/2017/884), which was limited to renewing the
Mechanism’s mandate without relating it to the content
of its reports.
In the past few days, Egypt has attempted in
all sincerity to arrive at a balanced, compromise
alternative that would enable the Security Council to
renew the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and improve its methodology, with a focus on the
substantive observations that have been presented
regarding its methodology and the implications of that
since the renewal of its mandate last year. However,
the two draft resolutions submitted in the past few
days (S/2017/933 and S/2017/962) did not take those
concerns into consideration. That did not help us to
achieve the desired result, and the Security Council
reached a negative conclusion on the issue of renewing
the mandate.
Egypt abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2017/962, extending the mandate of the JIM, despite
our position in favour of identifying the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We intended to abstain in the voting on the second
draft resolution (S/2017/933), which was withdrawn,
because it polarized the handling of the conclusions of
the Mechanism’s report and the renewal of its mandate,
resulting in an inability to achieve the objectives sought
by the international community — that is, the renewal
of the Mechanism’s mandate and the adoption of
working methods that would guarantee evidence-based,
indisputable results with respect to the identity of the
perpetrators in Syria.
Egypt is ready to revisit its position and overcome
fixed political positions in order to put the interests of
the Syrian people first. The Security Council, having
established the Joint Investigative Mechanism, is
responsible for guaranteeing everything it needs to do
an impartial job in carrying out its task of identifying
the persons and entities responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. Egypt is it prepared to work
with all interested parties and stakeholders to provide
12/21

16/11/2017

the groundwork and criteria needed to guarantee an
objective investigation.
Egypt once again affirms that the only motive
behind our position on the issue of renewing the
JIM and improving its methodology is to work in the
interests of our brother people of Syria, to ensure that
the use of chemical weapons in Syria does not recur and
to identify those responsible for using these weapons in
the past. That is consistent with our efforts to end the
Syrian people’s suffering and achieve a final political
settlement that will guarantee them a life of dignity
and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As we all know, the Russian Federation was
unable to support the draft resolution (S/2017/962)
submitted by the United States delegation. Today we
have been told that we refused to engage in consultations
or to communicate. That is not so, since our experts
did indeed communicate whenever they were reached
out to.
Over the past few weeks, we have patiently explained
that we cannot take the proposed concept seriously. It
was wrong from the start in that it was geared towards
entrenching the systemic flaws in the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism as well
as that of the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Today’s statement by the Permanent Representative
of the United States was focused not on the Mechanism
but, as usual, on Russia. Clearly, we will also be
hearing repeated accusations of Russia in interviews
and press releases.
Today my British colleague referred to — even,
one might say, blurted out and betrayed, and I am
very grateful to him for his frankness — the main
point that this spectacle was conceived and based on.
The Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
said that there is no place for Russia in the political
process in Syria. There we are. That is why this whole
unscrupulous performance was devised, to cast doubt
on Russia’s role in the political process for resolving
the Syrian crisis. I would like to thank Mr. Rycroft for
saying out loud what many could not bring themselves
to do.
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

There was nothing balanced about the United
States draft resolution. The main emphases in the text
remained the same throughout the expert discussions.
The changes made were merely cosmetic and did not deal
with a single one of the flaws in the bodies investigating
the Syrian chemical weapons dossier. We would like to
remind our United States colleagues — and those who
were not interested in examining the details when they
supported the draft resolution, divorced from reality,
submitted by the United States — that it is they who
will bear the burden of responsibility if the Mechanism
cannot be preserved. Russia is doing everything it can
to prevent that from happening. It had appeared that we
were united by one goal — extending the Mechanism’s
mandate and increasing its effectiveness in the interests
of identifying the real perpetrators of chemical weapon
crimes. It turns out, however, that some of our partners
in the Security Council have other priorities.
From a historical perspective, many have now
observed that the endless distortions regarding
Damascus and chemical weapons, which were in fact
removed and destroyed under OPCW oversight, are
strongly reminiscent of the situation in Iraq almost 15
years ago. At the time, the representatives of the United
States deliberately misled the international community,
including the Security Council, in order to establish
grounds for the intervention that ultimately resulted in
immeasurable misery for Iraq and the entire region.
In his recently published memoir, Gordon
Brown, former United Kingdom Prime Minister,
openly discusses the dubious nature of the arguments
supporting the military campaign launched against Iraq
in 2003. As it turns out, the United States deliberately
concealed from its closest allies the conclusions of its
military specialists, who had been unable to establish
any credible traces of Iraqi activity linked to weapons
of mass destruction. This is not the first statesperson
and will probably not be the last who over time has a
stroke of insight or epiphany in relation to the mosntrous
experiments in Iraq and Libya. Will this geopolitical
laboratory never shut down?
Russia, which has always unconditionally supported
the international regime on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, has proposed, not for
the first time but so far without success, together
with its Chinese partners, that the Security Council
should tackle the issue of chemical terrorism in the
Middle East seriously. Last year, at the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva, our Foreign Minister Sergey

S/PV. 8105

Lavrov proposed drafting an international convention
to combat acts of chemical and biological terrorism. We
call on everyone to join the discussions on the issue.
Any delay on it could be very costly.
In conclusion, I would like to support my Bolivian
colleague’s proposal to resubmit draft resolution
S/2017/933. We would like to be a co-sponsor of the
draft resolution and propose that it be put it to the
vote today.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
On six occasions, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) has certified the use of
chemical weapons in Syria by the Syrian Government
and Da’esh. Many other allegations are being investigated
by the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in the
Syrian Arab Republic. We believe that the Security
Council has the responsibility to address that serious
trend, upholding the integrity and credibility of the
crucial long-standing norms of our collective security
and preserving paths for accountability. Preventing
the recurrence of violations should also be a common
priority for all Council members. The OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism is a critical tool
in that regard, and Italy fully supported the renewal of
its mandate.
The draft resolution under consideration today
(S/2017/962) was the result of an open negotiation in
which Council members made a collective effort to
strengthen the implementation of the JIM’s mandate.
A number of delegations suggested ways to ensure
that the JIM operates more effectively, and the draft
resolution included a number of those suggestions.
At the same time, as many of us requested, the draft
resolution protected the Mechanism’s independence,
preserved the integrity of its mandate and upheld the
credibility of its past investigations. We believe that
the draft resolution and the negotiations that led to
it — and we thank the delegation of the United States
for its continued efforts in that respect — embodied a
willingness to find compromise and achieve common
ground, meeting the concerns and principles expressed
by all delegations.
We are deeply disappointed, therefore, by the result
of the voting today, as it deprives the international
community of a crucial tool for fighting impunity for

17-3859213/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

16/11/2017

some of the most heinous and unacceptable crimes
committed in Syria. The international community is now
weaker, and our collective security architecture shakier,
as a result of today’s vote. But the outcome is difficult
to accept. That is why we will continue to work with
the other Council members on the issue — hopefully,
immediately after this meeting — mindful of its crucial
importance for the non-proliferation regime and the
principle of accountability. We hope that collectively
we will be able to return to the positive trend of
cooperation and consensus on this crucial issue that we
have been developing in the Council since 2013.

the United Nations Special Commission established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 687 (1991), the
Swedish Rolf Ekeus and the Australian Richard Butler,
who refused to legitimize the United Kingdom-United
States invasion of Iraq.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

However, the fact of the matter is that there are
three permanent members of the Council who have
adopted aggressive and hegemonic policies. They
regard the United Nations and the Security Council
as mere administrative offices or commercial entities
in the service of achieving their goals. Fortunately,
two permanent members, along with other states,
oppose such practices and attenuate that hegemony
and aggression. Were it not for those two countries,
which are committed to the purposes of the Charter,
to date the world would have experienced even more
destruction, wars, crises and iterations of the Al-Nusra
Front, which was created by those three countries when
they decided to sponsor and finance terrorism and
use it as a weapon against all those who oppose their
interventionist policy. In the Syrian Arab Republic, we
therefore continue to believe that it is the principles of
international law and the purposes of the Charter that
must govern international relations. We continue to
believe that truth and justice will ultimately prevail, as
the only alternative is chaos.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We need to understand the important
discussions that have taken place in the Chamber today.
I invite Council members to review a report
published by the Daily Mail in January 2013 and
later withdrawn. The report includes the e-mail
correspondence between sernior officials at a British
company called Britam Defence. It describes a plot
that was subsequently approved by Washington, D.C.,
whereby Qatar, in cooperation with Turkey, would
finance and support rebels in Syria to use chemical
weapons and then blame the Syrian Government for the
use of those weapons. The report was published in a
British newspaper in 2013, not a Syrian newspaper.
Unfortunately, some members of the Council are
treating the cases of the false justifications that were
made in the brazen invasion of Libya and Iraq as
though they were incidents that would be forgotten by
the Council, and could be repeated at any time with
guaranteed impunity. We cannot allow that. Fortunately,
there are some members of the Council whose memory
is still good, and they do not forget.
Russia did not obstruct the work of the Security
Council today. It has worked to prevent another
tragedy such as that witnessed in Libya and Iraq. It has
preserved the integrity of the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations at a time when integrity and purity
have been lacking. The vote of the Russian Federation
today has saved the Council from manipulating a
United Nations mechanism whose Chair is supposed
to have at least the same courage as the Chairman of
14/21

We in the Syrian Arab Republic — a founding
Member of the United Nations — still believe that the
Organization plays a vital role in finding solutions to
crises when Member States comply with the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations, foremost of which
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is the main responsibility of the Council.

Accordingly, from the very beginning my
Government has cooperated with the United Nations,
its bodies, committees and numerous envoys. When
armed terrorist groups carried out their crimes in
Khan al-Assal, near Aleppo, on 19 March 2013, which
marked the first case of the use of chemical weapons,
the United Nations was the only entity from which my
Government sought assistance to investigate the use of
chemical weapons there. Only hours after that incident,
I personally met with former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. I asked him to send an emergency mission to
help the Syrian Government investigate the use of toxic
chemical substances and identify the perpetrators.
Within just a few hours following our meeting, as he
told me, the Secretary-General consulted with the
influential members of the Council.
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

He then called back to inform me that the United
Nations would provide assistance only in determining
whether chemical substances had been used, but that it
would not be able to help identify the perpetrators of those
crimes. Although we agreed to receive that incomplete
mandate, it took four months for the Secretary-General
to send an investigation mission, under the leadership
of the Swedish professor Åke Sellström. Despite that
unjustified delay of four months, the Mission has yet to
set foot in Khan al-Assal. That was four and a half years
ago. The mission has not yet gone to Khan al-Assal as a
result of the fabircation of the Ghouta incidents, which
took place just minutes before Mr. Sellström’s mission
was supposed to leave for Khan al-Assal.
I am recounting that story only because it has been
repeated many times. It was a rather historic moment,
as it showed that the mechanisms and committees
established by the United Nations to investigate
the use of chemical substances in Syria would not
be permitted to establish the truth or carry out their
work professionally, impartially, independently and
transparently. The three States and their proxies in
the region were focused on only one aspect — their
conspiracy with armed terrorist groups to stage crimes
using chemical substances against Syrian civilians and
to accuse the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
of them because they have not found more dangerous
types of weapon to carry out their interventionist and
destructive agendas after having exhausted all other
tricks up their sleeve.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, we are not at all opposed
to the establishment of investigative mechanisms that
are independent, honest and professional to determine
who is responsible for the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. As I just said, we were the first to ask for such
assistance. We believe that the draft resolution that was
introduced by Russia and China and vetoed by three
States since the beginning, was aimed at assisting the
Mechanism to carry out its mandate, in accordance with
the norms pursuant to the relevant international terms
of reference, and steering it away from politicization
and the pressure that has been exerted by the United
States, the United Kingdom and France. This would
have righted the course of its work in a way that would
have enabled it to find that truth based on physical and
conclusive evidence, which does not allow for multiple
interpretations, falsification or manipulation. Any
draft resolution failing to consider those standards and
safeguards would be analogous to a mere PlayStation

S/PV. 8105

game and represent a desperate attempt to pursue the
dangerous endeavour of conducting investigations from
afar, relying on false witnesses, information provided by
the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist group; on open sources
affiliated with it, such as the White Helmets; and early
warning mechanisms, as mentioned in the report of the
Chairman of the Mechanism, that are able to predict the
unknown and can somehow detect chemical weapons
carried by aircraft flying at a distance of several
kilometres away.
I remind everyone that the United States delegation
was quick to ask the Council to extend the mandate
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism only 48 hours
after its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex) was issued,
although by then it had been revealed that the report had
already been prepared and written in the dark rooms of
London, Paris, and Washington, D.C. The leadership of
the Mechanism only had to sign and seal the report to
present it to the Council on 7 November (see S/PV.8090).
It did not burden itself with even noting the remarks
made by Council members and responding to them at
that meeting. I will not repeat the remarks that I made
at last week’s meeting in this Chamber on the legal,
technical, and scientific aspects that refute the report
and all that it includes regarding the methodology
and specious conclusions of the Mechanism related to
Khan Shaykhun.
Some Council members may not be aware of the
fact that a British expert from the United Kingdom
Permanent Mission to the United Nations visited many
permanent mission to advocate for the same findings of
the report before it had even been submitted. When I
say the same findings, I mean the exact same wording,
terminology and information. What impartiality and
professionalism are we talking about with the presence
of a British expert who had promoted the same outcomes
that were to be issued in the report?
My country, Syria, reiterates that it has complied
with the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Since we acceded to the Convention in 2013, we have
possessed no banned toxic chemical substances, as
confirmed by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Head of the Joint
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations for the
Elimination of the Chemical Weapons Programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic, in her report to the Council
that was submitted in June 2014 (S/2014/444, annex).

17-3859215/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

Syria considers the use of chemical to be an immoral
act that must be condemned, regardless of where, when
and under what conditions they are used.
In conclusion, together with a number of other
Member States’ Governments, we believe that the time
has come for the Council to shoulder its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security with
integrity and in a balanced manner. To that end, some
members of the Council must ensure that their actions
match their words, especially those that enthusiastically
advocate for extending the Mechanism according to the
American way. Those countries must demonstrate the
same enthusiasm to ensure the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, some of which
are based on Chapter VII of the Charter, and investigate
violations of those resolutions by Governments of
some States. Those countries should also consider
the hundreds of letters that we sent to the Council on
the support and funding of arms that has been and is
still being provided by the Governments of the United
States, France, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia,
Qatar and Turkey to armed terrorist groups in Syria and
the ongoing support of Israel to the Al-Nusra Front in
the separation zone of the occupied Golan, which led
to the abduction of two members of the contingents of
Fiji and the Philippines deployed to the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force.
I wish to inform you, Sir — and I am sure that you
are aware of this — that I sent a letter yesterday to the
President of the Council asking for an investigation
into a documented report published by the British
Broadcasting Cooperation on the support provided by
the so-called international coalition forces to terrorists
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). This
support was supposed to secure the exit of ISIL elements,
provide them with shelter and obstruct the operations
of the Syrian Arab Army and its allies against ISIL.
We look forward to the same level of enthusiasm that
the Council demonstrated today in dealing with all the
issues that I have mentioned in my statement.
The President: I intend, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting for
15 minutes in order to prepare the documents for the
resumed meeting.
It is so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 4.55 p.m. and
resumed at 5.15 p.m.
16/21

16/11/2017

The President: Members of the Council have
before them document S/2017/968, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by the Plurinational
State of Bolivia.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for the way in which
you are conducting the work of this unusual meeting
of the Council. We believe it is important that the
text of the draft resolution (S/2017/968) that we are
submitting be put before members of the Council for
their consideration. We do not need to apologize for
having recourse to the provisional rules of procedure
of the Council.
At the same time, we wish to make it clear that
we wish the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to continue its work and we also want to
address the concerns of other members of the Security
Council. With that, my delegation would like to ask
Security Council members for their support to the
draft resolution.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation shares our common
commitment to a world free of chemical weapons
and is concerned about the continuing incidences of
chemical terrorism in the Middle East. Our position is
unchanged. We condemn the use of chemical weapons
by anyone in any circumstances. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable.
Russia was part of the successful chemical
demilitarization of Syria from the start and was one of
the founders of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to investigate incidents of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We believed that,
working professionally, responsibly and impartially,
the Mechanism would do a good job of clarifying who
might be the perpetrators of possible chemical weapons
attacks, based on irreproachable data. However, it
became clear that there were fundamental flaws in
the Mechanism’s activities that would not permit us to
formally consider the question of extending its operation.
They include its method of working remotely, the fact
that it focused exclusively on dubious testimony from
opposition groups and even terrorists, and its disregard
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

for the entire range of rules and methods provided for
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In the past few weeks we have frequently brought
up the impossibility of considering extending the
JIM’s mandate without considering the conclusions
of its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex), which are a
complete shambles. The analysis of Russian specialists
in that regard was submitted for the consideration of
the States Members of the United Nations, and we
discussed it at the Council’s meeting on 7 November
(see S/PV.8090). Suffice it to say that the version
according to which a Syrian military aircraft dropped
a sarin bomb on Khan Shaykhun is completely
unrealistic, going as it does against the laws of physics
and ballistics. A plane following the trajectory recorded
by American radar would have been physically
incapable of being involved in this act. An unguided
missile could not have been dropped perpendicular
to the aircraft and then have exploded more than five
kilometres from it. Our country’s specialists know the
tactical and technical details of the Su-22 aircraft better
than anyone and therefore categorically exclude that
possibility. The report contains a ton of other errors
and inconsistencies for which we did not receive any
convincing explanations, though Ms. Nakamitsu, the
High Representative on Disarmament, did attempt to
respond to some questions — with no success, frankly.
Her answers essentially refer back to the JIM’s report
and the very conclusions we wanted clarified, and we
therefore got no real explanation. Mr. Mulet, the Head
of the JIM, focused on discussions with the press in
a very strange way for someone running a supposedly
independent investigative unit, and in an interview
on 9 November with the New York Times, he took the
liberty of making unfounded and insulting attacks on
Russia that did his dignity no service.
Against the backdrop of a pseudo-investigation
that cannot tolerate any criticism, and testimony
cooked up by who knows what witnesses or where that
collapses like a house of cards when checked up on,
the JIM had the nerve to issue a guilty verdict against
an entire State, the Syrian Arab Republic. In doing so,
the leadership of the Mechanism sacrificed its own
reputation and inscribed its name in the inglorious
history of political speculations about Syria. However,
we know that blaming the Mechanism alone for this is
pointless. It has merely functioned as a means to an
end by executing the political instructions of its puppet
masters. And we know who they are.

S/PV. 8105

Nonetheless, we want to preserve the Mechanism.
The draft resolution (S/2017/968) that was first
submitted today by us and has now been resubmitted
by Bolivia, and which we will now put to the vote,
is designed to extend the mandate with significant
improvements in the quality of the JIM’s work and
to bring it fully in line with the high standards of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. We are not about
to infringe on the independence of the Mechanism’s
investigators. The task consists of establishing clear,
transparent parameters for its activity, which would
also help to prevent any further manipulation of the
investigation’s activities as supplied up until now by
opponents of the Syrian Government.
The draft resolution directs the JIM to conduct
its investigations in accordance with Chemical
Weapons Convention practice, working at the actual
sites of chemical incidents and using the entire range
of methods and means at its disposal. The Security
Council must be immediately informed of potential
issues with access. If an investigation on the ground is
still impossible, we propose that the Mechanism should
retain the results of its own investigations and remote
findings from the OPCW’s Fact-finding Mission until
a fully fledged investigation is possible, strengthening
the ties between the two entities and enabling them to
function as effectively as possible.
We cannot consider the investigation of the
sarin incident in Khan Shaykhun concluded until the
JIM has visited the site and collected samples at the
Shayrat air base. The draft resolution includes specific
provisions for that. It directs the Secretary-General to
provide additional recommendations for building the
JIM’s capacity within a 20-day period and requires the
Security Council to consider those proposals promptly.
We firmly believe that the Mechanism must take a
more responsible approach to its obligation under last
year’s mandate to investigate chemical-related acts by
non-State actors. So far we have seen no activity on it,
and the numerous complaints from Syria in that regard,
as a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, have
been ignored.
In our revision of the draft resolution we tried as
much as possible to take the views of our Security
Council partners into account, and have included in it
a number of ideas from the United States and several
other Council members. In particular, we agreed to
extend the mandate for a year rather than six months, as

17-3859217/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

provided for in resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016).
We were willing to correct the operational paragraph
on the re-evaluation of the conclusions from the JIM’s
reports of last year, confining it solely to the episode
in the Sarmin area. At the time, the Mechanism based
its conclusions on a version in which a chlorine-filled
barrel bomb fell from a high altitude into a ventilation
shaft of a diameter similar to the bomb’s, even though the
Mechanism itself termed that unlikely. Unbelievable.
We call on the members of the Security Council
to vote in favour of the draft resolution, which,
together with Bolivia and China, we are submitting for
their consideration.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): There are
a few things that I think we have to realize here. I think
a lot of it has do with genuineness — whether it was
used or not; with the actors, whether they were to be
trusted or not; with the process of how all of that played
out; and where we go from there. Given that, I have a
few comments to make.
First, we all voted. We voted that we were going
to follow the rules. We were going to take the Russian
draft resolution (S/2017/933) first and the United States
draft resolution (S/2017/962) second. Bolivia showed
a complete lack of respect for the Council by turning
around and playing a game so as to have its vote after
the vote on the United States draft resolution. We will
have that vote, and it will have the same outcome. For
a member that always says it wants to be transparent,
there was nothing transparent about that. Bolivia really
tried to pull one over on the entire Council, and it is on
Bolivia alone to deal with.
Secondly, the United States took the draft resolution
very seriously. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) is one that we strongly believed in.
We engaged in good faith with Russia when we first
came up with the JIM. We were all united and together
when we established the JIM. It was there for a reason,
because chemical weapons usage in Syria continues,
and people continue to die from it. Because of that, we
knew how important the JIM was. I was glad to hear
Russia say how important the JIM is.
What is fascinating, however, is that Russia is now
suddenly finding numerous flaws in the JIM — but it
never found any when we held the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) to be responsible. The flaws did not
seem to exist then. They came about only when Syria
18/21

16/11/2017

was blamed. Why is that? Was the process different? Did
the experts not do it the same way? Did they treat ISIS
differently from how they treated Syria? Is that what we
are going to imply? So where is our responsibility? Our
responsibility is that the JIM must remain independent.
So then we had a new draft resolution. By the way,
the United States worked with each and every member
of the Council on the draft resolution, even Russia.
Though it did not want to engage with us, we took into
account things that we knew we could bring in from
the draft resolution, and we have the changes. I showed
Russia those changes, and Russia then said it had had
no intention of voting for it from the very beginning
and that it was always going to veto it. Again, that was
disingenuous, because Russia should have just told all
of us that that was its intention in the first place.
Let me turn now to the process. There is another
draft resolution on the table. Suddenly, Russia puts out
a draft resolution and China joins it. They did not touch
base with a single other country on the Council. Neither
of them held consultations and neither of them wanted to
discuss it. To them it was all a game, in which they would
just counter it with something else — and they did. All
of us can still look at it, and I can tell you what we think.
They want a JIM that does not have independence. They
want a JIM that does not have reporting. They want a
JIM that they can micromanage — or that any member
can micromanage. That is the JIM they want. That is
what they are looking for.
Today, I have heard so many of my friends on
the Council talk about how this is all embarrassing.
It is embarrassing that the Council is not united. It is
embarrassing that we are allowing this to play out.
No. What is embarrassing is that we do not have a
JIM renewal. What is embarrassing is that everyone is
worried about who they are going to upset, and they
are not thinking about the people who were abused by
chemical weapons.
To realize the importance of what this investigative
mechanism would do, one has to also realize when a
country is playing games with people’s lives. That is
exactly what is happening here, and it is happened
10 times. We have watched it happen — 10 different
vetoes. And I will say that the only thing that today has
proved is that Russia cannot be trusted in the political
process in Syria. Russia will not be a good and trusted
actor because it wants to control who is at fault; it wants
to control what happens; it wants to control that area,
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

because it wants to work with Iran and Syria to make
sure that they have that all under control. If someone is
okay with that, then he or she should make the decision.
The United States is not okay with that.
So what I will say is that through this process we
were very kind and tried to work with everyone — as
we always do — because we think that every member
is important. And we may smile, and we may work with
everyone, and we may incorporate these changes, but
the United States will not be disrespected. We worked
for weeks on a draft resolution, and then they turn
around and say “Oh, can we come up with something
else?” I have a draft resolution with every change that
was requested, but we are going to allow one member to
basically give a pass to chemical-weapons use in Syria.
I will tell my Russia friends this — the next
chemical-weapons attack is on their hands. The next
pictures I hold up will be because they let it happen.
Because by not having the JIM, they are basically telling
the entire world that chemical weapons are okay to use.
That is what we should be embarrassed about today.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Kazakhstan,
Russian Federation
Against:
France, Italy, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Egypt, Ethiopia, Japan, Senegal
The President: The draft resolution received
4 votes in favour, 7 against and 4 abstentions. The draft
resolution is not adopted, having failed to obtain the
required number of votes.

S/PV. 8105

organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security into a media show.
I reiterate that we abstained in the voting on both
draft resolutions only after we made strenuous efforts
to bring differing positions closer together and to renew
and enhance the performance of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism without compromising
its independence. We saw room for consensus and
tried to build on it. However, this opportunity was not
seized and the polarization continued until we reached
today’s outcome.
I reaffirm that consensus is possible. There is
room for consensus if we have enough willpower.
We are prepared to pursue our efforts to preserve the
Mechanism and its independence.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted against
the draft resolution initially proposed by the Russian
Federation (S/2017/968) for several reasons.
First, we view the document as a deliberate attempt
to undermine the credibility and independence of
both the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) and the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic (FFM).
Secondly, it appears from the text that the goal of
the draft is to create artificial and unwarranted obstacles
to independent investigations. Moreover, the attempt to
micromanage the JIM and the FFM is nothing less than
an ill-disguised effort to sabotage the work of both the
Mission and the Mechanism.
Thirdly, it is also noteworthy that the document
was not open for negotiation within the Council. That
speaks volumes about the willingness of its authors
to actually reach agreement on it and, by the way, to
contribute to the draft resolution proposed by the
United States (S/2017/962), which was the product of
real negotiations.

I shall now give the floor those members who wish
to make statements after the voting.

All in all, we cannot support a scenario the sole aim
of which is to protect at any price the perpetrators of
atrocious crimes in Syria from accountability.

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I did not
intend to take the floor again, but I must express my
deepest regret about what has transpired in the Council
today and about how it has been transformed from an

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan did not support the draft
resolution initially submitted by Russian Federation
(S/2017/968) because we do not support its assessment of
the past work of the Organization for the Prohibition of

17-3859219/21

S/PV.8105

The situation in the Middle East

Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM).
While we take note of Russia’s willingness to
consider renewing the mandate of the JIM and Russia’s
wish to improve the work of the JIM, we believe that
the best way to keep the JIM in operation was described
in the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2017/962), which failed to be adopted. There is
no changing the fact that the Council is ultimately
responsible for ensuring accountability for the use of
chemical weapons. Again, I sincerely urge all members
of the Council not to abandon our efforts and to continue
discussions in order to find a way to prevent the further
use of chemical weapons and not to allow impunity.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons inside
Syria. We support investigations into the incidents so as
to bring to justice the perpetrators and those responsible
for unleashing the chemical-weapons attacks.
We support the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) in continuing its work. The draft
resolution on which the Council voted (S/2017/968)
contains the proposed extension of the JIM mandate
by a year, condemns the chemical weapons attacks in
Syria, demands investigations, and expresses concern
over the use of chemical weapons by non-State actors,
including terrorist organizations. It also seeks to
improve theJIM’s working methods and mandate and
to strengthen its on-site investigation and evidence
collection, and proposes specific measures to improve
the JIM’s work and to ensure the reliability and
credibility of the conclusions of its investigations.
China supported and voted in favour of the draft
resolution. We regret the fact that it was not adopted.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are deeply disappointed that our initiative
aimed at extending and improving the quality of
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to investigate instances of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria did not receive the
necessary support.
We assumed that various tricks would be used in
an attempt to blame Russia for a possible shutdown of
the JIM’s activities. On 24 October, with exactly the
same intention, we were deliberately made to exercise
20/21

16/11/2017

our veto when there was no need for a vote in the
first place (see S/PV.8073). We are not ruling out the
possibility that the intention of defaming our country
has superseded that of preserving the Mechanism.
We will now listen to numerous comments from our
colleagues around this table, intended for the press.
The world will be awash in lies about what transpired
today in the Security Council. As usual, Russia will be
blamed for everything.
I get the impression that no one listens to me or
hears me when I speak. Everything that I said in
my statement — two statements, actually — was
essentially ignored. We were accused of not taking
part in consultations, even though we met at least
three times at the expert level with our United States
colleagues. We were accused of saying from the outset
that we would not permit the adoption of the United
States draft resolution. That is true, because the draft
resolution proposed by the United States entrenched the
JIM’s fundamental errors. But we proposed our own
initiative. We have been accused of playing games. We
think it is not we who are playing games but others
who are playing games with us. We have been told
that we welcome the results of the work of the JIM
when terrorists are accused of chemical attacks while
at the same time we are covering up for the Syrian
Government. That is not true.
We are protesting about the JIM’s blatant
unprofessionalism, which is most likely intentional.
To give an example from a different area, in an
argument put forward in the Mechanism’s seventh
report (S/2017/904, annex) in support of the claim that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) used
mustard gas at Umm Hawsh, the only evidence was that
it was claimed that ISIL had been observed using it in
the past, and the other group involved had not. Is that a
professional investigation? It is simply ridiculous.
We firmly believe that people who are paying
attention will understand what is really going on.
Let me reiterate that in the past few years Russia,
as a conscientious party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, has done a great deal of work with regard
to the chemical demilitarization of Syria, including,
among other things, helping to establish and support
the JIM. During that entire time we have consistently
sought to boost the effectiveness of its work, with no
effort at understanding from a number of our Western
partners. Today it was made crystal clear that we need
a robust, professional investigative mechanism that
17-38592

16/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

will help to prevent the threat of chemical terrorism
in the region from spreading, but what others want
is a puppet entity so that they can manipulate public
opinion, an entity that will repeatedly accuse the Syrian
Government of violating international norms, based on
false information.
Those who voted against the draft resolution
submitted by Russia and China bear full responsibility
for shutting down the activities of the JIM.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you
once again, Mr. President, for your leadership of the
Council at this meeting.
We are of course as frustrated as the majority of
the members around this table, given another collective
failure on the part of the Council to work together
to extend the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. I come from a country that
has never used chemical weapons and a region that
is in the process of successfully settling its very last
armed conflict, that is free of nuclear weapons and that
I believe has repeatedly demonstrated its respect for
international law and the United Nations.
The representative of the United States has said here
in this Chamber that Bolivia has shown a lack of respect
for the Council and has not acted transparently. We
categorically reject those claims. They are absolutely
unacceptable and untrue. Bolivia will not apologize for
using the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council. We supported the draft resolution submitted
by Russia at the outset of the meeting (S/2017/933)
and it became clear that we were going to have to have
recourse to the provisional rules of procedure. In doing
so, a delegation that enjoys the same rights as every
other delegation cannot be accused of exhibiting a lack
of transparency or of not showing respect for the other
members of the Security Council. That is unacceptable.
If we are talking about transparency and a lack of
respect for the Security Council, perhaps we should

S/PV. 8105

recall the closed consultations held on 7 April, at which
we all worked to approve a draft resolution on the
situation in Syria. Was it out of a lack of respect for
the Security Council or a lack of transparency that, the
whole time that we were trying to find a way out of that
situation, the United States was planning an air strike
on a military base in Syria, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations? That was an unacceptable unilateral
action. Bolivia categorically rejects those accusations.
In any case, Bolivia will continue to work to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We
hope that we can leave behind this media circus where
we resort to finger-pointing at one another for failures
of responsibility. We hope that we can offer a glimmer
of hope to the victims of chemical-weapon attacks, not
just in Syria but all over the world, and I reiterate my
hope that future negotiations will succeed in extending
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be brief. I actually forgot to mention
three issues that I think it is important to mention
today. I would first like to sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, for your stewardship of today’s meeting.
It has been difficult, but you managed to conduct it in
truly presidential fashion. Secondly, I should recall
something that I forgot to mention, which is that
our alternative draft resolution (S/2017/933) was not
submitted yesterday but has been before the Council
since 7 November.
Lastly, I would like to note, which I omitted
to earlier, that while Bolivia clearly does not need
Russia’s protection, it does need support. In my view,
the United States representative’s accusations of a lack
of transparency with regard to today’s process on the
part of the representative of Bolivia were completely
unjustified. Regrettably, we saw far less transparency
in today’s voting process displayed by our counterparts
in the negotiations.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

17-3859221/21
