VII.

251

Re,olutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

threat to the natural resourccs of the Territory and its social and economic dcvelopment,

istering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assemhly at ils forty-third scssion.

Noting with satisfaction the assistance extended to Tokelau by the United Nations Oevelopment Programme and
other regional and international institutions,

92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

Recalling the dispatch in 1976, 198 l and 1986 of United
Nations visiting missiorn, to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a further visiting mission to Tokelau at an appropriate
time should be kept under review,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Tokelau; 28

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Tokelau to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way dela y the implementation of the Declaration, which fully applies to Tokelau;
4. Welcomes the statement of the Chairman of the
General Fono (Council) ofTokelau that Tokelau wishes to
see the devolution of authority to the General Fono consolidated and continued;
5. Notes that the people of t he Territory are determined to manage their economic and political development in such a way as to ensure the preservation of the social, cultural and traditional heritage of Tokelau, and
urges the administering Power and the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system
to respect fully the wishes ofthe people ofTokelau in this
regard;
6. Urges Member States, relevant specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
extend to Tokelau the maximum assistance possible to
help in its rehabilitation and reconstruction in order to
overcome the losses incurred in natural disasters in 1987;
7. Urges the Government of New Zealand, the administering Power, in co-operation with the General Fono, to
ensure that the traditional fishing grounds of the people of
Tokelau are protected in accordance with the Multilateral
Fisheries Treaty between the United States of America
and States members of the South Pacific Forum Fisheries
Agency;
8. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the General Fono, to continue and expand its development assistance to Tokelau;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, as well as the regional
institutions concerned, to continue to take ali necessary
measures, in close consultation with the Office for Tokelau
Affairs, and taking due account of the decisions of the
General Fono on the allocation of resources and development priorities, to accelerate progress in the social and the
economic life of the Territory;
10. Requests the Special Committee to contínue the examination ofthis question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Tokelau
atan appropriate time and in consultation with the admin-

42/85.

Question of the Cayman lslands

The Ci<'wral Assembly,
Having cons1dered the question of the Cayman Islands,
llaving examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
the Cayman Islands, in particular General Assembly resolution 41 /20 of 31 October 1986,
Consc1011s of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing m mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stahility,
Noting that over 35 per cent of the civil servants of the
Territory are expatriates,
Noting with appreciatio11 the continued contribution of
the United Nations Development Programme to the development of the Territory,
Recalling the dispatch in 1977 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a further visiting mission to the Cayman Islands atan appropriate time should be kept under review,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman
Islands; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Cayman Islands to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to the Cayman
Island~:
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the Territory as will enable the people of the Cayman Islands to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV) and ali other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
Cayman Islands themselves to determine their future

(;cn<'ral Assembl~- -l·orty-second Session

252

política! status in accordann: w1th the relevan! prov1s1011~
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Dedaration
and, in that connection, reaffirrns the irnportance offoster
ing an awareness arnong the people of the Territory of the
possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to
self-determination and independence.
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation with
the territorial Government. to continue to provide ass1s
tance for increased employment of the local population in
the civil service;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote the economic and social development of
the Territory and recommends that priority should continue to be given to the diversification of the Territory's
economy in order to provide the foundations for sound social and economic developrnent;
8. Notes the steps taken by the territorial Government
to promote agricultura! production and calls upon the administering Power to provide the necessary assistance in
that field so as to reduce and resolve the Territorv's heavv
dependence on imported foodstuffs;
•
•
9. Calls upan the specialized agencies and other orga
nizations ofthe United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to take ali necessary measures to accelerate pro
gress in the social and economic life of the Territory;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the Cayman Islands at an appropriate time and in consultatior1
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly al its forty-third ,ession
92nd plenary meeting
4 Decembcr 191?7
42/86.

Question of Bermuda

The General Assembly,
Having considered thc question of Bermuda,
Having examined the relevan! chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation ofthe Declaration 011 the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,~7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependen_ce to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resoluttons and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
Bermuda, in particular General Assembly resolution
41/18 of 31 October 1986.
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy irnplementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting that, although the Senate of Bermuda did not
adopta bill calling for a referendum in April 1987 38 on the
issue of independence, t he issue has been the subject of debates in the Territory,
Aw~re of the specia! circumstances of the geographical
locatton and econom1c conditions of the Territory and
be~ring in mi~d the necessity of diversifying and strength
enmg further tts economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stahility,

37 !bid., fórty-second
chaps. III, IV, V and IX
38 See resolution 41/IR

Snsi,m.

S11p11i, 111,·,,:

Vo. 2 l

IA

~-' ·:• \ 1

Welcoming the role bcing played in thc Territory by thc
United Nations Dcvelopment Programme,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions providc
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a visiting mission to Bermuda at an appropriate time
should be kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda; 28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reiterares the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise hy the people ofthe Territory oftheir inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Reiterares that it is the obligation of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the Territory as will enable the people of Bermuda to exercise
freely and without interference their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and, in that connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the people ofBermuda ofthe possibilities open
to them in the exercise of that right;
5. Reaffirrns that it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda themselves to determine their own future political
status m accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
6. Reaffirrns its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Territory from exercising its right to self- determination and independence in conformity with the purposes and principies of the Charter;
7. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
ali necessary measures not to involve Bermuda in any offensive acts or interference directed against other Statcs
and to comply fully with the purposes and principies of
the Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly relating to military activi
ties and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories
under their administration;
8. Once again urges the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take ali effective measures to guarantee the right of thc
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development with a view to creating conditions for
a diversified, balanced and viable economy;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system to continue to pay special attention to the development needs of Bermuda;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to providc
a_ssist_ance for i_ncreased employment of the local populatHm tn thc c1v1I service, particularly at senior levels;
