United Nations

S/PV.6534

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6534

th meeting
Thrusday, 12 May 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/281)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33372 (E)

*1133372*

S/PV.6534

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/281)
The President (spoke in French): Unless I hear
any objection, under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure I shall invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
Unless I hear any objection, under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure I shall invite
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, to
participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/281, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamberto Zannier.
Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
(S/2011/281) describes the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 January to 15 April 2011. Today, I
wish to update members on recent developments and,
more generally, on the key current issues concerning
Kosovo.
In the wake of the latest constitutional crisis,
which was resolved with the election by the Kosovo

2

Assembly of Ms. Atifete Jahjaga as President, Kosovo
now appears to be heading towards a period of
increased political stability. This in turn should be
conducive to further progress in the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, which is key to finding solutions
to the unresolved issues that hamper Kosovo’s
development.
The dialogue has gotten off to a positive start
with three face-to-face meetings between the Serbian
and the Kosovo representatives to date, during which
discussions have focused on issues of importance to
the day-to-day lives of Kosovo’s inhabitants, including
civil registration, freedom of movement, and
telephony. UNMIK, though not physically present in
the discussions, has been supporting the dialogue
process and cooperating both with the European Union
facilitation team and with the two sides, and will
continue to support the process in any way that is
helpful.
I am hopeful that both Pristina and Belgrade will
demonstrate the resolve needed to find solutions to all
relevant issues in a constructive spirit so as to solve
problems for all communities, as well as to create
better conditions for progress on reconciliation and for
the further advancement of the entire region towards a
common European future. I consider particularly
positive the fact that today there was a meeting in
Pristina between local senior Government officials and
the Serbian chief negotiator, and I hope that this may
pave the way for future progress in the engagement
between the two sides. On a less positive note,
however, I regret to inform the Council that a street
protest against the visit escalated into violence that
resulted in a number of injuries. Such violence
undermines the dialogue and needs to be firmly
condemned.
In general, allow me to point out that it is
essential, particularly during this phase, for the parties
to approach the situation on the ground cooperatively
and with due respect for the concerns of all the
communities. Solutions that foster trust between
Kosovo’s communities stand a much greater chance of
serving the interests of long-term peace and stability.
One area where relations between the
communities are particularly difficult is the north of
Kosovo. Work has largely concluded on renovating the
courthouse in northern Mitrovica, which was the scene
of an occupation and action to regain the court just

11-33372

S/PV.6534

over three years ago that resulted in the death of an
UNMIK police officer and scores of injured. Since
those events, only a small group of international judges
and prosecutors — a first UNMIK staff and now
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) staff — have been working in the courthouse
intermittently. Nonetheless, the issues that led to the
occupation remain unresolved and still contentious. In
order to restore a fully functioning administration of
justice in northern Kosovo, which should not be further
delayed. There needs to be progress in the engagement
between the sides and with the communities that the
court will serve.
Another controversial issue related to the north of
Kosovo is the census, which was held in the rest of
Kosovo last month. The United Nations Office for
Project Services (UNOPS), as a status-neutral entity,
agreed to conduct the census in northern Kosovo, and
UNMIK supported this process by facilitating meetings
between UNOPS and local institutions in the north and
by providing support through the UNMIK-run
administration for north Mitrovica.
It was expected that the census in northern
Kosovo would begin in early May but, regrettably, as
of today there is no start date. The process has been
unduly politicized, and UNOPS reports that
cooperation from local institutions on a number of
operational aspects has not been forthcoming, in
particular with regard to the formation of local census
commissions and the recruitment of field staff. This
situation, if not rectified, will be detrimental for
everybody. Without the proper collection of data on the
dimension and composition of the communities, it will
be more difficult to plan the much-needed
interventions to promote the economic and social
development of the region.
Looking more generally at the state of the
economy in Kosovo, referred to in some detail in the
Secretary-General’s report, the situation remains of
concern due to high unemployment and heavy public
spending, notably on public sector wages and transport
infrastructure, which has led to the suspension of
substantial external budget support by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the
European
Commission.
Although
there
are
expectations of significant economic growth, there is
still a lack of foreign investment. Moreover, inflation is
rising, and in March the consumer price index was
10.8 per cent higher than it had been one year before.

11-33372

The IMF and some recognizing States have offered
advice and support to the Kosovo authorities in
developing more realistic economic programme. It is
now expected that the Kosovo authorities will focus
their energies and attention on carrying out the
necessary adjustments.
The lack of economic prospects is also one of the
main obstacles to the returns process, which remains
disappointingly slow and in some instances
unsustainable. Although in 2010 minority returns were
greater than at any other time in the past six years,
totalling 2,275 individuals, the first quarter of 2011
shows a 53 per cent decrease in voluntary returns
compared to last year, with Kosovo Serbs constituting
fewer than one in four returnees. While the policy of
the Kosovo authorities remains open to encouraging
returns, we have witnessed persisting problems at the
local level, where economic pressures and lack of
reconciliation have created tensions between receiving
communities and returnees.
The lack of reconciliation is in fact another key
impediment to returns. Despite the dialogue and
occasional attempts by various bodies, mainly
non-governmental
organizations,
reconciliation
remains an issue that has been insufficiently tackled.
Nevertheless, the continuing efforts being made to
clarify the fates and locations of missing persons and
to identify their bodily remains — an essential part of
the overall process of reconciliation — are resulting in
slow but steady progress. As I have noted in past
addresses to the Council, UNMIK supports efforts by
Pristina, Belgrade, EULEX and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to identify all of Kosovo’s
missing persons, as well as to investigate their
disappearance and bring those responsible to justice.
In this regard, allow me now to turn to the
Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly
resolution 1782 (2011), calling for an investigation of
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo, which was
based on a report by the Parliamentary Assembly’s
Rapporteur, Dick Marty. It is essential for these
allegations to be subject to a thorough, impartial and
independent investigation, conducted promptly, for the
sake of the victims and their loved ones, as well as for
the sake of those whom it is alleged were responsible
for the crimes. As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, EULEX has stated that it has the ability to
handle the case, while the Serbian Government has

3

S/PV.6534

proposed the establishment of an ad hoc mechanism
under the authority of the Security Council. In any
event, UNMIK remains fully available to cooperate
with such an investigation, in the awareness that while
these allegations are pending, it will be even harder for
reconciliation to take root.
Following further progress in the so-called
unfixing of Kosovo Force (KFOR) protection of a
number of key Serbian Orthodox Church sites, the
Kosovo
Police
has
taken
over
protection
responsibilities, thus far without incident. However, the
Secretary-General’s report mentions the discovery of
the theft of 13 square metres of lead sheet roofing from
the Virgin Ljeviška church in Prizren. Events such as
this could seriously undermine the Serbian Orthodox
Church’s confidence in the protection offered by the
Kosovo Police. For this reason ,I requested KFOR,
which was initially in charge of protection for this
church, to provide information on the matter. On
3 May, KFOR Commander Major General Erhard
Bühler, informed me that a German military police
investigation had determined, based upon photographic
evidence and witness statements, that the lead sheeting
was in fact most likely removed between April and
July 2008, when the church was guarded by a private
security
company.
Kosovo
Police
assumed
responsibility for guarding the church in February
2009.
Finally, UNMIK continues to play a key role in
facilitating Kosovo’s participation in regional and
international forums where non-recognizing States are
present. These have most recently included meetings
on justice, regional integration and transport. As
reported, the 2011 UNMIK/Kosovo chairmanship of
the Central European Free Trade Agreement has gotten
under way with a first meeting held in Brussels.
Pristina and Belgrade have indicated their willingness
to go along with a loosely defined formula for the
conduct of the meetings during this chairmanship year
that focuses on making progress on issues of mutual
interest, rather than on attempting to derive political
advantage from the issue. It is important that this
constructive approach should continue with a view to
resolving a number of important outstanding issues,
such as the use and acceptance of Kosovo customs
stamps. In this, as well as in other instances, the
Pristina authorities have recently taken a more
pragmatic approach to interaction with UNMIK.

4

In conclusion, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I
wish to thank the Council for its continued support and
to assure it of our full commitment to the
implementation of the mandate with which it has
entrusted us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier and gratefully acknowledge the
unequivocal statement in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/281) that the Mission’s priorities
remain unchanged.
We believe it is critical for all responsible
stakeholders on the ground, together with the Security
Council, to reaffirm support for UNMIK as an
indispensable pillar of peace and security. We echo the
importance that the Secretary-General places on the
close coordination required of all international actors
that operate within the framework and under the
authority of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999), including the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Mission in Kosovo.
We also reiterate our support for UNMIK’s
ongoing commitment to the external representation
function for Kosovo. We continue to be deeply
concerned, however, that the province’s ethnic
Albanian authorities remain fundamentally sceptical on
this issue. Today’s report suggests, on the one hand,
that they appeared to be taking a pragmatic attitude”.
On the other hand, the same document highlights
Pristina’s continuing unwillingness to attend a number
of regional meetings, for which UNMIK’s facilitation
is required, including sessions of the Regional
Cooperation Council.
Serbia hopes that the constructive and inclusive
approach offered by UNMIK will be embraced at long
last. Adhering to established procedures and legally
binding agreements is the only way to ensure that

11-33372

S/PV.6534

regional cooperation continues to improve under the
current set of circumstances, which have been severely
complicated by the 17 February 2008 unilateral
declaration of independence of the ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province.
I would like to once again reaffirm my
Government’s position on the unilateral declaration of
independence. We do not, and we will not, recognize it,
explicitly or implicitly. This is mandated by the
democratic will of the people of Serbia and enshrined
in our Constitution. A substantial majority of States
Members of the United Nations, and of those seated on
the Security Council, continue to respect Serbia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, in accordance with
the basic principles of the United Nations Charter and
the Helsinki Final Act.
On behalf of my nation, I would like to reiterate
our deep gratitude for their support and solidarity in
the face of numerous pressures. We urge them to
maintain their principled position, thus ensuring that
unilateral attempts to impose outcomes to ethnic and
territorial disputes are not legitimized, and thereby
preventing Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence from becoming a dangerous and
destabilizing precedent for the whole world. This will
also contribute to maintaining a healthy international
environment within which the negotiations between
Serbia and Pristina can continue.
Last September, the world supported by
acclamation the fact that dialogue is the only road to
peace in Kosovo. I want to emphasize that Serbia
remains strongly committed to these talks, which
finally got under way during this reporting period. The
Secretary-General has observed that while the longawaited launch of the dialogue is an encouraging
development, it is still too early to assess its results.
The report characterizes the dialogue as being
conducted in a positive and constructive atmosphere.
Indeed, a strong foundation has been laid for arriving
at consensual solutions to all outstanding issues. We
hope that the forward momentum will be maintained,
strengthening the spirit of compromise that holds the
key to success in this endeavour.
Discussions have taken place on the following
topics:
civil
registry,
cadastral
records,
telecommunications, electricity, civil aviation and a
package of issues defined as freedom of movement.
Some progress has been achieved. For instance, a

11-33372

working group was established and tasked with
ascertaining the current state of the civil registry
books. Agreement has already been reached on
practical
arrangements
regarding
UNMIK’s
chairmanship of the Central European Free Trade
Agreement for 2011, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). It was also agreed that neither
the facilitator nor any other stakeholder would attempt
to unilaterally impose any outcome on the parties, as
after the unsuccessful Ahtisaari process. Serbia will
remain a constructive participant in the dialogue, and
will continue to offer multiple proposals for each topic.
We firmly believe that the United Nations needs
to be present during the negotiating sessions. This is a
transparent process, and we have nothing to hide from
the Organization. We therefore appeal to all those who
insist that the United Nations must be left out of the
room to reconsider their positions, especially in the
light of the Secretary-General’s continuing dedication,
as stated in today’s report, “to ensure an effective
exchange of information and reporting on the dialogue
to the Security Council” (S/2011/281, para. 59).
The Council’s leading role in determining and
providing legitimacy to a comprehensive settlement
remains indispensable, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Council’s primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security.
Let me underline how critically important it is
that no one tries to alter realities on the ground
unilaterally. Numerous reports by the SecretaryGeneral have warned us of that danger, including the
one before us today. The province’s ethnic-Albanian
authorities have repeatedly sought to extend the reach
of their Pristina-based institutions to North Kosovo,
against the will of the local population, including
multiple attempts to deploy heavily armed special
police units. According to the report, this has increased
tensions. The report also states that the majority-Serb
community of North Kosovo perceives these
provocations as
“not being dictated by rule of law considerations
but, rather, as being intended to intimidate the
local population and impose Pristina structures
upon them without their consent” (ibid.,
para. 19).
We remain deeply concerned by these and other
unilateral measures against Kosovo Serbs. Addressing
the General Assembly last September, President Boris

5

S/PV.6534

Tadić clearly stated our position on this matter: “Any
attempt to change these realities through the use of
force would bring an immediate end to the process of
dialogue.” (A/65/PV.16, p. 10)
The Secretary-General’s report underscores
recent developments in Serbian cultural and religious
heritage issues in Kosovo. We appreciate UNMIK’s
key role in facilitating UNESCO’s activities in the
province, as well as the work of the Council of Europeled Reconstruction and Implementation Commission,
which we believe should continue under the terms of
its existing mandate.
As the report indicates, Orthodox churches and
graveyards continue to be desecrated, with arrests for
attacks on places that represent the core of Serbian
national identity remaining few and far between. This
unfortunately indicates the preponderance of a culture
of impunity that tolerates extremism and hate crimes. A
prime example of the current state of affairs is the
Church of the Virgin Ljeviška, located in the centre of
the ancient Serbian capital of Prizren. The church was
placed on UNESCO’s List of World Heritage in Danger
following the March 2004 pogrom. Nevertheless, it has
remained a target for extremists.
On 13 April, Bishop Teodosije of Raška-Prizren
and of all of Kosovo and Metohija wrote a letter to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier in connection with the most recent large-scale
theft of the shrine’s led roof. This crime, which local
authorities charged with protecting the site did not
even report, has further damaged the early fourteenthcentury frescoes that were commissioned by Serbia’s
King Milutin. It is the third such act of vandalism since
the March 2004 pogrom. The manifest inability to
protect one of the most important heritage sites in
Southeast Europe needs to be addressed. As Bishop
Teodosije’s letter to Special Representative Zannier
concludes, after so many failures of the local
authorities to protect our holy sites, a more adequate
long-term international protection of the Serbian
Orthodox heritage in Kosovo is more than necessary.
Viewed in this light, the ongoing commitment of
KFOR to maintain a static presence at some of our
most important holy sites is absolutely critical. These
include the Dević monastery, the Visoki Dečani and the
Patriarchate of Peć, both of which remain on the
UNESCO List of World Heritage in Danger. Given the
rising tide of tension in Prizren, we also call on KFOR

6

to redeploy a guard unit to the Cathedral of the Holy
Virgin of Ljeviška.
The Secretary-General’s report paints a bleak
picture of the overall situation in South Kosovo.
Domestic political turmoil dominated the reporting
period, it says. Sharp divisions came to the surface in
the wake of the controversial results of last year’s
election. That led to a political crisis that culminated in
a court ruling that brought to an end the 35-day-old
presidency of Behgjet Pacolli. Following what the
report terms “intensive talks and diplomatic
mediation,” Atifete Jahjaga — who until then was the
Deputy General Director of the Kosovo police — was
picked to be the new President.
Last week, the European Police Office (Europol)
released its biennial European Union (EU) Organized
Crime Threat Assessment. That report identifies
Kosovo as a major European organized crime hub and
states that Albanian-speaking groups “remain the most
prominent in trafficking heroin to and within the EU”.
One of Europol’s key judgments is that these criminal
groups are among the best resourced in Europe,
drawing their membership from individuals with a
secret service, police or paramilitary background. The
Threat Assessment concludes that some of their
proceeds are reportedly destined for support
organizations of the former Kosovo Liberation Army,
or the KLA.
Key public figures, mostly former KLA leaders,
stand at the very centre of serious allegations contained
in a deeply disturbing report — overwhelmingly
approved by the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly on 25 January — entitled “Inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo”. The report claims that the KLA
leadership is responsible for kidnapping hundreds of
Serb civilians before, during and after the 1999
conflict, and that those abductees were sent from
Kosovo to secret detention camps in the Republic of
Albania. According to the report, the captives were
forced into surgery, before being left to die. Their
internal organs, once extracted, were sold on the
international black market.
This represents a uniquely monstrous practice in
the voluminous annals of brutal warfare in Europe and
has shocked the conscience of the world. The tragic
situation has been aggravated by the deeply disturbing
fact that for years, to quote from that Council of

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Europe report, “international actors chose to turn a
blind eye to the war crimes of the KLA, placing a
premium instead on achieving some degree of shortterm stability”. The report concludes that “certain
crimes committed by members of the KLA, including
some top KLA leaders, were effectively concealed and
have remained unpunished”.
We plead for the full truth in the allegations of
human-organs trafficking to be established and for
justice to be done. If that is our common goal, there is
only one way forward, and it requires action by the
Security Council.
To that end, the Republic of Serbia has made a
formal proposal in the form of a concept paper that has
been designated as an official Security Council
document (see S/2011/256) at the request of the
Secretary-General. No existing institution can either
conduct a comprehensive investigation or ensure the
cooperation of all concerned. Only a mechanism
created by the Security Council can do that. Without it,
any number of alleged participants in the humanorgans trafficking criminal conspiracy could remain
beyond reach. Justice would be ill served should
anyone implicated in this heinous endeavour not
answer for what he did because of mandate or
jurisdictional limitations.
It is in this context that we should examine the
precipitous assertion made by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), in a press
release of 28 January, that it has the capacity, the
expertise, the location and the jurisdiction to conduct
the investigation. That is factually incorrect, as our
concept paper describes in detail. The truth is that
EULEX — which classifies itself as a technical
mission — can operate only within Kosovo, and
nowhere else, whereas the alleged criminal trail leads
not only to a number of European countries but also
into parts of Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
Let us turn for a moment to the contemporary
Medicus case, as mentioned in Annex I of the
Secretary-General’s report. This case involves another
criminal conspiracy to source human organs for illicit
trafficking and mirrors in many ways the KLA-led
operation. While EULEX has been able to indict a
number of ethnic Albanians on various charges, two of
the ringleaders — both foreigners — have fled Kosovo
and cannot be extradited. Therefore, even if all the

11-33372

defendants currently in the custody of EULEX are
convicted, justice will be only partially served.
While EULEX cannot conduct a comprehensive
investigation on its own, it should play a crucial role in
uncovering the truth about what happened inside
Kosovo itself. To be an effective part of the ad hoc
investigation mechanism, however, EULEX will need
to assure its full statutory independence from the ethnic
Albanian institutions. Right now, EULEX bases its
investigative and prosecutorial competencies on
legislation passed by Pristina.
EULEX will also have to upgrade its current
support capacities by providing, inter alia, a more
effective witness protection and relocation programme.
That will guarantee credible testimony by all without
fear of retribution. In addition, EULEX will have to act
far more decisively than it has, for example, in the case
of Fatmir Limaj, a former Minister of Transport and
Telecommunications indicted in connection with
allegations of war crimes. As Annex I to the SecretaryGeneral’s report acknowledges, more than two months
have passed since the latest unsuccessful attempt by
EULEX to clarify the issue of his supposed immunity
from prosecution. Limaj continues to mock EULEX
efforts to arrest him and continues to be a free man.
In each previous instance involving war crimes in
the Balkans — whichever side the perpetrators
belonged to and irrespective of their political roles —
the Security Council has given a mandate to
investigate. We ask for nothing more, and we have no
moral right to settle for anything less. If all
investigations into war crimes committed by Serbs
received mandates from this body, then why should the
investigation of war crimes committed against Serbs
not take place under the auspices of the Security
Council as well? With malice towards none and with
firmness in the right, we ask: what possible explanation
could there be for such a double standard? Like must
be treated as like. No suspected war criminals in the
Balkans should ever enjoy any sort of privileges,
immunities or protections.
The Secretary-General, in his letter of 3 May
addressed to you, Mr. President (S/2011/281),
expressed his support for an in-depth, impartial and
independent investigation into the serious allegations
of human organs trafficking. The United Nations, the
letter concludes, will cooperate fully with such an
investigation, should one be carried out.

7

S/PV.6534

This is a black and white situation. No nuance is
possible here, for there must be no gray area when it
comes to war crimes. On behalf of my nation, I appeal
to the Security Council to support our plea to
thoroughly investigate allegations of the harvesting and
smuggling of organs of innocent Serbian civilians. We
will not rest or retreat until the full truth about what
happened is uncovered. This is our solemn obligation
to all the victims of this terrible inhumanity and to
their families. We must not let them down.
This matter also constitutes an integral part of the
reconciliation process and is itself a prerequisite to
establishing a lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians. Let us come together in the service of
justice and see that it gets done through a
comprehensive, independent investigation accountable
to the whole world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj: Let me start by expressing, on
behalf of the people and the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo, our profound gratitude for the
Council’s attention to the latest developments in the
Republic of Kosovo during the most recent reporting
period.
We have gathered here yet again to discuss the
issues related to the post-independence situation in
Kosovo. Some members may remember that there have
been many times in the past when reports from Kosovo
spoke more of challenges and problems than of
solutions and positive developments. I am here today
to provide the Council with a first-hand account of
recent positive developments, but let me also thank the
members of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for their strong role in our young country.
The United Nations presence in Kosovo has been
one of the international community’s largest nationbuilding efforts in the modern history, and these efforts
have borne fruit. The independence of Kosovo in the
last three years has produced peace, stability and
security in the region, and Kosovo is today gaining its
rightful place in the community of free nations.
As the Council has heard from Mr. Zannier, over
the past months Kosovo passed through a dynamic
period. Our young Republic has consolidated its
institutions in the pursuit of good governance and

8

political stability. A constitutional crisis was initiated
by the resignation of former President Fatmir Sejdiu,
and we had national elections that passed through
rigorous tests and challenges in both the courts and the
Central Election Commission. After certification of the
results — to which no party objected — we formed a
new Government under the leadership of our former
and present Prime Minister, Hashim Thaçi.
The Democratic Party of Kosovo, the party that
won the most votes, entered into coalition discussions
with relevant political stakeholders. In the end,
common ground was found with the New Kosovo
Alliance, the Serb Independent Liberal Party and
Turkish, Bosniak and other smaller parties. This
coalition formed a dynamic and multi-ethnic
Government that is prepared to lead Kosovo towards
greater strength and integration in the community of
democracies.
After the final certification of election results,
members of the parliament elected Mr. Behgjet Pacolli
as the President. Opposition parties filed a complaint
with the Constitutional Court objecting to the
procedures of Mr. Pacolli’s election. Less than a month
later, the Court ruled that the new President was
elected in violation of constitutional quorum and
candidate requirements.
That unexpected decision provided a moment of
political challenge that tested yet again the strength of
the governing coalition. However, it is important to
note that at no time did any party in Kosovo oppose or
object to the Constitutional Court’s role or its decision.
The Government and the people of Kosovo respected
our institutions, and they recognize the importance of
the Court’s independence as the arbiter of Kosovo’s
Constitution. This is a primary example of Kosovo’s
dedication to the rule of law.
Kosovo came through these challenges when the
governing coalition and the largest opposition party
showed that they were ready to elevate national
interests for stable governance above narrow political
interests. The Government and opposition reached a
compromise that supported the election of Atifete
Jahjaga as President of the Republic of Kosovo.
President Jahjaga is the first woman to be elected
as head of State in the Balkans. She brings to the office
a lifetime of dedicated public service, having worked
for years with the Kosovo Police trained by the United
Nations. She is a non-partisan leader who represents all

11-33372

S/PV.6534

of Kosovo. This development is good for Kosovo, good
for the region and good for the world.
The governing coalition now leads in a stable
political environment and enjoys the participation of
ethnic minorities from Serb, Turkish, Bosniak, Roma
and other communities, who have 25 seats in the
120-seat Parliament. For the first time in the history of
Kosovo, the Government also includes a Deputy Prime
Minister and three ministers from the Serb community.
Kosovo Serbs are represented at all levels of the
Government and civil service. This development
reflects Kosovo’s status as a functional multi-ethnic
democracy that celebrates and draws strength from its
diversity.
Kosovo’s communities have rejected the Republic
of Serbia’s politics of division. Their participation in
Kosovo’s institutions in the central and local
Governments shows that Kosovo has unified around
the promise of a representative democracy that gives a
voice to all of its members.
We are happy to report to the members of
Security Council that more Serbs participated in
Kosovo’s elections than in the illegal elections
organized by the Serbian Government in the past in
some parts of Kosovo.
It is important to note that the parallel
Government of Serbia institutions that continue their
corrupt activities in some parts of Kosovo are illegal,
according to the Security Council’s own decisions.
President Jahjaga is not the only Kosovan woman
receiving international attention nowadays. The
Government of Kosovo has also named Ms. Edita
Tahiri as a Deputy Prime Minister and the country’s
special representative to lead Kosovo’s delegation in
the dialogue with the Government of Serbia. Kosovo
recognizes the importance of this dialogue with Serbia
and is taking part in the discussions at the highest
level.
We accepted the invitation of the European Union
(EU) to engage in dialogue with Serbia, which was
welcomed by the General Assembly when it
acknowledged the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. If I may remind members, the Court
confirmed the legality of Kosovo’s declaration of
independence.
The Government of Kosovo has engaged fully in
the EU-facilitated dialogue. It is a good opportunity for

11-33372

both Kosovo and Serbia to put the past behind us. Our
focus is on a future that will see both the Republic of
Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia enter the European
Union as equals, as independent States.
With the facilitation of Mr. Robert Cooper as EU
representative, Deputy Prime Minister Tahiri has met
three times with Serbia’s representative to the dialogue,
Mr. Borislav Stefanović. We have opened several
topics of discussion in the dialogue, and there are
indeed many unresolved issues between the two sides.
I would like to inform the Council that today that the
first visit of Mr. Stefanović happened in Pristina, the
Republic of Kosovo, and very soon representatives of
the Republic of Kosovo will visit Belgrade.
I assure the Council that Kosovo is ready for and
committed to finding new and creative ways to
improve the lives of all citizens and to assist Serbia in
coming to terms with our independence. That should
bring a package of solutions in areas of importance to
the daily lives of the citizens of both countries. It
should show the world that the Balkan people want
peace and prosperity. We do not want to enhance ethnic
divisions or to reopen old wounds.
The Government of Kosovo expects two things
from the dialogue. First, we want creative solutions
that respect our constitutional order, set up by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General President Ahtisaari.
We want to solve practical issues, such as the mutual
recognition of documents, license plates, airspace,
school
and
university
diplomas,
telephone
communication and others.
We want to extend freedom of movement for the
people of Kosovo across the Balkans. Today, the
people of Kosovo can travel to most neighbouring
countries and most of the world with their Kosovo
passports, including many countries that have yet to
recognize us as an independent State. Serbia, on the
other hand, still refuses to acknowledge documents
issued in Kosovo, just as it refused to accept
documents formerly issued by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. Such
artificial and wholly political restriction on the
freedom of movement in the region has not helped the
dialogue or reconciliation between the two peoples and
their countries. While Serbia might question the right
of Kosovo to exist as a State, there is no question
whatsoever that Serbia itself has no right to exercise
any type of authority within the borders of Kosovo.

9

S/PV.6534

Our second goal for the dialogue is linked to the
first. The Government and the people of Kosovo are
tired of conflict and propaganda. We want to look
forward and to engage in a process of reconciliation
with Serbia. There have been many instances in our
common history in the Balkans when people of the
region have cooperated with each other. As both
countries move towards EU membership, now is the
time to shake hands again and to look to each other as
equal partners. We are ready to talk about solutions that
promote the rule of law and preserve Kosovo as a
unified legal space, in accordance with the Constitution
of Kosovo.
The Kosovo Government wants to prove beyond
doubt its willingness to meet, discuss and agree with its
neighbours as a fundamental condition of European
integration. It is in Kosovo’s and Europe’s strategic
interest to enable the free movement of people and
goods within the framework of EU integration. For that
purpose, the Government established a special Ministry
of European Integration to ensure that we meet
European Union standards. It will set the conditions for
Kosovars to join the rest of the Balkan States in the
visa-free zone within Europe.
The eyes of the world are focused on Kosovo and
Serbia during this dialogue. I assure members of the
Council here today that Kosovo wants friendly
relations with all of its neighbours. We recognize that
as a precondition for a stable and peaceful Balkans.
I promise the Council that we will not allow
extremist elements to distract us from our objectives.
We call on the Government of Serbia to join us in
opposing those radical organizations that have used
nationalist language, as well as violence, against
members of Kosovo’s Serb community who have
agreed to cooperate with Kosovo’s institutions. Serbs
across Kosovo participate in the country’s democratic
institutions. Their involvement in political life has
ensured responsive local governance that represents
their priorities.

prevented the organization of national elections. They
have employed intimidation and violence to prevent
the local communities and their residents from joining
Kosovo’s institutions. Those radicals have opposed the
efforts of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force to establish
the rule of law in northern Kosovo. They have
prevented the reopening of the Mitrovica District Court
and have obstructed attempts by Kosovo’s political
leaders to reach out to the population by making
personal visits to the communities. Such active
obstructions, which have delayed EULEX’s core
objective of establishing equal and unified rule of law
in all of Kosovo, have given rise to the voicing of some
discontent among our civil society, media and certain
political leaders.
Kosovo is very supportive of EULEX, and the
Kosovo Government sees the Rule of Law Mission as
its partner. We look to EULEX for support in showing
radicals who reject peace and progress in Kosovo that
they cannot beat back the tide of the rule of law.
EULEX has the resources and the capacity to make a
difference in Kosovo. It can promote the rule of law,
strengthen the fight against corruption, and investigate
former Swiss parliamentarian Dick Marty’s allegations
of war crimes that took place during the conflict. The
Government of Kosovo recognizes EULEX as an
independent arbiter of justice that can determine the
legitimacy of Mr. Marty’s allegations. We invite all
sides to deliver any information and evidence that they
may have regarding Mr. Marty’s allegation to the
EULEX prosecutors.

The situation is less positive in the north of
Kosovo, where an atmosphere of fear persists. The
Government of Kosovo has implemented the Ahtisaari
proposal, and is in permanent contact with the
international community on a partnership to extend the
rule of law and the country’s unified legal system.

There are a few more items to report from
Kosovo. Kosovo has approved its new budget, which
includes salary increases for all categories of public
employees, from teachers to policemen, doctors and
civil servants. The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
has voiced its concern over the increases. The
Government is in close contact with our partners in
order to prove the necessity, as well as the prudence, of
such increases. Kosovo has managed to close the gap
in tax collection, improving revenue collection by
more than 30 per cent compared to the previous year.
According to the IMF’s economic outlook for the year
2011, Kosovo has the fastest growing economy in the
Balkans and in Europe. We started from a very low
base, but are rapidly catching up.

However, radicals who refuse democracy and
claim to represent the Government of Serbia have

Kosovo has the third highest growth in wireless
Internet connections in Europe. The Kosovo

10

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Government has just started implementing a new plan
that will further support economic growth. While the
rest of the Balkan States have already privatized their
public resources, we will start that process this year.
The
combined
value
of
investments
in
telecommunications, energy, agriculture, ski tourism
and infrastructure for the next three years is expected
to further increase our gross domestic product growth.
That will provide a major push for the economy
and enable the Government to pass the baton of
development to private and free market-oriented
players. All major European banks, insurance
companies and airlines have established a base in
Pristina. The capital city has one of the lowest crime
rates of any capital in Europe. We are aware that some
people still associate Kosovo with war, refugees and
crisis, but, as any visitor to the new, independent
Kosovo can report, the new country is dynamic, young,
growing and open for business.
If Kosovo is to enjoy the same benefits as other
countries in the Balkans, we need Serbia to stop its
obstruction of our participation in the Central European
Free Trade Agreement accords. The EU and Kosovo
have both proposed various compromises on the issue
of the customs stamps used by Kosovo at border posts.
We are very sorry to see that Serbia continues to block
our producers from moving goods through Serbia.
Serbia’s action represents an absence of reciprocity, as
the Government of Kosovo has maintained an opendoor policy to all EU countries and prospective
candidates. In fact, Kosovo is a major trading partner
for Serbia. We hope that our neighbours will soon
refrain from blocking and sanctioning our producers.
Allow me to address another positive
development. I am happy to report that we managed to
successfully complete the census in almost all of
Kosovo. The 2011 census was organized with the help
of the Statistical Office of the European Communities
and donor agencies that monitored the complex
procedure. In June, for the first time in three decades,
the central Government will have accurate data on
population, unemployment, education, age and gender,
among other information.
We have pleaded with Serbia to urge Serbs in
Kosovo’s northern municipalities to take part in the
census that will be conducted by the United Nations
Office for Project Services. We are extremely
disappointed that Serbian Government representatives

11-33372

have called for a boycott of this internationally
recognized census.
The census has already confirmed what we have
long suspected, namely, that more than one third of all
Kosovars now live abroad, making Kosovo one of the
most widespread populations on the European
continent. Kosovars live and work in countries ranging
from New Zealand to Germany and from Norway to
South Africa. We are proud that our citizens living
abroad are now giving something back to their country,
in the form of remittances and foreign direct
investment.
In conclusion, allow me to add some personal
observations regarding the path that lies ahead of us.
Since I was appointed to this position, I have travelled
a great deal to assess the international position of
Kosovo. It is clear that Kosovo is no longer the
primary focus of international diplomacy. That is good
news and means that there are fewer reasons for the
United Nations, the European Union, NATO and other
bodies to dedicate as many resources to the Balkans.
NATO has now decreased its forces to fewer than 5,000
soldiers. It is clear that Kosovo will have a shrinking
need for military support and a growing need for
investment, cultural and academic exchanges and
political and economic reforms.
When I hear Mr. Jeremić describe Kosovo, I
cannot help but wonder at the reasons for his distorted
version of the country today. He is out of touch with
the facts on the ground. We have worked to
accommodate the needs of minority communities and,
over the past three years, have invested more than
€200 million in implementing the Ahtisaari Plan.
Today, Kosovo is a young, stable and vibrant State that
provides possibilities for all of its citizens. I thank the
United Nations and the international community for
facilitating that transformation in Kosovo.
Here and now, we renew the pledge that Kosovo
is committed to peace and stability in the Balkans. We
welcome the partnership of the United Nations in that
shared objective.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lamberto Zannier for his briefing today and for his
continuing strong leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and Mr. Vuk Jeremić,

11

S/PV.6534

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council
Chamber today.
The past three months have proven to be an
important time for Kosovo in consolidating its progress
as an independent State. We have witnessed significant
political uncertainties since the most recent Security
Council debate (see S/PV. 6483), as a new Government
was formed. Kosovo’s institutions rose to the challenge
and set a precedent for responsible, inclusive and
democratic Government.
The new Government and the new President have
already started work on the issues of key importance to
Kosovo’s future, namely, European Union (EU)
integration, economic reform and regional cooperation,
including the EU-facilitated dialogue with Serbia. We
welcome the focus on delivering further positive
development for all communities living in Kosovo.
The EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade is clearly vital to the future of both countries
and to peace and prosperity in the region. With
political will on both sides, the dialogue should deliver
practical benefits aimed at improving trade, people-topeople contact and the quality of life of the citizens of
Kosovo and Serbia. It will also support the progress of
both countries towards EU accession.
The United Kingdom welcomes the pragmatic
approach taken by both Belgrade and Pristina during
their first three meetings. It is important that they build
on that momentum and that both countries continue to
engage in a constructive and flexible manner.
Looking at wider developments in Kosovo, we
welcome the assessment in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/281) that the security situation in
Kosovo, including in the north, has remained calm. We
also welcome the reporting of clear and decisive action
having been taken against organized crime and
corruption from the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), working in partnership
with the Government of Kosovo.
Serious challenges remain. It is essential that the
Government of Kosovo continue to actively address
priority areas for reform. In particular, I would
highlight the rule of law, an area in which Pristina must
continue to work closely with EULEX, as well as the
legal and regulatory obstacles to foreign investment. I
welcome Foreign Minister Hoxhaj’s assurance today
that Kosovo remains committed to its relationship with

12

EULEX and continues to seek a trustworthy and
dynamic partner in its efforts to reform the rule of law
sector.
EULEX is playing an increasingly important role
as it takes forward the investigation into Senator
Marty’s allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. While we
note the concerns of some Security Council members,
the paper from the Republic of Serbia and the
comments of Foreign Minister Jeremić today, we are
confident that EULEX fully meets the criteria set out
by the Secretary-General when he called for a
thorough, impartial and independent investigation into
the allegations, with a strong witness-protection
programme and the full cooperation of all stakeholders.
Having assumed rule-of-law responsibilities from
UNMIK since 2008, EULEX has the authority and
jurisdiction to investigate those serious allegations. It
is both impartial and independent in carrying out its
executive mandate, as evidenced by its work to date on
sensitive issues, such as war crimes and missing
persons. EULEX has the capability to carry out a
thorough investigation, including witness-protection
capability. The Mission’s Witness Security Unit meets
EU standards and can be upscaled, as necessary, to
meet the demands of that investigation. It also has a
proven track record of international legal cooperation
with third States, both inside and outside the region.
Finally, EULEX has the cooperation of the key
stakeholders, having received assurances of full
support and cooperation from Tirana and Pristina, and
having already engaged closely with Senator Marty.
The United Nations has continued to play a
crucial role in supporting reconciliation and
cooperation. That has been highlighted in its work in
support of missing persons and religious and cultural
heritage. I would also like to underline the United
Nations support, including through the United Nations
Office for Project Services, for the census in northern
Kosovo. An accurate census conducted throughout
Kosovo is key to providing public services, now and in
the future, to all communities living there. It is the
citizens in the north who will suffer the most if the
census there is not completed. The data needed to
provide social, economic and health services will be
lacking. The United Kingdom hopes that the census
will proceed there this month, in accordance with the
revised operational plan.

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Finally, let me reiterate again the United
Kingdom’s commitment to work with all parties in
support of a stable, prosperous and democratic Kosovo
that enjoys genuine cooperation with all countries in
the Western Balkans as they all move towards the EU.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his briefing and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his remarks.
Stability in the Balkans remains an important
goal. We continue to believe that resolution 1244
(1999) offers an adequate framework for a negotiated
settlement that can address tensions in the region.
Brazil reiterates its support for the work carried out by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing the Security
Council mandate. UNMIK’s presence remains essential
for stability in Kosovo.
We welcome the launch of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina and the willingness of both sides
to find solutions that can have a positive impact on the
daily lives of the population. We concur that the
process of dialogue can pave the way for peace,
security and stability in the region. This is important
progress, which must be strengthened with the
intensification of meetings and the support of UNMIK
and regional organizations. We expect the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina to ultimately lead to the
solution of the political differences between both
parties.
It is encouraging that the security situation since
mid-January has been relatively calm, as reported by
the Secretary-General, despite underlying political
tensions. Nevertheless, the situation in northern
Kosovo is particularly delicate. All sides must exercise
caution and restrain and avoid actions that may
undermine the situation on the ground.
As we stated last February (see S/PV.6483),
Brazil is concerned at the allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. The gravity of such allegations
cannot be overlooked. A thorough, independent and
credible investigation must be carried out. In this
regard, it would be interesting to explore possible
options that take into account the need to involve
various jurisdictions and the importance of ensuring
consistency with resolution 1244 (1999).

11-33372

The Council should continue to keep political
developments in Kosovo under close review and
encourage the auspicious beginning of dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade. We are confident that a
fair and legitimate solution to the outstanding political
issues in the region can be reached under the auspices
of the Security Council, consistent with its authority
and primary responsibility in matters pertaining to
international peace and security.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for introducing the report (S/2011/281) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation of Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in today’s meeting of the
Security Council, and we share his views.
We listened closely to the statement by
Mr. Hoxhaj. However, we must direct a comment at the
Secretariat. As Mr. Hoxhaj was speaking in his
personal capacity, the text of his speech should not
have been distributed as it was. We are firmly
convinced that this mistake by the Secretariat will not
be repeated.
Russia’s position on non-recognition of Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. We support the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. We also believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
is binding for all as the international legal basis for
Kosovo’s settlement, as well as for ensuring security in
the province. Moreover, the Security Council should
continue to play a leading role in addressing the issue
of Kosovo.
We welcome the resumption of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. We are convinced that a viable
solution to the Kosovo issue can be reached only
through negotiations. We believe that it is necessary to
have an official presence by representatives of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo at meetings held in
the framework of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, given the need for the Security Council to
receive adequate information about the progress and
the substance of the talks and for the purposes of the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General. That need
also stems from the agenda of the meetings themselves.
As we know, participants in the talks discuss issues

13

S/PV.6534

directly related to UNMIK, such as Pristina’s
chairmanship this year of the Central European Free
Trade Agreement (CEFTA). In that regard, I would like
to recall that UNMIK is the signatory of CEFTA for
Kosovo.
We believe that the European Union, which is
mediating the talks, must provide an appropriate place
for the United Nations at the talks, especially given the
possibility that the Organization may provide
assistance. UNMIK should continue to provide
maximum assistance for a settlement of the Kosovo
issue, as well as to carry out its duties to ensure
Kosovo’s external representation in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms.
We consider unacceptable the unilateral actions
of Pristina and international presences in the north of
Kosovo aimed at changing realities on the ground. In
this context, we draw attention to the potentially
explosive situation in the northern part of the province.
There have been attempts to Albanicize local Kosovo
police units and to extend the activities of Kosovo
custom officers to the north. There is also the
uncontrolled resettlement there of the Albanian
population, which was not agreed with all interested
parties. All of this will inevitably lead to an escalation
of tension.
Of serious concern is the operation carried out in
Zubin Potok on 15 February by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), with the
support of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Kosovo
Albanian police, to detain — as they stated — local
criminal elements. In fact, the purpose was to detain
importers of oil products from Serbia who refused to
pay taxes into the Kosovo Government coffers. In the
eyes of the local population, this operation stood out as
an act of intimidation. We believe that in this case the
international presences to which I have referred acted
as an instrument of the Kosovo Albanian authorities,
bringing to the north of the province the rules and ways
established by the authorities in Pristina. We call on
EULEX and KFOR to observe the status neutrality
stipulated by their mandate.
We share the concern of the Serb authorities and
the Serbian Orthodox Church about the situation that
developed in connection with the transfer by NATO
forces to the Kosovo police of the responsibility for
protecting the most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites. We believe that these actions

14

could cause additional tension in Kosovo in the area of
security, especially given that cases of theft and
vandalism against Serb holy sites were once again
documented during the reporting period.
The situation with regard to the return to Kosovo
of internally displaced persons — including the
Serbian population — continues to be unsatisfactory.
There are many reasons for this situation, not the least
of which is the fact that returnees do not have certainty
about their own security.
On 19 April, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia sent a letter to the Secretary-General setting out
the approaches of the Serbian side to the issue of
carrying out an investigation in connection with the
well-known report by Dick Marty about illegal
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. We support the
proposal contained therein to establish, by decision of
the Security Council, an international investigative
mechanism accountable to the United Nations. It
should be granted adequate resources to ensure the
functioning
of
a
reliable
witness-protection
programme. In carrying out its work, the mechanism
should work closely with interested States, UNMIK
and EULEX. Its progress and results must be reported
to the Security Council through the Secretary-General.
We are convinced that carrying out a detailed,
de-politicized and independent investigation will be in
the interests of establishing truth and reconciliation in
the province.
We believe that arguments made today by
Mr. Jeremić are more than convincing. We do not
understand the aspirations of some colleagues in the
Security Council to limit the investigation to EULEX,
which has never done anything like that. The
international community has, more than once, looked
at these serious crimes; once we overlook them, we
cannot do so a second time. We are convinced that we
will revisit this issue in the Security Council in the
near future.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join
colleagues in welcoming to the Security Council
Foreign Minister Jeremić of Serbia, the new Foreign
Minister Hoxhaj of Kosovo and Special Representative
Zannier. I would like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the contribution
made by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and commend the
dedication and service of his staff.

11-33372

S/PV.6534

The reporting period has been marked by
significant political events. Kosovo went through a
difficult political period after the Constitutional Court
ruled on the procedure for the election of the President.
Germany notes with satisfaction that these difficulties
have been successfully overcome by democratic means
based on a dialogue between the ruling coalition and
opposition parties. There is now an opportunity to shift
attention to the important challenges facing Kosovo.
Let me comment on three aspects contained in the
report of the Special Representative.
First, Germany welcomes the launch of the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, which aims at
promoting cooperation, achieving progress on the path
to the European Union and improving the lives of
people in the region through practical arrangements. As
facilitator of the dialogue, the European Union hosted
the first three meetings in Brussels, which were
conducted in a positive and constructive atmosphere.
They showed that there is potential for reaching
agreement between Pristina and Belgrade on muchneeded arrangements in a number of areas, among
which are a civil registry, cadastral data,
telecommunications and electricity. This potential must
be fully realized for the benefit of the people in the
region. We call on both sides to continue the dialogue
in good faith and produce tangible results as soon as
possible.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation in
Kosovo, Germany is pleased to note that the overall
situation remained relatively calm during the reporting
period. This also holds true for the situation in the
north of Kosovo, where only one incident in the past
three months was reported. This is encouraging.
Nevertheless, challenges remain and we share the
assessment of the Secretary-General that solutions to
practical issues found through dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade will help to alleviate the
persistent underlying tensions in the northern part of
Kosovo. We echo the call made by the SecretaryGeneral on communities in the north to avoid taking
any unilateral action that could undermine the situation
on the ground and exacerbate those tensions.
My third point concerns the report of the
rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty, on alleged
inhumane treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. Let me stress that Germany
continues to take this report very seriously. A full

11-33372

investigation is necessary of the allegations contained
in the report of despicable crimes committed against
Serbian nationals during and after the armed conflict in
Kosovo. We have already stated that, in our view, there
is no doubt that the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has the capacities,
competence and jurisdiction to carry out those
investigations. EULEX has an independent and fully
functional Witness Security Unit, which can be scaled
up if necessary. EULEX has Germany’s full support
and confidence. As stated in annex I to the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281), EULEX
has opened a preliminary investigation and its
prosecutors have met with Mr. Marty to discuss his
findings. The Government of Kosovo is ready for full
cooperation. EULEX has established good cooperation
with the authorities in Belgrade and Tirana. EULEX
prosecutors have already met twice with the general
prosecutor of Albania on this matter.
Let me conclude by underlining that Germany
will continue to promote Serbia’s and Kosovo’s joint
and shared European future.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić back
to the Security Council. I would also like to welcome
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj to the Council today and to
congratulate him on assuming his new position. I also
thank Special Representative Zannier for his briefing
and for his service on behalf of the international
community.
Let me begin by congratulating the people of
Kosovo on the election of President Jahjaga, the first
woman to hold Kosovo’s presidency and the first
female head of State in the Balkan region. Her election
is historic and heartening.
I will focus on three key points today. First,
Kosovo has once again demonstrated the resilience of
its young, multi-ethnic democratic institutions, even in
the face of political challenges. The new Kosovo
Government was constituted shortly after our last
Security Council meeting on this subject (see
S/PV.6483). It has the most robust, top-level, multiethnic representation the country has ever known. We
are hopeful that the new Government will refocus
Kosovo’s energies on political and economic reforms
to improve citizens’ lives and further integrate Kosovo
into the international community. We also welcome the
agreement between the governing coalition and leading

15

S/PV.6534

opposition parties that followed the 30 March
Constitutional Court ruling, which led to a peaceful
transition of power from President Pacolli to President
Jahjaga. We look forward to working with her and the
new Government as they complete the important
electoral reforms that were central to that agreement.
Secondly, Kosovo’s institutions deserve the
strong support of the Council and all parties present
today as they work to extend the rule of law throughout
Kosovo, including the north. The European Union Rule
of Law Mission (EULEX) plays an important role in
assisting Kosovo institutions develop a professional
police force and judiciary, in line with European Union
(EU) standards. NATO’s Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
EULEX continue to work with Kosovo border police to
prepare Kosovo for full control of its southern border,
and the Kosovo border police have assumed
responsibility for additional controls along the
Macedonia border. In recognition of the Kosovo
police’s professional standards, KFOR has continued to
transfer responsibility for protecting Serbian Orthodox
Church sites to them without incident.
The overall security situation in Kosovo has been
relatively calm. We are encouraged by reports of
increased engagement with Kosovo institutions by
minority communities, including Kosovo Serbs. But
we remain deeply concerned by the actions of the socalled parallel structures in northern Kosovo, which
answer to the Government of Serbia. These parallel
structures obstruct progress and freeze the
unacceptable conditions in the north.
The international community, along with the
Government of Kosovo, must ensure that Kosovo has a
country-wide police and judicial system that serves and
protects all communities and defends their members’
rights to lead safe, secure and productive lives. We still
witness threats of violence and acts of intimidation
directed at ordinary citizens and at the Kosovo
Government and international authorities. We have also
witnessed the obstruction of the census in northern
Kosovo and repeated efforts to block international
assistance projects. All of these actions come at the
expense of the people in the north, and none of these
actions should be tolerated.
Thirdly, we welcome EULEX’s decision to
investigate the serious allegations in the report by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
EULEX has the jurisdiction and mandate to investigate

16

and prosecute the types of criminal activity alleged in
the report. We welcome Kosovo and Albania pledges to
cooperate fully with the EULEX investigation.
The United States, as a EULEX-participating
State, supports the Mission’s activities. We are
evaluating how we can best support the investigation.
EULEX has already begun a follow-on investigation to
those conducted earlier by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. As others have said, nothing in relation to
the report’s allegations would prevent EULEX from
undertaking this task. Kosovo law and the EU joint
action on EULEX explicitly provide for EULEX to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, and to do so
independently.
Some assert that all investigations into war
crimes in the ex-Yugoslav realm have taken place
under Security Council auspices. That is incorrect.
Many cases have been and still are being handled in
domestic courts in the region, in Bosnia, Croatia and
Serbia.
In conclusion, I hope we will all take heart from
the great promise shown by this young country in its
three years of independence. We have been particularly
struck by the dynamic and engaged youth, who will
forge so much of Kosovo’s future — young men and
women of all backgrounds who are working to deepen
civil society, build up democratic institutions, expand
economic opportunity and promote the rule of law.
The United States remains committed to a stable,
prosperous, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo that is
at peace with its neighbours. We continue to fully
support the EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. We hope that it will lead to practical
solutions to the continuing challenges of daily life for
the people of Kosovo.
Seventy-five countries have now recognized
Kosovo. We call on all remaining countries to
contribute to stability in the region by welcoming
Kosovo into the international community through
formal recognition.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their
statements. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Zannier for his informative update on the situation in
Kosovo.
Nigeria welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/281) and the observation that the
overall situation in Kosovo has remained relatively
stable during the reporting period. We appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to foster cordial relations
among all actors within the country and in the region.
This remains vital to ensuring lasting peace, prosperity
and stability in Kosovo. UNMIK therefore deserves the
continued support of the Council and the international
community.
Nigeria welcomes the ongoing European Unionfacilitated talks aimed at regional development,
enhancing cooperation among local actors and progress
towards joining the European Union (EU). There is a
need for the parties to remain engaged in the process
and to show the flexibility, compromise and
constructiveness needed to achieve results. We
commend the European Union and UNMIK for their
contributions and urge them to continue to offer their
facilitation in support of the talks.
While the Secretary-General’s report indicates
that the situation in northern Kosovo is calm, the
underlying tensions suggest that the situation remains
fragile. Broad-based consultations aimed at promoting
social change and reconciliation among the
communities are needed as a matter of policy.
The Council can and should do more to help
build confidence among the communities and
consolidate peace and stability in the country and in
the region. It is in this regard that we call on UNMIK
to continue to play its pivotal role in facilitating interethnic contacts and fostering cordial relations with
international actors. We hope that the EU-facilitated
talks will provide an opportunity to address more of the
outstanding issues.
The low number of returns, forced returns and the
fiscal and socio-economic limitations that impede the
reintegration of returnees deserve serious and
concerted action. We reiterate the importance of
promoting voluntary returns and the viability of the
conditions of return, such as access to public services,
housing and property rights, and socio-economic
activities. The law-enforcement authorities should also
reinvigorate their efforts to curtain the harassment of,
and attacks on, returnees. Such measures should go a

11-33372

long way towards promoting safe returns as well as
reconciliation and the long-term stability and
development of Kosovo.
On the issue of investigations relating to the
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo, we remain convinced of the
need to bring to justice those held accountable. A
thorough international investigation is therefore
required. However, in such an effort, the various
jurisdictional issues involved in the matter should be
taken into account. It is essential that the relevant
national authorities, UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) provide the
necessary technical, organizational and logistical
support to the investigation.
Nigeria appreciates the untiring efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his team in the promotion of peace and security in
Kosovo and in the region. We would also like to note
in this regard our satisfaction with the cooperation
between the Mission, EULEX, the Kosovo Force, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
as well as United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes aimed at improving the lives of all
Kosovars.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank Minister
Vuk Jeremić for his important statement. We welcome
the presence at this meeting of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and
we thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zannier, for his introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281).
The report notes the positive evolution of the
political and security situation since the elections.
Unfortunately, this is at odds with the allegations of
serious violations of human rights.
Gabon, while reiterating its commitment to
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, remains
convinced that, as we emphasized during earlier
debates, a lasting and peaceful resolution of the
situation in Kosovo will require dialogue and
consultation among all stakeholders. That is why we
firmly believe that resolution 1244 (1999) represents
the political and legal basis for a negotiated solution to
the situation.
We welcome the developments in the political
situation, including the resumption of direct dialogue

17

S/PV.6534

between the parties on 8 March in Brussels under the
auspices of the European Union (EU). This augurs well
for the continuation of talks, given the importance of
the matters that were raised on that occasion, namely,
the living conditions of the people living in Kosovo
and technical subjects related to peace and stability in
the region. My country urges the parties to continue to
work in that direction and to maintain the political
determination necessary to see the negotiations
through. We welcome also the improvement in the
security situation north of Kosovo despite continuing
tensions on some fronts.
As the Council is aware, the reconciliation
process in Kosovo always comes up against the failure
to resolve three major issues, namely, missing persons,
the return of refugees, and cultural and religious
heritage. As those issues are of pivotal importance, my
delegation urges the parties to continue, with United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) facilitation, to address them with a view to
achieving a lasting, consensus-based solution.
The possibility of establishing a climate of
confidence between the parties could be compromised
by allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. We urge
the Council to spare no effort in determining the facts
and identifying those responsible. Crimes of such
gravity cannot remain unacknowledged or unpunished.
Hence we call on the Council to promote the
establishment of an appropriate mechanism for the
carrying out of an in-depth, impartial and independent
inquiry, with the participation of UNMIK.
Lastly, we reaffirm our support for Mr. Zannier
and the staff of UNMIK and for all other partners on
the ground in the important work that they are doing
within the context of resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zannier, for his briefing. We welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremić, and also listened attentively to the
statement made by Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
While at present the overall situation in Kosovo
is calm, it remains complex and fragile. We are
concerned in particular at the inter-communal tensions
in Kosovo. China hopes that the parties concerned will

18

make joint efforts to maintain stability and avoid any
acts that could cause tensions to escalate.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We have always believed that the
situation in Kosovo has a bearing on peace, security
and stability, not only in the Balkans but also in Europe
as a whole. It is up to the parties themselves to find
solutions that are acceptable to both sides within the
framework of United Nations resolutions and through
negotiations.
Since March 2011, there have been dialogues
between Belgrade and Pristina. We welcome this
development and hope that the two sides will maintain
a constructive engagement aimed at reaching
consensus on a wide range of issues. China appreciates
the positive role that the European Union and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) have played in facilitating dialogue
between the parties.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
valid and an important legal basis for a solution to the
situation in Kosovo. China encourages UNMIK to
continue its work, in keeping with the mandate given it
by the Security Council, and to play a greater role in
resolving the situation in Kosovo.
China is concerned at the issue of illegal
trafficking in human organs, as mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281). No act in
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law can be condoned. China shares
Serbia’s legitimate concerns and supports the
investigation into this matter by the United Nations.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for his statement.
Allow me to make the following remarks. We
express our support for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
welcome its efforts to promote security and stability
and to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation in Kosovo
and its participation in international and regional
forums. We call on all parties to provide the support to
necessary for UNMIK to carry out its mandate. We also
welcome the ongoing coordination between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Kosovo within the status-neutral framework stipulated
in resolution 1244 (1999).
We express our satisfaction over the continued
relative calm of the security situation in Kosovo,
although some incidents in the north have exacerbated
tensions. It is therefore important for all parties to
refrain from provocative acts and to maintain
communication between the various communities. We
also believe that UNMIK must continue to play a
positive role in facilitating communication and
coordination between the various communities.
We also welcome the launch of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, and commend the efforts of the
European Union in that regard. We are encouraged by
the fact that the dialogue is addressing a large number
of significant practical issues, which will help to build
confidence between the parties and pave the way for
measures that will have a positive effect on the day-today lives of the people. In that regard, we welcome the
positive role in support of the dialogue being played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We hope that it will promote reconciliation between the
various communities of Kosovo.
We note the importance of fighting organized
crime. A neutral and independent investigation must be
undertaken into the allegations of inhuman treatment
and illegal trafficking in human organs in Kosovo that
took place in 1999. The investigation must be carried
out without being politicized and on the basis of the
principle of accountability in order to achieve justice
for the families of the victims. Accountability must be
upheld as a principal foundation and pillar of
sustainable peace.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join my colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo and
the activities of UNMIK. I also want to thank His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, for his statement
outlining his country’s perspective on the situation in
Kosovo. We have also carefully listened to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
The Secretary-General’s report on UNMIK for
the quarter ending 15 April (S/2011/281) describes in
detail the ground situation in Kosovo. We note with

11-33372

satisfaction that UNMIK continues with its endeavour
to provide transitional administration to Kosovo, as
mandated by resolution 1244 (1999), with the active
cooperation and support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo.
We welcome the commencement of a dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by
the European Union in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 64/298 of 9 September 2010. We
all know that from small beginnings come great things.
India has always believed that the Kosovo issue should
be resolved peacefully through consultation and
dialogue between the concerned parties. We are happy
that both sides have agreed to start discussing the
topics that most impact the daily lives of the affected
population.
We hope that both sides will pursue
serious dialogue until those immediate issues are
resolved, and that they will eventually begin to
deliberate on more complex political issues. We urge
all parties to take no unilateral action that could
undermine that reconciliation process. We appreciate
UNMIK’s contribution to facilitating this dialogue
process, and feel that its continued engagement would
be helpful.
We have also noted with satisfaction that UNMIK
has facilitated cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina on the issue of missing persons through the
Working Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
While the overall security situation in Kosovo,
especially in the northern part, has remained relatively
calm, it is a matter of concern that underlying tension
continues. Many untoward incidents of criminal
assault, armed robbery, murder, shooting, damage of
religious places and so on continue to be reported. We
would appeal to the local authorities, especially the
Kosovo Police, to be more vigilant and watchful.
The continued voluntary return of refugees
recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is heartening. We are
concerned by reports of opposition by some receiving
communities. It is noted that a population and housing
census took place during the period covered by the
report, except in northern Kosovo, where it will be
conducted at a later date. It is hoped that the census

19

S/PV.6534

will appropriately reflect the plight of displaced
persons and not legalize any ethnic cleansing.
We have also noted the Secretary-General’s view
that the Kosovo authorities remain fundamentally
sceptical about UNMIK facilitation of their
engagement in international and regional initiatives.
We hope that they will not seek to undermine
UNMIK’s role, mandated by the Security Council, and
will instead fully cooperate with UNMIK and other
United Nations and European Union institutions.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s view that
there is a need for thorough, impartial and independent
investigation into the allegations contained in the
report of Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick
Marty. All stakeholders should agree on the creation of
a mechanism to carry out the follow-up investigation,
which should be fully supported by national and
international entities present in Kosovo.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s consistent
position that all issues concerning Kosovo should be
resolved peacefully through consultation and dialogue
between the concerned parties. Only thus can the
aspirations of all the people be met on an enduring
basis, and lasting peace and stability be established in
the region. We applaud the role played by UNMIK in
upholding the goals of the United Nations.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
wish to thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his very comprehensive briefing to this Council,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their remarks.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281)
offers a factual and comprehensive analysis of the
situation prevailing in Kosovo, of the progress made
during the period under review and of the significant
challenges that still lie ahead in terms of ensuring
security, stability, economic development and respect
for human rights. It clearly makes the case for the
continued commitment of the international community
in order to support the people and authorities of
Kosovo in their efforts to overcome those challenges
and build a modern democratic State.
In that sense, Portugal reiterates its appreciation
and support for the work being done and wishes to
thank and commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law

20

Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for the
accomplishments achieved. We also wish to highlight
the active engagement of UNMIK with the
communities and authorities in Kosovo and with the
Governments of Serbia and Albania in order to fulfil its
mandate. That commitment and cooperation are
essential for furthering our common aims in Kosovo,
but they are also a very important element in
guaranteeing peace and stability in the whole region
and promoting cooperation in the Balkans.
Since our last meeting on UNMIK (see
S/PV.6483), the nomination of a new President and
Government have taken place in Kosovo. It is
encouraging that the crisis around the presidential
election and the appointment of Ms. Jahjaga took place
within the applicable institutional framework and
without disturbance. Another important development
has been the beginning of the meetings of the PristinaBelgrade dialogue, facilitated by the European Union
(EU). A number of significant issues have been
identified and discussed. I would, as an example,
mention those pertaining to civil registry and cadastral
information, as well as regional economic cooperation
and the movement of goods and freedom of movement,
as particular important ones. It is important that this
dialogue proceeds on all outstanding issues, with the
aim of producing results in the near future. We
encourage the parties to engage actively in that sense.
Despite the fact that the overall security situation
has remained relatively calm since the beginning of the
year, it is obvious that more efforts must be made in
order to fight and prevent organized crime, put an end
to trafficking in drugs and human beings and stop all
criminal incidents that target both Kosovars and
members of the international community. We take good
note that the Kosovo police conducted a number of
successful operations aimed at putting a stop to some
of these criminal activities. We encourage them to
redouble their efforts in that area.
On the other hand, in the community, criminal
acts and vandalism and theft affecting cultural and
religious sites are still occurring. The situation in the
north remains tense. Other elements that may trigger
renewed tensions abound. We commend UNMIK’s
efforts and dedication to ensure peace and security, but
those efforts will be to no avail without the full
commitment of the people of Kosovo themselves to

11-33372

S/PV.6534

engage fully and in good faith in a process leading to
the settlement of their differences.
Let me also stress the importance of the ongoing
cooperation between Kosovo authorities and EULEX
with regard to the rule of law, namely, on access to
justice,
policing
and
investigation,
criminal
prosecution and compliance with international human
rights standards in civil and criminal proceedings.
Again, the task facing Kosovo’s Administration is one
of institution- and capacity-building. We commend and
support the efforts made by the EU Special
Representative in that context.
Concerning the report of Senator Dick Marty to
the Council of Europe, I took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s reference in his report (S/2011/281) to the
initiatives that UNMIK and EULEX have undertaken
in that regard. I am encouraged by the declared
intention of the Kosovar and Albanian authorities to
cooperate fully in the investigations. In that context, I
also call upon all other countries that are in a position
to elucidate on these very serious accusations to come
forward and help.
I also paid careful attention to what Minister
Jeremić said to the Council, as well as to the contents
of the Serbian concept paper that circulated previously
defending an international investigation, as well as to
the letter of the Secretary-General of 4 May. I wish to
make two comments on this matter.
First, with regard to the nature of organ
trafficking, this is a complex criminal activity that
requires a sophisticated network and the complicity of
a variety of different actors, and not only doctors and
recipients. It has become a horrendous international
traffic that often has to rely on the complicity of
authorities in different countries. Nearly a year ago, the
General Assembly adopted the Global Action Plan
against Trafficking in Persons, which of course
includes trafficking for the purpose of organ removal
and trafficking in organs.
Dick Marty’s report further underlines the
importance and reach of the Action Plan, which
promotes the universal ratification of the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
trafficking protocol, while reinforcing State’s national
and regional commitments to prevent and combat such
trafficking, as well as strengthening cooperation among
States,
international
organizations
and
other
stakeholders. All of these elements can be particularly

11-33372

relevant when addressing not only Senator Marty’s
allegations but also the case referred to in annex I of
the Secretary-General’s report concerning the
indictment of defendants in the so-called Medicus case
charged with illegal kidney transplant. The EULEX
report states that
“Kidneys were allegedly removed from
impoverished individuals, recruited on false
promises of payment that they never received,
then transplanted to wealthy foreign patients.”
(S/2011/281, annex I, p. 16)
In all its horror, that sentence encapsulates the
particularly heinous nature of this type of crime.
My second comment concerns the investigation
of the alleged facts presented in the Council of
Europe’s report. Time and again, the Security Council
has rightly denounced impunity and defended the
assertion that the perpetrators of serious crimes and
violations of human rights must be brought to justice.
Impunity is not only intolerable in itself, it can also be
an obstacle to peace and to a healthy and cooperative
political environment, as so many cases illustrate. The
allegations made by Senator Marty, if proven, will
weigh lastingly on our collective memory and
conscience. Their seriousness warrants a thorough,
complete and independent investigation.
Portugal fully supports the role of EULEX in that
context. We were happy to learn that investigations
have started and we hope that they will allow for the
full clarification of the allegations. Portugal also stands
ready to work within the institutional framework of the
European Union to better equip EULEX with the
necessary capabilities to allow it to address the
situation adequately and efficiently. But as I stated here
last February, the seriousness and relevance of this
issue demands that we follow it closely and keep an
open mind on any future action that the full pursuit of
the investigations may require.
That is why we view the letter of the SecretaryGeneral offering the United Nations assistance with the
independent investigation as an important element in
this context, to which due consideration should be
given if the evolution of the investigations presently
being carried out so warrant.
Despite all the difficulties, the situation in
Kosovo has evolved positively during the past three

21

S/PV.6534

months. We hope and trust to register new progress
when we again meet to discuss UNMIK’s next report.

assessment that continued reporting to the Security
Council on the process of dialogue is essential.

In conclusion, allow me to once again underline
the importance of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. High hopes and much room for progress and
tangible results lie in those conversations. It is
Portugal’s strong belief that peace and security in the
region require sustained commitment from all sides to
democratic institutions, the rule of law, justice and
human rights. Those will, in the future, prove to be the
enduring mark of the cooperation of the international
community in the Balkans.

On reconciliation, we are pleased with the
continued progress made in the Working Group on
Missing Persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We encourage the parties
to continue with those efforts. However, we are
concerned by the lack of funding for the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, which is
tasked with the reconstruction and preservation of
religious and cultural heritage sites. The work of the
Commission is an important factor in reconciliation
efforts. Its work should continue beyond 2011.

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zannier for his briefing to the Security
Council today. We wish to convey our support to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for the work it has done in Kosovo
over the years. We also welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we thank
him for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hoxhaj.
South Africa remains convinced that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the legal basis for the
resolution of this crisis, and that it remains in force as
mandated by the Council.
My delegation welcomes the report that direct
dialogue, as mandated by the General Assembly and
facilitated by the European Union, has started between
Pristina and Belgrade, a process we fully support. We
have noted that the meetings to date have focused on
critical matters aimed at improving the lives of the
people of Serbia and Kosovo. We welcome the fact that
this process has taken place in a positive and
constructive atmosphere. My delegation encourages the
parties to continue their dialogue in that atmosphere,
aimed at finding lasting solutions.
Moreover, we believe that this regular direct
contact between the parties is an important confidencebuilding measure that will hopefully help the parties to
address more difficult matters. Sustainable peace,
stability and development in the region will be served
by reconciliation between Belgrade and Pristina. We
therefore encourage the parties to continue with this
process of dialogue in good faith and to exert all efforts
to achieve agreement in the spirit of compromise. We
have noted that the Secretary-General has remarked on
the cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations on this matter. We agree with his

22

We welcome the slight improvement in the
situation in northern Kosovo, which is calm but tense.
However, that improvement will not be served by the
repeated efforts of Pristina to deploy Kosovo Police
units without consultation with local communities,
which have been construed as methods of intimidation.
It is important that all sides consider their actions and
focus their efforts on maintaining and building
conditions for dialogue and reconciliation.
During the Council’s debate on this issue in
February (see S/PV.6483), we stated that the limited
progress on reconciliation between the communities
could be undone by the allegations of organ smuggling
against several leading Kosovo personalities, as
reflected in the so-called Marty report adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. It is
important that a credible, thorough, impartial and
independent inquiry into these allegations be
conducted as quickly as possible. It is also essential
that such and investigation have the ability to conduct
investigations outside of Kosovo and have a strong
witness protection programme.
In this regard, we have noted the statement by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo that it
has the capacity, expertise and jurisdiction to handle
the investigation and that it has assumed responsibility
for it. Equally, we have noted the request by Serbia that
the Security Council mandate an ad hoc mechanism
under its authority to conduct this investigation. South
Africa has taken note of the concept paper circulated
by the Serbian Government in this regard
(S/2011/256), and we will continue to study it
carefully.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank Special Representative

11-33372

S/PV.6534

Lamberto Zannier for his work. We also thank the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for its work, including its promotion
of closer relations among communities and of
interreligious contact as a strategy for long-term
security. I also thank Mr. Jeremić and Mr. Hoxhaj for
their statements, and I congratulate Mr. Hoxhaj on his
appointment.
Colombia sees the dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade as an encouraging step towards finding
lasting solutions to their joint issues, and we welcome
the role of the Mission in facilitating interaction. We
therefore welcome the progress on technical issues in
bilateral talks held in Brussels, such as property law,
telecommunications, regional trade and freedom of
movement. In this context, we consider the Security
Council’s proactive support for the dialogue to be
constructive, in the belief that such dialogue is the
basis for any lasting resolution of the differences
between Serbia and Kosovo.
We reiterate our concern about the complaints of
inhuman treatment of persons and illicit trafficking in
human organs, and we agree with those speakers who
have affirmed that a thorough, impartial and
independent investigation into the grave accusations is
essential. In this context, we call for the investigation
into the alleged crimes to begin as soon as possible.
Likewise, we believe that if such investigations are to
succeed, they must include an adequate witness
protection programme and the cooperation of all
parties involved.
The Secretary-General’s report on UNMIK
(S/2011/281) notes that, during the reporting period, a
number of people, including public officeholders, were
arrested by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) for alleged war crimes. In such
circumstances, my delegation believes it necessary to
call for the cooperation of all parties involved and all
the accused at all stages of inquiry, not only to bring
investigations to a close and to punish the guilty, but
also to strengthen legal institutions and respect for the
rule of law.
We support a regional approach to addressing
problems between the parties, and especially urge the
involvement of the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
reconciling Pristina and Belgrade. Colombia supports
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration

11-33372

Mission in Kosovo aimed at promoting a favourable
political, social and economic atmosphere in that
country, leading to peace and stability in the Balkans
sufficient to hold peaceful and transparent presidential
elections in the fall of 2012.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo for
their presence and their statements. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
welcome the work that he and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo are
carrying out in Kosovo.
I will highlight three points.
First, a special effort should be made to
strengthen institutions and the fight against corruption
and organized crime. As recalled by Mr. Zannier,
Kosovo has a new Government that must face these
challenges, and we must help them. That is why France
is working alongside Kosovo and the other States of
the region to bring them closer to European standards,
particularly in the area of the rule of law. We express
our full support for the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which is doing
outstanding work.
Secondly, dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo,
under the auspices of the European Union, is of crucial
importance. Several meetings have already been held
and concrete subjects have been discussed. We hope
that those discussions, aside from their potential
benefits for the population’s daily life, will build
confidence between the parties. It is up to the two
States to show a spirit of compromise and creativity.
The United Nations is informed on a regular basis and
will be invited to participate when necessary.
Lastly, reconciliation and justice go hand in hand.
That is the logic of the European project. In that light,
we take very seriously the allegations contained in the
report of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, submitted in late 2010. They should be the
subject of a methodical and dispassionate investigation.
EULEX opened a preliminary investigation at the end
of January to shed some light on the allegations. The
investigating team held several meetings outside of
Kosovo, in Albania and in Serbia. The Albanian
authorities committed to providing their cooperation.

23

S/PV.6534

EULEX has an operational team that is dedicated to
witness protection, respects European standards and
may be reinforced. An international, impartial
investigation is thus under way. We call on all States
concerned to cooperate with EULEX. France will
continue to support the process of rapprochement for
Kosovo and entire Western Balkans with Europe.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Jeremić for a further
statement.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would just like to make a
brief comment on some of the statements made today.
On the subject of the Security Council giving
mandates to investigate war crimes in the Balkans, I
would like to reiterate that all of the war crimes that
have been investigated were investigated under the
auspices of the Security Council, and transferred to
national courts of States Members of the United
Nations only after agreement between those Member
States and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which was established by the
Security Council.
As we all know, Kosovo is not and will not
become a State Member of the United Nations. All
major crimes committed by major officials and
wartime commanders in Yugoslavia were investigated
under the auspices of the Security Council and with the
requirement that those who conducted the
investigations report back to the Security Council on
their work. I fail to understand the fervour of the
opposition to the Security Council’s mandating and
receiving a report on the findings of such
investigations, unless there is something to be hidden
from this Council.
According to Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch, the European Law Enforcement Agency
and other international organizations, some of which I
quoted in my statement earlier today, Kosovo is at the
bottom of lists when it comes to human rights and
security, contrary to Mr. Hoxhaj’s claims, in rebuttal to
my statement, that it is a young, dynamic, developing
democracy.
If we are to talk about multi-ethnicity, inclusion
and tolerance in Kosovo, I would just like to draw the
Council’s attention to the following numbers. There are
more people sitting around this table than there are

24

Serbs left in Pristina, out of the total pre-war
population of 40,000. In Prizren, the ancient capital of
Serbia, today there are 18 Serbs out of the pre-1999
population of 10,000. In Gnjilane today, 100 remain
out of 15,000. In Urosevac, there is one Kosovo Serb,
and in Suva Reka, zero.
More than 205,000 people have been expelled
from Kosovo since 1999, according to the numbers of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Less than 15,000 have returned in a decade, less than
300 since the unilateral declaration of independence,
and only 47 this year. So much for multi-ethnicity and
inclusion in Kosovo.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Mr. Hoxhaj for a further statement.
Mr. Hoxhaj: Let me be brief with my remarks,
without taking a lot of the Council’s time.
Let me be clear that the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo is very much interested in
cooperating fully with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We think that
EULEX has the professional capacity and enough
people — more than 1,600 — with whom we can
cooperate in order for all the allegations made by
Mr. Marty to be investigated. At the same time, it is
very important to us that those allegations be
investigated as soon as possible, as our country needs
to have clarity on this issue.
Secondly, I would like to inform the Council —
and here I can speak from my own experience — that
during the Vienna talks of 2005-2007, we were able to
develop, in the Ahtisaari plan, the best provisions and
mechanisms for the protection of cultural heritage.
That cultural heritage has been protected for all time
by the people living there — Albanians, Serbs, Turks,
Bosniaks and other communities — and it will always
be protected.
At the same time, I would like to inform the
Council that the Ahtisaari plan today has been more
than 80 per cent implemented. Pursuant to the Ahtisaari
plan, new municipalities have been created that are
providing Kosovar Serbs with the best way to
accommodate their own interests and priorities.
Perhaps the reason that Mr. Jeremić described the
situation as he did in his feedback is because he has
never visited the country, and he is describes a
situation that does not exist and that never existed.

11-33372

S/PV.6534

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

11-33372

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

25
