VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

------------------

to the convening of a world assembly on aging, including
appropriate proposals on ways in which either or both
of these undertakings might be carried out;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Problems of the
elderly and the aged" under which the Secretary-General's report and pertinent observations by Member
States would be considered.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/133.

International Year for Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 123 of 16 December
1976, by which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year for Disabled Persons and decided to devote
that year to the realization of a set of objectives, including:
(a) Helping disabled persons in their physical and
psychological adjustment to society,
( b) Promoting all national and international efforts
to provide disabled persons with proper assistance,
training, care and guidance, to make available to them
opportunities for suitable work and to ensure their full
integration into society,
( c) Encouraging study and research projects designed to facilitate the practical participation of disabled
persons in daily life, for example by improving their
access to public buildings and transportation systems,
(d) Educating and informing the public of the
rights of disabled persons to participate in and contribute to various aspects of economic, social and political life,
( e) Promoting effective measures for the prevention
of disability and for the rehabilitation of disabled persons,
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 4 of its resolution
31/123 in which it requested the Secretary-General to
elaborate, in consultation with Member States, the
specialized agencies and the organizations concerned,
a draft programme for the International Year for Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 31/93 of 14 December 1976
on the medium-term plan, in paragraph 6 of which it
urged organs to refrain from undertaking new activities
not programmed in the medium-term plan and the subsequent programme budget unless a pressing need of
an unforeseeable nature arises as determined by the
General Assembly,
Having considered with satisfaction the report of the
Secretary-General on the International Year for Disa bled Persons 80 and the draft programme for the Year
annexed thereto,
1. Approves the proposals of the Secretary-General,
contained in his report, for preparatory work for the
period 1978-1979;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to undertake
the measures required to implement these proposals,
including the necessary information activities prior to
and during the International Year for Disabled Persons;
8-0 A/32/288.

153

3. Decides that the International Year for Disabled
Persons represents such a pressing need of an unforeseeable nature;
4. Decides to establish an Advisory Committee for
the International Year for Disabled Persons, composed
of the representatives of fifteen Member States to be
appointed, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, by the Chairman of the Third Committee, in
concurrence with the regional groups; 81
5. Decides that the task of the Advisory Committee
shall be to consider, and to consult with Member States
and specialized agencies on, the draft programme for
the International Year for Disabled Persons prepared
by the Secretary-General;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Advisory Committee no later than March 1979 at the
Headquarters of the United Nations and to submit the
report on that meeting to the General Assembly for
consideration at its thirty-fourth session;
7. Appeals to Member States to make in due time
generous voluntary contributions for the International
Year for Disabled Persons;
8. Encourages Member States and the organizations concerned to take specific action in the preparation of the observance of the International Year for
Disabled Persons;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "International
Year for Disabled Persons".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/134.

Youth in the contemporary world

The General Assembly,
Recalling that since 1965 numerous resolutions on
the situation, needs and aspirations of youth have been
adopted by both the General Assembly 82 and the Economic and Social Council, 83
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct
participation of youth in shaping the future of humanity,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the
energies, enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to
the tasks of nation building, the economic, social and
cultural advancement of peoples, the implementation
of the new international economic order, the preservation of world peace and the promotion of international
co-operation and understanding,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth
the ideals of peace, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, human solidarity and dedication
to the objectives of progress and development,
Convinced of the necessity of meeting the legitimate
needs and aspirations of youth and ensuring their active
participation in all fields of national life,
BI The composition of the Advisory Committee will be announced subsequently.
8 2 Resolutions 2037 (XX), 2447 (XXIII), 2497 (XXIV),
2633 (XXV), 2770 (XXVI), 3022 (XXVII), 3023 (XXVII),
3024 (XXVII), 3140 (XXVIII), 3141 (XXVIII), 31/129,
31/130, 31/131 and 31/132.
83 Resolutions 1086 J (XXXIX), 1353 (XLV), 1354 (XLV),
1407 (XLVI), 1752 (LIV),1922 (LVIII), 1923 (LVIII), 1966
(LIX) and 2078 (LXII).

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

154

Recognizing the necessity of consolidating the efforts
of all States in carrying out specific programmes concerning youth,
Noting the wide variety of proposals that have been
made to the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to improve channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth organizations and to ensure the active participation of
young people in all stages of development at the local,
national and international levels,
Believing that it is urgently desirable to consolidate
the efforts of the United Nations concerning the situation, needs and aspirations of youth into specific, practical and effective means of bringing about such objectives,
Affirming the importance of current and projected
United Nations activities designed to increase opportunities for youth to be i'1tegrated into development activities and to assess the needs and aspirations of youth,
including, inter alia, publications designed to disseminate
information on programmes of youth participation in
development, co-operative arrangements with institutions engaged in youth research, and the preparation of
studies on youth organizations and the training of youth
workers,
Convinced that an international youth year could usefully serve to mobilize efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels in order to promote the
best educational, professional and living conditions for
young people to ensure the;r active participation in the
over-all development of society and to encourage the
preparation of new national and local policies and programmes in accordance with each country's experience,
l. Invites all States to make known their views concerning the proclamation of an international youth year
and to send their proposals and observations in this
regard to the Secretary-General before 1 July 1978;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report containing the views of Member States on the
proclamation of an international youth year and to
propose possible ways and means for the observance
of such a year;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare
a brief synopsis of the legislative history and programme
activities of the United Nations in the field of youth
since 1965, and to submit it to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session for further discussion;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Policies and
programmes relating to youth" and to grant it the highest priority, due consideration being given to the idea
of proclaiming an international youth year at that
session.
105th plenary meeting
I 6 December 1977
32/135.

Channels of communication with youth
and youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/131 and 31/132 of 16
December 1976 and Economic and Social Council reso-

lution 2078 (LXII) of 13 May 1977,

Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the
United Nations with regard to the participation of youth
in achieving the objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Convinced a/10 of the valuable contribution that
youth can make in promoting co-operation among
States and in the implementation of the new international economic order based on equity and justice.
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of
the charrncls of communication and of practical and
effective opportunities for youth and youth organizations to participate in the work of the United Nations
at the natillnal. regional. interregional and international
levels,
l. Adopts the guidelines for the improvement of the
channel:; of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations contained in the
annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution, together with its annex, to all Member States, regional commissions and regional and international youth organizations in consultative status with
the Economic and Social Council;
3. Invites Member States to communicate the substance of the present resolution and its annex to national
youth organizations and ask for their comments and
suggestions;
4. Invites Member States and the regional commissions to comment upon the guidelines contained in the
annex to the present resolution and to offer additional
suggestions regarding the further development of these
guidelines;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the
necessary action for the implementation of the guidelines, in particular through:
(a)
Joint consultations with the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme concerning the youth activities dealt with in the guidelines;
( b) The interagency task force drawn from the
secret~riats_ of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies directly concerned with youth policies and
programmes, established in accordance with Economic
and Social Council resolution 2078 (LXII);
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a report on
comments and suggestions offered by Member States
and regional commissions relating to the guidelines contained irt the annex to the present resolution and on the
progress achieved in their implementation with specific
action-oriented recommendations for the further <level:
opment of the guidelines and of the co-operation between the United Nations system and national and
international youth organizations.
105th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 977
ANNEX
Guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth organizations

A.

NATIONAL

1. The Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme should be requested to continue exploring, in
