At the same meeting, the Council further decided, by
a vote, that an invitation should be accorded to the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the debate and that that invitation would
confer upon it the same rights of participation as those
conferred on a Member State when it was invited to
participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

At the same meeting, the Council further decided, by
a vote, that an i..vitation should be accorded to the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate and that that invitation would
confer upon it the same rights of participation as those
conferred on a Member State when it was invited to
participate under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Adopted by JO l'Otes to I
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (France,
Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Grmt Britain
and Northern Ireland).

Adopted by JO votes to I
(United States of America),
with 4 abstentions (France,
Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland).

At its 2157th meeting, on 19 July 1979, the Council
decided to invite the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

In a note dated 29 June 1979, 28 the President of the
Council stated that the Chairman of the Security Council
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) to
examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, had
informed him on behalf of the Commission that, in view
of the current heavy schedule of the Council and also
the extensive volume of testimony and other documentary information received by the Commission during its
visit to the area, the Commission requested an extension
of the date of submission of its report until 15 July.
The President, after holding consultations with the members of the Council, stated that it had been found that
no member of the Council had any objection to the
request of the Commission.

Resolution 452 (1979)
of 20 .July 1979

The Security Council
Taking note of the report and recommendations of
the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979 to examine the
situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, contained in
document S/ 13450 and Corr. l and Add.1, 20
Strongly deploring the lack of co-operation of Israel
with the Commission,
Considering that the policy of Israel in establishing
settlements in the occupied Arab territories has no legal
validity and constitutes a violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 10
Deeply concerned by the practices of the Israeli authorities in implementing that settlements policy in
the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
and its consequences for the local Arab and Palestinian
population,
Emphasizing the need for confronting the issue of the
existing settlements and the need to consider measures
to safeguard the impartial protection of property seized,
Bearing in mind the specific status of Jerusalem and
reconfirming pertinent Security Council resolutions concerning Jerusalem, and in particular the need to protect
and preserve the unique spiritual and religious dimension
of the Holy Places in that city,
Drawing attention to the grave consequences which
the settlements policy is bound to have on any attempt
to reach a peaceful solution in the Middle East,
1. Commends the work done by the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)

At its 2156th meeting, on 18 July 1979, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel and
Jordan to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled "The situation in the occupied Arab
territories: report of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979) (S/13450 and
Corr .1 and Add .1)". 2 9

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
28 Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1979, document
S/13426.
29 lbid., Supplement for July, August and September 1979.

8

Force to the attention of the members of the Security
Council, who agree with the proposal contained
therein.
"The representative of China has informed me that
China, not having participated in the voting on resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 and subsequent resolutions relating to the Force, dissociates itself from
the matter."

in preparing the report on the establishment of Israeli
settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem;
2. Accepts the recommendations contained in the
report of the Commission;
3. Calls upon the Government and people of Israel
to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Requests the Commission, in view of the magnitude of the problem of settlements, to keep under close
survey the implementation of the present resolution and
to report back to the Security Council before 1 November 1979.

At its 2160th meeting, on 27 July 1979, the Council
decided to invite the representative of the German
Democratic Republic to participate, without vote, in the
further discussion of the item entitled "The question of
the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
rights: letters dated 13 March 1979 and 27 June 1979
from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to the
President of the Security Council (S/13164 6 and
S/ 13418)". 15

Adopted at the 2159th meeting by 14 votes to none, with
I abstention (United States
of America).

Decisions

In a letter dated 24 July 1979," 0 the Secretary-General
informed the President of the Council as follows:
"I have taken note of the recent Security Council
consultations concerning the United Nations Emergency Force. I understand that members of the Council are agreed that there should be no extension of the
mandate of the Force, which, accordingly, will lapse at
midnight on 24 July. It is my intention, therefore, to
make all the necessary arrangements for an orderly
withdrawal of the Force."

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to the Rapporteur of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

At its 2161st meeting, on 23 August 1979, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Cuba, Iraq, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and
Yugoslavia to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

In a letter dated 26 July 1979 31 addressed to the
President of the Council, the Secretary-General stated
that, for reasons of economy, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) had hitherto relied to a great extent on the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF) for third-line logistic support in such
areas as transport and maintenance, movement control,
postal services and field engineering. With the termination of the mandate of UNEF, that logistic support was
no longer available and, consequently, it had become
necessary to strengthen the existing Canadian and Polish
logistic units of UNDOF. In that connexion, he proposed
that the logistic component of UNDOF should be increased by 200 men. He added that it was his intention,
subject to the usual consultations, to make the necessary
arrangements to that effect. In a letter dated 1 August, 32
the President of the Council informed the SecretaryGeneral as follows:
"I have brought your letter of 26 July 1979 concerning the United Nations Disengagement Observer

At its 2162nd meeting, on 24 August 1979, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Morocco,
Senegal and Turkey to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the question.

In a note dated 9 August 1979,33 the SecretaryGeneral recalled that, when the Iranian battalion was
repatriated in March 1979, he had taken action, after
consultation with the Security Council, as a temporary
measure, to transfer a company of the Finnish battalion
of UNEF to UNDOF. The replacement of the Iranian
battalion by a Finnish company had resulted in a reduction of 139 men in the total strength of UNDOF. As
a consequence, the workload of the contingents had
markedly increased and the number of UNDOF daily

so Ibid., document SI 13468.

document S/ 13479.
s2 Ibid., document S/ 13480.
31 Ibid.,

33

9

Ibid., document St 13499.
