UM

37/63.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting International Peace and Co-operation

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations expresses the determination of the peoples of the United Nations to reaffirm faith in the equal rights of men and women
and to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one
another as good neighbours,
Considering also that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights74 proclaims that recognition of the inherent dignity
and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world,
Considering further that the International Covenants on
Human Rights 75 provide for the equal right of men and
women to the enjoyment of all economic, social, cultural,
civil and political rights,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Taking into account the resolutions, declarations, conventions, programmes and recommendations of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies and international conferences designed to eliminate all forms of discrimination
and to promote equal rights for men and women,
Recalling that the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality
of Women and their Contribution to Development and Peace.
1975, 76 states that women have a vital role to play in the
promotion of peace in all spheres of life: in the family, the
community, the nation and the world,
Recal1ing that the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women 71 declares that discrimination against women violates the principles of equality of rights and respect for human dignity, is an obstacle
to the participation of women, on equal terms with men, in
the political, social, economic and cultural life of their countries and makes more difficult the full development of the
potentialities of women in the service of their countries and
of humanity,
Recalling also that the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women affirms that
the strengthening of international peace and security, the
relaxation of international tension, mutual co-operation
among all States irrespective of their social and economic
systems, general and complete disarmament, in particular
nuclear disarmament under strict and effective international
control, the affirmation of the principles of justice, equality
and mutual benefit in relations among countries and the
realization of the right of peoples under alien and colonial
domination and foreign occupation to self-determination and
independence, as well as respect for national sovereignty
and territorial integrity, will promote social progress and
development and as a consequence will contribute to the
attainment of full equality between men and women,
Recognizing that the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women obligates States
Parties to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all its forms and in every field
of human endeavour, including politics, economic activities, law, employment, education, health care and domestic

relations,
Noting that, despite progress towards the achievement of
equality between men and women, considerable discrimiResolution 217 A. (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
16 Report of the World Conference of the International Women's Year,
Mexico City, /9 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.I), chap. I.
74
75

nation against women continues to exist, thereby impeding
the active participation of women in promoting international
peace and co-operation,
Welcoming the contribution which women have nevertheless made towards promoting international peace and cooperation, the struggle against colonialism, apartheid, all
forms of racism and racial discrimination, foreign aggression and occupation and all forms of alien domination, and
towards the unrestricted and effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Welcoming also the contribution of women towards a just
restructuring of international economic relations and the
achievement of a new international economic order,
Convinced that women can play an important and increasing role in these areas,
Solemnly proclaims the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
3 December I 982

ANNEX
Declaration on the Participation of Women In
Promoting International Peace and Co-operation
PART I

Article I

Women and men have an equal and vital interest in contributing to
international peace and co-operation. To this end, women must be enabled
to exercise their right to participate in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society on an equal footing with men.
Article 2

The full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international
peace and co-operation is dependent on a balanced and equitable distribution of roles between men and women in the family and in society as
a whole.
Article 3

The increasing participation of women in the economic, social, cultural,
civil and political affairs of society will contribute to international peace
and co-operation.
Article 4

The full enjoyment of the rights of women and men and the full participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation will
contribute to the eradication of apartheid, of all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism, aggression, foreign occupation and domination and interference in the internal affairs of States.
Article 5

Special national and international measures are necessary to increase the
level of women's participation in the sphere of international relations so
that women can contribute. on an equal basis with men, to national and
international efforts to secure world peace and economic and social progress
and to promote international co-operation.
PART II

Article 6

All appropriate measures shall be taken to intensify national and international efforts in respect of the participation of women in promoting
international peace and co-operation by ensuring the equal participation of
women in the economic, social, cultural, civil and political affairs of society
through a balanced and equitable distribution of roles between men and
women in the domestic sphere and in society as a whole, as well as by
providing an equal opportunity for women to participate in the decisionmaking process.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Third Committee

Article 7

All appropriate measures shall be taken to promote the exchange of
experience at the national and international levels for the purpose of furthering the involvement of women in promoting international peace and
co-operation and in solving other vital national and international problems.
Article 8

All appropriate measures shall be taken at the national and international
levels to give effective publicity to the responsibility and active participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation and
in solving other vital national and international problems.
Article 9

All appropriate measures shall be taken to render solidarity ancf support
to those women who are victims of mass and flagrant violations of human
rights such as apartheid, all forms of racism, racial discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism, aggression, foreign occupation and domination
and of all other violations of human rights.
Article JO

All appropriate measures shall be taken to pay a tribute to the participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation.
Article 11

All appropriate measures shall be taken to encourage women to participate in non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations concerned
with the strengthening of international peace and security, the development
of friendly relations among nations and the promotion of co-operation
among States and, to that end, freedom of thought, conscience, expression,
assembly, association, communication and movement, without distinction
as to race, political or religious belief, language or ethnic origin, shall be
effectively guaranteed.

195

Recalling its resolution 34/ l 80 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980 and 36/ 131 of 14 December 1981 ,
Recalling that the Convention entered into force on 3
September 1981 ,
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the Convention, 77
1. Notes with appreciation that an increasmg number
of Member States have ratified or acceded to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women;
2. Notes further that an important number of Member
States have signed the Convention;
3. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
4. Welcomes the election, in accordance with article 17
of the Convention, of the twenty-three members of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
on 16 April 1982, 78 as well as the fact that the Committee
has already commenced its work, having held its first session
at Vienna from 18 to 22 October 1982;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the status of
the Convention.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

Article 12

All appropriate measures shall be taken to provide practical opportunities
for the effective participation of women in promoting international peace
and co-operation, economic development and social progress including,
to that end:
(a) The promotion of an equitable representation of women in governmental and non-governmental functions;
(b) The promotion of equality of opportunities for women to enter
diplomatic service;
(c) The appointment or nomination of women, on an equal basis with
men, as members of delegations to national, regional or international
meetings;

(d) Support for increased employment of women at all levels in the
secretariats of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, in conformity with Article IOI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 13

All appropriate measures shall be taken to establish adequate legal protection of the rights of women on an equal basis with men in order to
ensure effective participation of women in the activities referred to above.
Article 14

Governments, non-governmental and international organizations, including the United Nations and the specialized agencies, as well as individuals, are urged to do all in their power to promote the implementation
of the principles set forth in the present Declaration.

37/64.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any
distinction as to sex,
Reaffirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social, economic and political processes of development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,

37/168.

Strategy and policies for drug control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/168 of 16 December 1981, by
which it adopted the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and the basic five-year programme of action 79 dealt with
in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 1 (XXIX) of
11 February 1981, which the Economic and Social Council,
by its decision 1981 / l l 3 of 6 May 1981, decided to transmit
to the General Assembly,
Recalling also that in paragraph 3 of resolution 36/168
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs was requested to establish, within available resources, a task force to review,
monitor and co-ordinate the implementation of the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and the programme
of action,
Recalling further its resolutions 32/124 of 16 December
1977, 33/ 168 of 20 December 1978, 34/ l 77 of 17 December
1979 and 35/195 of 15 December 1980,
Noting with satisfaction the establishment on a provisional basis by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the
task force requested,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/13 of 3 May 1982 and Commission on Narcotic Drugs
resolution 1 (S-VII) of 8 February 1982,
1. Approves the projects recommended by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in its resolution 1 (S-VII), as
set out in the report of the Commission on its seventh special
session, 80 for implementation in 1983, within available
United Nations resources and to the extent possible in order
of priority;
A/37/349 and Add. I.
For the composition of the Committee, see A/37/349, annex Ill.
79
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1981, Supplement No. 4 (E/1981/24), annex II.
80
Jbid., 1982, Supplement No. 3 (E/1982/13), chap. Ill, sect. A. para~.
102 and 104, and sects. 8 and C
77

78
