-

UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

5 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

. , . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .. ,. . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2374)

SlPV.2374

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Courxil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2374th MEETING
eld in New York on Saturday,
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

Pwxicht:

de NANTEUIL

the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with the
Council’s usual practice.”

P’,c~.scnf: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

3. The proposal by the representative of Jordan is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but if approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in the discussion would
confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
the same rights of participation as those conferred on
Member States pursuant to rule 37.

agenda (S/Agenda/2374)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162)

5 June 1982, at 4.20 p.m.

of the agenda

4. Does any member
on this proposal?

of the Council

wish to speak

5- . Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The United States delegation has on many occasions
explained the reason why we oppose the special
procedure that appears to give the PLO the same rights
of participation
in the proceedings of the Security
Council as if it represented a State. The PLO is not
a State: it is a political movement which presents its
claims in the name of a collectivity
whose members
live under various political jurisdictions.
No formula
-justifies this departure from the rules of procedure of
the Council. The formula proposed seems to us to seek
without basis to enhance the prestige, and indeed to
falsify the status, of those to whom it is directed.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

6. We have always stressed that we have no objection to the Council’s hearing the PLO representatives.
Indeed, we have no objection to the Council’s hearing
the representatives of any political group with a stake
in questions discussed here. But we consider that this
can be accomplished
legally only on the traditional
basis of rule 39, which empowers the Security Council
to grant hearings to persons speaking on behalf of nongovernmental
entities.

I. The PRESIDENT
(intclp~rtution
,fhm
Frcuc*k):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of
Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity which the usual practice 1 propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. Accordingly, we ask, Mr. President, that you put
to the vote the terms of this proposed invitation. The
United States will vote “no”,
8. The PRESIDENT
(intop,.ertrtiorz
jhn
Fwn~h):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak.
I shall take it that the Council is prepared to vote on
the proposal by the representative of Jordan.

‘The PRESIDENT
(intP,.pl-ctation
jhtn
Frrtwh):
I shfould like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter [S/1.5/66] dated 5 June from
the representative of Jordan which reads as follows:
7*.

In,fir~orfr: China, Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo. Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of
I

Against: United States of America
Ahstaini~z~: France, Japan, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Kingdom

Some eight raids were observed by United Nations
personnel, with Israeli overflights over Beirut co,,tinuing until about 1500 hours.

of

17. The targets of the air strikes included a Palestinian camp near Beirut on the road to the airport, Ihe
area of the Sports Stadium adjacent to the Sabra camp
and the western perimeter of Beirut airport. The overflying aircraft attracted heavy anti-aircraft fire.
IS. Soon after the raids, casualties caused by the air
strikes were officially estimated to be some 40 dead,
but reports since then indicate that the number COu]d
be higher. There has also been heavy material damage.

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtcrtion .fiorn Frcnrh):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter [S/15167] dated 5 June from the
representative of Jordan which reads as follows:

19. In the south, at about 1500 hours GMT, heavy
exchanges of fire commenced between positions of
the armed elements (mainly the PLO and the Let+
anese National
Movement),
on the one hand, and
the Israel Defence Forces and the de @*to forces
(Christian and associated militias), on the other. As of
1500 hours GMT on 5 June, firing was still in progress.
In total, some 2,000 rounds of artillery, mortar and
rockets have been exchanged. Of this number, some
600 rounds can be attributed to the armed elements,
some 800 rounds to the Israel Defence Forces and the
dc’ firt*to forces, while the origin of the remainder
could not be identified. The exchanges of fire involved,
or have affected, the following areas: on the one side.
in Lebanon, Tyre and its vicinity, Nabatiyah, Chateau
de Beaufort and the Kawkaba-Hasbaya
area and, on
the other side, Marjayoun in southern Lebanon, and
the areas of Nahariya,
Qiryat Shmona and Metulla
in Israel. In addition, in the course of today, a total of
48 Israeli air strikes have been reported in the areas
of Hasbaya, the Chateau de Beaufort, Nabatiyah,
Aichiye and Arnoun.

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States,
to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”
IO. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council decides to grant that request.

I I, The PRESIDENT
(intoprcftrtion
from Frcnc-h):
The Security Council is meeting today in response to
a letter dated 4 June from the representative of Lebanon addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
12. Members of the Council have before them document S/15168, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Japan, document S/ I5 I6 I, which
contains the text of a letter dated 4 June from the
representative of Lebanon to the President of the
Council, as well as document S/15164, which contains
the text of a letter dated 4 June from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Council. Members
of the Council have received copy of a letter [S/lSl65]
dated 5 June from the representative of Cuba to the
President of the Council.

20, While full information
is not available on the
casualties resulting from these exchanges in the south.
the Israeli authorities have informed UNIFIL
of one
person killed and others injured.
21. United Nations personnel have also reported
today that Israeli air strikes took place at around
0940 hours GMT in the vicinity of Beirut and Damur
and between 121.5 hours GMT and 1315 hours GMT
east of Damur. There have also been exchanges of fire
between Israeli naval vessels and positions of the
armed elements south of Tyre.

13. I now call upon the Secretary-General.
14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As members
of the Council are aware, Israeli aircraft conducted
strikes in Lebanon on 4 June. These have been followed by exchanges of fire and further air strikes.
Hostilities are continuing as at 1500 hours GMT on
5 June.

22. In view of the continuing hostilities, the buildup of forces south of the border and the very real
danger of further escalation, I and my colleagues
have remained in close touch with the parties concerned, urging them to restore and maintain the ceasefire that had generally held since 24 July 1981. The
parties would, of course, also be aware of the stale* ;
ment made by the President of the Council on behalf
of its members last night [S//51633. With the objective
of the Council in view, I have already made an urgent
appeal for a simultaneous cessation of hostilities at the

1.5. The following is based on information
received
so far from the United Nations Interim
Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO):
16. On 4 lune, the air strikes around Beirut started
at 1315 hours GMT and lasted for about one hour.
2

earliest possible time. I have asked all parties to
adhere to my appeal by no later than 0600 hours local
time tomorrow, Sunday, 6 June.

30. As the Council will know, the British authorities have made arrests in connection with this appalling
crime. Four men are now in custody. As a result of the
preliminary inquiries, the police have discovered a list
of names which includes not only that of Ambassador
Argov but also that of the representative of the PLO
in London.

23. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Like the other members of the Council, my delegation is deeply concerned
at the rapidly deteriorating situation in Lebanon since
yesterday. We fear that the current use of force could
escalate further unless the parties concerned cease
alI military activities. We believe, therefore, that the
Council
should call upon the parties concerned to
ceirse all military activities immediately, At the same
title the Council should request all Member States
which are in a position to bring their influence to
bear- on the parties concerned to do so in order that the
ces’sation of hostilities declared earlier by the Council
cart be respected.

3 I. This assassination attempt, however despicable,
does not in any way justify the massive attacks on
Lebanese towns and villages by the Israeli air force,
attacks which have already inflicted major loss of life,
casualties and damage to property. These actions have
also led to the collapse of the precarious cease-fire
which has now been in effect in south Lebanon since
July I98 I. It is imperative, in the interests of peace in
the region and for the sake of the suffering people of
Lebanon, that there be no escalation of fighting and that
the cease-fire be immediately restored.

24. It is with such an intention that my delegation
wishes to introduce the draft resolution in document
S/ 15168. This draft, in its preamble, recalls earlier
resolutions
of the Council, expresses the concern we
all share and reaffirms the statement the President and
the members of the Council issued yesterday [ibid.],
as well as the urgent appeals which the SecretaryGeneral made yesterday and just a few moments ago.

32. Therefore my delegation warmly supports the
resolution which the Council has just adopted unanimously and strongly urges all concerned to comply
with its terms.
33. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Like other members of the
Council, Ireland is very seriously concerned about
the present situation in Lebanon and along the Lebanese-Israeli border. We are concerned first at the loss
of life and the casualties which have already occurred.
This concern extends to each and every life lost and to
each and every casualty, Lebanese, Palestinian and
Israeli: but we are even more concerned at the serious
danger which now exists that the conflict will become
widespread.

25. The operative paragraphs contain the urgent call
and the request I mentioned earlier. They further
request the Secretary-General
to undertake all possible efforts to ensure the implementation
of and compliance with this resolution, and to report to the Council as early as possible and not later than within
48 hours.
26. My delegation hopes that this draft resolution
will be adopted unanimously by the Council, in order
to utter the unified voice of the Council members to
meet this grave situation.

34. The situation in the region is extremely dangerous. The cease-fire established in accordance with
resolution 490 (198 I), fragile though it has been, has
generally held well since July 1981. If it is now broken
on a large scale or rejected by any of the parties, the
consequences could be literally incalculable.

27. The PRESIDENT
(intrrprctution jkrn French):
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution distributed under the
syrrtbol S/1.5168. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.

3.5, It appears that the immediate reason advanced
by Israel for the massive air raids on Lebanon was
the attempt on the life of Mr. Argov, the Israeli Ambnssador in London. I know Mr. Argov. He was accredited concurrently as Ambassador to Ireland. I met him
on several occasions in Dublin in that capacity. On
behalf of the Government
of Ireland, I condemn
without reservation those who made the attack on his
life. I offer our deep sympathy to his family and colleagues and I express our hope for his early recovery.
But we see no justification
for, and no correspondence, no relation, between that outrage and the largescale Israeli raids on the Lebanese capital.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion jvtn Flctwh):
I shall now call upon those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
24. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): I cannot emphasize too strongly the shock and the horror
felt by my Government and by the people of Britain
at the dastardly terrorist attack on the Ambassador of
Tsrael to London, Mr. Shlomo Argov, a most distinguished and respected member of the diplomatic
community.
We all hope and pray for his life and for
his recovery from his wounds.

36. According to reports, scores of people have
been killed in those raids. This was an indiscriminate
attempt at retribution.
It was on a massive scale and
it has killed many who can have had no knowledge of,
and no connection,
and indeed no sympathy, with
3

!

has been unacceDtable to the Council. and it should
be unacceptable to the world community at large. To
penalize Lebanon for everyone’s crimes is simply
murderous.
In simple terms, we condemn Israel’s
attacks on Lebanon, which are fuelling a cycle of
violence and afflicting our country, which has become
the victim of everyone’s revolution
and everyone’s
war.

whatever group or individuals planned the attack on
the Ambassador. But its most serious aspect is what
it could now lead to. It appears that shelling is continuing. Where scores have already died, many more,
Lebanese, Palestinian and Israeli, may yet die if conflict is allowed to escalate.
37. What needs to be done, and done with the greatest urgency, is limit escalation, halt conflict and
reassert and restore the cease-fire. The resolution just
adopted does that. Ireland was glad to vote for it and
we call insistently on all concerned to see that it is fully
observed.

’

(
,
j
1

“The world cannot stand aside, watching in
morbid fascination,
as this small nation, with it5
creative and cultured people, slides further into
the abyss of violence and chaos.”

38. The PRESIDENT
(itltrlpr’ctotion .fiwn Frc~td?):
I now call on the representative of Lebanon.

Those are not my words. Those are the words of the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Haig. on 27 May
1982. Today I am speaking for this nation, the nation
that is sliding into the abyss. In fact, I am speaking
from the bottom of the abyss, the abyss of violence
and chaos, pictures ofwhich were displayed yesterday i
and today in the media, beyond my capacity to de- :
scribe.

39. Mr. TUGNI (Lebanon): I have just learned from
official sources in Beirut that a party of Israeli commandos landed approximately two hours ago on the
coastal road between Sayda and Beirut and shot with
machine-guns at cars and buses which were transporting civilian refugees fleeing from the south. This
action is of the utmost gravity and my Government
earnestly hopes that the Council is not thus confronted
with yet another pre-emptive act by Israel.

44. The Secretary-General
has just informed the
Council briefly, surgically and in simple terms of whi\t
has happened in my country and I shall not burden lhr
Council with details of the attacks. The air raids iIre
continuing:
artillery shelling from land and sea artd
every possible means of destruction
has been used
-not against military positions as has been claimed.
but against civilians-and
not excluding those who
were rushing to take part in rescue operations or those
who were fleeing death and destruction in modest can
on public roads and highways and whose bodies are
still lying there with no one able to recover them. Red
Cross cars, civil defence cars, orphanages. schools.
warehouses where food supplies were
hospitals,
stockpiled-all
are there to testify to the unique s:lvagery which characterizes that aggression. Thousondl;
of refugees-Lebanese
refugees-are
flooding the till
of Beirut from the south, seeking shelter despite the
air raids against the city itself. The chaos is also social
to disrupt the very fabric uf
chaos, threatening
society.

40. Mr. President, within two weeks the Council is
scheduled to meet again to discuss the fate of UNIFIL.
The Council’s meeting under your presidency acquires
a very special importance, not only because of the
historical relations that bind Lebanon to France but
also because France has played an instrumental role in
the establishment of UNIFIL and is playing an important role in enhancing its capabilities. Last week the
French contingent was deployed in south Lebanon.
We are gratified that with you in the Chair the cause of
peace in Lebanon will be well served.
41. In my letter to you yesterday, Mr. President,
I mentioned some of the attacks launched by the
Israelis [S//516/]. The Council met urgently and issued
a statement [S//5/6.?] which we read as a confirmation of the cease-fire. Yet military activity has been
continuing
intensively.
More victims
have fallen
and more damage has been wreaked. The total figures
are rising minute by minute. Casualties are now beyond
the hundreds and destruction is immeasurable.

45. The Council has just adopted a resolution which
we consider to be of historical importance.
Yet we:
cannot fail to recall that the Council has already
adopted many resolutions on Lebanon which have all
been challenged and defied by Israel. We view the
resolution which has just been adopted as a practical
measure to stop a catastrophe, for not only is the fate
of my country at stake but also that of the peace and
security of the Middle East and probably international
peace and security as well.

42. Once more we come to the Council requesting
it to stop the aggression against Lebanon. The wanton
bombardment of positions in Lebanon by Israel cannot
be explained away by anything that its spokesmen
have said. Nothing that happened could justify the air
raids on Beirut and its suburbs yesterday or the attacks
on cities and villages in Lebanon today.

46. Mr. President,
your Prime Minister
visited
Lebanon a week ago in dramatic circumstances and
said that the world will not allow Lebanon to disappear.
Can the Council meet the challenge and prove beyond
doubt that it is more than a platform for rhetoric and
that its executive power can still be effective? We hope

43. Drawing on the wisdom of a well-known French
author, La Fontaine, it appears to us that no mutter
what blow the Israeli wolf receives the Lebanese lamb
downstream is invariably accused of muddying
the
water upstream. Such logic is unacceptable to us and
4

_---

that the resolution just adopted by the Council, fol
which we are indeed very grateful, will stop the war on
Lebanon,
safeguard the lives and property of OUI
people and of all the people in the area, maintain the
inte:grity of our land and restore peace, security and
legitimate
rights for all.

Any review of the events that led to what happened yesterday and to what is continuing shows that
Israel did not need a pretext to attack Palestinian
civilian concentrations. Most, if not all, of the Israeli
targets have been civilian concentrations.
The Nrn,
Yor/c Times, conservative in its reporting, gave a very
illustrative picture in its 5 June issue of the situation
in Beirut yesterday. The PLO has declared, through
its representative in London, that it had no connection
whatsoever with the attempt to assassinate the Israeli
Ambassador in London. None of its components had
any connection with or responsibility
for what happened. In fact, as has been confirmed by the representative of the United Kingdom, our representative
in London was a prospective target of those who
attempted to assassinate the Israeli Ambassador.
53.

47. The PRESIDENT
(intclp,‘ctation
,fhm Fwm~h):
I call on the next speaker, the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization.
48. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization):
At the outset, I should like to thank
you. Mr. President, for calling on me. I should also
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month, We are confident that with
your wisdom and experience and under your leadership the work of the Council will be most fruitful.

54. But let us look at this and compare what happened yesterday with what happened when an Israeli
soldier, a member of the Israeli Defence Forces,
attacked worshippers in Al-Aqsa Mosque, killed two
people and injured 27 other Palestinians. Why did the
Arab world not dispatch all its air forces to destroy
the Jewish population in occupied Palestine’?

49. Since its very inception, the Zionist movement
has conceived of Palestine as a country without people
for ,people without land. When they discovered that
that was not true and that there was a Palestinian
people, they did everything possible in order to destroy
the .Palestinian people. First, they expelled the Palestinians from their homes and properties in Palestine,
thus transforming
more than 2 million Palestinians
into homeless refugees residing in host Arab countries.
When the Palestinian people resisted their condition
of st.ateless and homeless refugees, the Zionist movement and its creation, Israel, pursued them into their
places of refuge, killing and destroying indiscriminately. How else can anyone explain what happened
yesterday in Beirut?

55. Are we to be responsible for every Palestinian
or Arab who commits an act of violence? The PLO has
always upheld and continues to uphold the following
position: we are opposed to any act of violence that
takes place outside our occupied land or involves an
innocent third party. But it is convenient for the Israelis
whenever possible to implicate the PLO in any act of
violence that takes place outside the occupied Palestinian territories.
56. WC resist the occupation of our land because
we defend our basic God-given right to live in out
homeland in freedom and in dignity. That right has
been upheld, at least theoretically,
by every member
of the international community. Why should that right
be denied to us‘?

50. It seems that the only purpose of the military
junta in Tel Aviv, led by the trio-Sharon,
Shamir and
Begin-is
to kill as many Palestinians as possible.
What is happening today-the
intensity of the ail
strikes,
the indiscriminate
killing of Palestinians
residing in Lebanon-illustrate
the Israeli strategy.
One hundred and thirty men, women and children have
been killed as twice as many have been injured. That
has occurred in only two days of war by Israel against
the Palestinians in Lebanon and against the Lebanese
people.

57. In the last four months, in its systematic acts
of terrorism against the Palestinian population in the
occupied territory, Israel has killed over 27 children,
some of them even under six years of age, and 200
others have been injured. I have a list of their names,
but I do not want to read it out. Is this a violation of
the cease-fire that was arranged in July 1981 or is it
not? Is the killing of Palestinian people allowed because they happen to be Palestinians, even though
whenever a Jew anywhere-in the words of Menachem
Begin-is
hurt by a Palestinian or a non-Palestinian
that constitutes for the Israelis a violation of the ceasefire? Are we less human beings than the Israelis? Is
our blood less valuable than Israeli blood or Jewish
blood’? Why?

51. In July last year, the Israeli air force attacked
the heart of Beirut, killing over 500 people and injuring
2,000 others. This is not “an act of retaliation”;
it
is an act of genocide. Its only purpose is to reduce by
as many as they can the number of Palestinians still
in existence.
52. I do not want to burden the Council with the
details of what happened yesterday and of what is still
going on today. The Secretary-General has given an
extensive report of those events and my colleague,
the representative
of Lebanon, has added to it. I do
not hlave much to add to what they have both reported
to the Council.

58. In the past the PLO has adhered to and abided
by the decisions of the United Nations and its organs.
We have not violated our commitment
to the Security
i Council or the Secretary-General.
On the contrary

s

---and I think the Secretary-General can confirm what
I am going to say-there have been hundreds of violations of the cease-fire by the Israelis by crossing the
Lebanese borders and terrorizing the civilian population. We feel that on this occasion the Israeli junta in
Tel Aviv has committed and continues to commit an
act of aggression, and that it is therefore incumbent
upon it to stop this human carnage that it has started
and continues to carry out.

the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
United Nations decisions. The growing threat to inter- ,
national peace and security that results from those
actions is clear.
65. It is no secret to anyone that Israel would not
be able to carry out such an aggressive and blatant
policy if it did not have encouragement from and Ihe
comprehensive military, political and economic assistance of its old “strategic ally”. the United States.
which has been systematically
covering up the ill.
conceived deeds of its Israeli protegl in the United
Nations, making condemnation by the Security Coun.
cil impossible.

59. Mr. OLEANDROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intPI.I)I.Ptcltion.fi’(~)?1Russinn): The Council
is meeting urgently to consider the new flagrantly
aggressive action by Israel against Lebanon. This is the
third time in the last six weeks that Israeli aircraft
have bombarded Beirut and other populated areas of
Lebanon, victimizing tens and hundreds of peaceful
persons. Much material damage has resulted from the
Israeli attack upon Lebanon, the cost of which is still
difficult to assess. It is appropriate to recall that on
21 April. following an Israeli air attack on Beirut, the
members of the Council warned against any repetition
of that action or further violation of the cease-fire and
emphasized the need for all parties to comply with
their obligations with regard to keeping the peace.

66. We feel that it is more than time to put an end
to the dangerous policy carried out by Israel and its
leaders in the Middle East. The Soviet Union is in
favour of immediately
ending the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon and not allowing any further dangerous escalation of the situation in the area, In our view.
the Council has not, in adopting the present resolution,
met all its responsibilities
with regard to the very
serious situation that has come about in Lebanon and
the Middle East as a whole.

60. However, Israel has not heeded that appeal,
.just as it has failed to heed all the appeals and resolutions of the Council. It has once again activated its
death-dealing military machine. This time what is
involved is a clear expansion of the barbaric war that
Israel has for many years been waging against Lebanon
and the Palestine resistance movement.

67. Unfortunately,
for reasons known to all, the dr:iTt
did not reflect clearly enough the condemnation
of
Israel which it deserved because of its responsibility
for this new act of open aggression against Lebanon.
68. The Soviet delegation supports the call for an
immediate
cease-fire and a cessation of other hostile
acts on the territory of Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli border, We also believe there should be il
strong condemnation
of Israeli aggressive pulicp
towards Lebanon and other Arab States.

61. There is information that Israeli heavy artillery
continues to carry out raids on Lebanese cities and
towns and is once again concentrating on the southern
border of Lebanon and carrying out attacks on Lebanon. Therefore there can be no doubt that Israel is
engaged in large-scale military aggression against a
sovereign Arab State, aggression that it has prepared
over the course of recent months.

69. The Council should use all effective means available to it in accordance with the Charter to halt further
Israeli aggression against that State.
70. The PRESIDENT
(if?to.prL’trrtiofz
Jim
Fwfdk
I should like to inform members of the Council th:d
I have just received a letter from the representative
of Israel in which he requests to be invited to participate in the Council’s discussion of the item on its
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I pr*
pose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

62. The tragic events in Lebanon once again show the
truth that is obvious to all: that Israel, through its
aggressive and expansionist policy, has turned Lebanon into a blood-letting area of the Middle East and
bears full responsibility for the tension accumulating
in that area, which harbours the danger of a new and
major armed conflict.
63. The policy of international piracy of the rCgime
in Tel Aviv reveals the daily reality for the peoples of
Lebanon, Palestine and the rest of the Middle East.
It is an occupation rCgime that has seized Arab territories. Its bombing of and raids against Lebanon, its
annexation of the Golan Heights and its piratical
attacks on Iraq are tangible and concrete evidence of
the aggressive policy that has become the keystone of
the State of Israel.

/

7 1. The PRESIDENT
(intop,.ctotiolz ,fi~m~ F~dfl: ]
The next speaker is the representative
of Israel.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

64. This policy is a clear violation of the elementary
and generally recognized norms of international
law,
6

72. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me tell you how delighted we are to see a diplomat
of your stature, skill, wisdom and experience presiding
over our deliberations. We salute in you also a son of
the great French Republic, the land of liberty, equality
and fraternity.

78. The representative of Lebanon knows that a State
cannot invoke in its favour benefits deriving from
certain provisions of international law without being
prepared at the same time also to abide by the duties
flowing from international law. If Lebanon is either
unwilling or unable to prevent the harbouring, training
and financing of PLO terrorists openly operating
from Lebanese territory with a view to harassing
Israel, Israelis and Jews world-wide, then Lebanon
surely must be prepared to face the risk of Israel’s
taking the necessary countermeasures to stop such
terrorist operations. This, Mr. TuCni, is not only a
fundamental premise of international law: it is also a
conclusion dictated by simple logic.

73. I should like to take this opportunity to thank
the representatives of the United Kingdom and Ireland
for their expressions of sympathy in connection with
the dastardly attack against Israel’s Ambassador in
London. This recent attempt on the life of Mr. Argov
is only the climax of a long campaign of terror that has
been waged against my country and against my people in Israel and throughout the world. If the Council
had really wanted to address itself to the central issue
that should have confronted it in this context, it certainly would not have passed over that campaign of
terror, including the attempt on the life of Mr. Argov.
But the Council, as such, is not aware of this campaign
of te.rror-although
some individual representatives
seem to be aware of it. This is also reflected in the resolution adopted by the Council.

79. The PRESIDENT
(interprctcrtion
from French):
Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, wishes to make a statement. With
the consent of the Council, I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make that statement.
80, Mr. MAKSOUD
(League of Arab States):
I should like to express to you. Mr. President, and
through you to the other members of the Council. the
League of Arab States’ appreciation of the invitation
to make a statement.

74. The Council may pretend that the Israeli operations of yesterday and today came out of the blue. The
entire world knows otherwise. The Council may ignore
Israel’s restraint over the past year in the face of
constant
terrorist provocations.
The entire world
knows otherwise. The Council may ignore the fact that
since July of last year there have been approximately
150 acts of terrorism instigated by the PLO, originating
in Lebanon,
against Israelis and Jews in Israel and
elsewhere:
in Athens, Vienna, Paris and London.
The terrorist PLO frequently denies responsibility
for its activities and even invents organizations and
designations
specifically for that purpose, such as
“Black
September”,
“Eagles of the Revolution”,
and SODon, which go under different aliases but all serve
the same purpose.

81, Needless to say, between your great country
and the Arab people and the Arab States there are
strong ties of friendship and historical association,
which are reinforced by the current friendly feelings
that we have for your people and your great civilization.
82. It was not our intention to make a statement at
this juncture. However, it is very important at this
grave hour to express our appreciation of the unanimity with which the Council has adopted this resolution.
We consider this to be a step in the right direction,
whjch will give the Council and the world community
a further opportunity to defuse an escalating situation
which is likely to endanger many more lives in Lebanon and among the Palestinian people.

75. ‘The time has surely come to confront these simple
facts.

83. We have heard repeatedly in the last few days
since the attempted assassination in London of the
Israeli Ambassador the official position of the PLO.
We have also listened with great interest to the evidence, which further reinforces the PLO position, that
has been submitted to the Council today that the representative of the PLO in London was one of the other
targets of such assassinations.

76. Well, of course, we all know that the PLO, in its
cowardly fashion, hides behind civilians and deliberately establishes its emplacements and its bases within
refugee camps and villages in civilian neighbourhoods.
And thus when its combat centres and arms and
ammunition
depots are attacked,
unfortunately
civilian
casualties also occur. We in Israel certainly
regret any civilian casualty, irrespective of nationality
or creed. The responsibility for any such loss of life
lies squarely with the PLO cowards, who have established., in the first place, their bases of operations
within such civilian neighbourhoods.

under no circumstances
can the
84. Therefore,
incident in London be associated with the PLO, which
is the representative of the Palestinian people and
which has always supported in this building, in the
United Nations, the development of the diplomatic and
political option. Of course, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, when the PLO carries
out its legitimate acts of resistance to occupation it
is exercising the right of all peoples throughout the

77. K do not want to refer in great detail to the statement made by the representative of Lebanon, but
there are a few words which I should like to address
to him.
7

world who have been disfranchised and deprived of the
exercise of their national rights. These legitimate acts
of resistance are confined, by a defiberate,policy
on
the part of the PLO, to resistance within the occupied
territories.

91. I cannot fail to mention first the suffering of Hll
those who for so long now-and
only recently OIIC~
again-have
had to bear the consequences of the
conflict afflicting a region dear to LIS, whatever the
country to which the victims belong and whatever the
country in which the victims are struck down,

85. It is in this context that we can adduce as a logical
conclusion that Israel has been planning with prerneditation to perpetuate in an escalated form the bloody
haemhorrhage among the Lebanese and Palestinian
people in Lebanon. It has been attempting to continue
the factor of destabilization
in Lebanon by refusing
to comply with the various Security Council resolutions that have established the legitimacy of the central
Government of Lebanon’s exercising its authority ovel
all the territories of Lebanon, more particularly in the
south of Lebanon.

92. As of yesterday, Lebanon was once again subjected to air raids, adding to the suffering of the tebanese, an already sorely-tried people. As of yesterday
there was a further dangerous escalation in the violence
both in Lebanon and elsewhere on the frontier between
Lebanon and Israel.
93. This morning the French Government
following statement:

issued the

“Once again we are witnessing a deplorable chain
of acts of violence in the Middle East. However
criminal and reprehensible the attack on the Israeli
Ambassador in London may have been, France
can only energetically condemn the bombing of Lebe
anese territory by Israeli aircraft. The bombing.
which produced numerous victims, including a
French journalist, constitutes a new violation of the
territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon.
The French Government appeals for restraint from
all the parties concerned so that peace in the region
may be restored.”

86. Yet ;1n ominous remark has just been made, in
contempt and defiance of the international
will represented in the unanimous adoption of this resolution.
It provides a sort of II priori pretext for much greatet
escalation and further invasion of and aggression
against Lebanon. This is already being prepared for,
not only by the deployment of Israeli forces on a large
scale on the borders of Lebanon, but even more by
efforts to make it possible in advance for subsequent
invasion and aggression against Lebanon to take place.
87. It was in this context that we heard the representative of Israel state and assert under the so-called
interpretation of international law that the State of
Lebanon could expect more of what it has experienced
through the repeated and escalated Israeli acts of
aggression.

94. We can only mourn the dozens of innocent
victims, both in Beirut and in the southern part of the
country. This is a further blow to the Lebanese GOVernment in its efforts to establish its administration
and authority throughout its territory.

88. It is in this context and from this point of view
that we see how important the unanimously
adopted
resolution of the Council is. We consider that it should
not only be invoked and implemented,
but, through
the mechanism of the United Nations and the efforts
of the Security Council, mandated as it has been by
this important transitional resolution, should provide
a deterrent to the further escalation of aggression and
the intended invasion of the sovereign State of L,ebanon, which Israel has been planning,

95. It is to be feared thnt, above and beyond the
suffering of the civilian population already affected.
the hostilities
may spread throughout
the region.
affecting further civilian populations.
It is also to he
feared that the precarious balance existing since the
cease-fire of July 1981 will be jeopardized.
96. For all those reasons, the Council must quickly
decide on a call for an immediate cease-fire, to he
respected by all the parties concerned in order to pllt
an end to the escalation of violence.

89. That is why, on behalf of the League of Arab
States, I appreciate the collective wisdom manifested
today. We urge the Council to ensure that this does not
become merely another resolution but that its implementation restores to Lebanon the healthy atmosphere it requires, to the United Nations the credibility
that it deserves and to the Palestinians the opportunity
to seek in a rational international
atmosphere
the
exercise of their right of self-determination
and the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
throughout the Middle East.

97. That is why the French delegation
draft resolution just adopted.

voted for the

98. It must be pointed out once again that it is not
possible to impose by force an equitable solution to the
conflict in the Middle East, in which Lebanon finds
itself involved against its will, Force will not guarantee
the right of Israel to live in security within secure and
recognized frontiers, the right of the Palestinian PeVle
to their own land and the right of Lebanon to live in
peace.

90. The PRESIDENT
fi17tC/‘l)/.rftltiOlz ,fivm Frc~dr):
I shall now speak in my capacity as the representative of FRANCE,

99.
8

I now resume my function

as PRESIDENT.

100.
The representative
speak to make a statement

of the PLO has asked to
in reply and I call on him.

JO].
Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): The representative of the military junta
jn Tel Aviv described the PLO as cowardly, Who are
the cowards- those who resist and who insist that
they are Palestinians and want to go to Palestine, their
homeland, or those who confront with machine-guns
young children, school children, in the streets of every
:ity and town in the occupied territories? Are they the
Palestinian children in the streets of Nablus or the
Israeli armed forces shooting at them? Who are the

cowards-the
Palestinian women and children in the
refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila or the Israeli heroes
in their F-l% and F-16s flying over those refugee
camps, killing and destroying? The most cowardly
act is that committed by the Israeli authorities on the
civilians of Lebanon and on the Palestinians living in
Lebanon; it is not the insistence of we, the Palestinian
people, that we have no intention of remaining in
Lebanon and that we are struggling to return to Palestine, our homeland.

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstorc
or wile to: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vow
aup&
des ventes,
New York ou Gen&e.

I+
publicacionts
de las Naciones
[Midas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

sent en vcnte
de votrelibraire

DES NATIONS
dans

UNIES

lcs librairies
et Its agences
ou adresscz-vous
?I : Nations

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

throughout
the
York or Cheva.

d6positaires
du
Unies. Section

y casns distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,
