S/PRST/2002/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 May 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4537th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 May 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
East Timor”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the attainment of independence by East
Timor on 20 May 2002, which marks the culmination of a process of selfdetermination and transition that began in May 1999. The Council pays tribute
to the people and leadership of East Timor for their efforts in achieving the
goal of independence.
“The Security Council affirms its commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and national unity of East Timor
within its internationally recognized boundaries.
“The Security Council takes this opportunity to express its deep
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, and notes with satisfaction the role played by the United
Nations in restoring peace to East Timor, and in building a solid foundation for
a democratic, viable and stable East Timor. The Council commends the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) for the
important work that it has done to achieve these important goals.
“The Security Council expresses its strong support for the leadership of
East Timor as it assumes authority for governing the new, sovereign State of
East Timor. The Council recognizes that the people and democratically elected
Government of East Timor bear the ultimate responsibility for the
establishment and maintenance of a viable State. It expresses its confidence
that the people and leadership of East Timor will demonstrate the necessary
political will and determination to fulfil their aspirations.
“The Security Council appreciates the efforts made by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples towards East Timor’s achievement of
independence. The Council expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Indonesia and the Government of Portugal for their cooperation with the
United Nations in concluding the 5 May 1999 Agreement which led to the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) to

02-38994 (E)

200502

*0238994*

S/PRST/2002/13

conduct the popular consultation. It also expresses its appreciation to Australia
and all other countries that contributed troops to the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) and the UNTAET, which helped restore stability following
the post-referendum violence.
“The Security Council welcomes the Government of East Timor’s
commitment to develop close and strong relations with Indonesia, and the
Government of Indonesia’s stated readiness to cooperate with East Timor
towards building a peaceful, unified and sustainable society in East Timor. The
Council stresses that good relations with neighbouring States will be essential
to East Timor’s future stability and that of the region, which are inextricably
linked.
“The Security Council is concerned that challenges to the security and
stability of East Timor remain after independence. It notes with concern that
shortcomings exist in a number of critical public administration elements of
East Timor in the post-independence period. The Council reaffirms that a
strong international commitment will be required in East Timor to ensure
continued stability and development of the country for some time after
independence. The Council expresses its confidence that the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) established through resolution
1410 (2002) on 17 May 2002 will help consolidate and strengthen a stable
environment in East Timor.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of complementing the
United Nations peacekeeping contribution with other United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, international financial institutions,
bilateral donors and non-governmental organizations to assist the people of
East Timor to develop a sustainable social system and economy. It also
reaffirms the continued need for effective and close coordination among these
programmes and donors to ensure a smooth transition towards a normal
development assistance framework. The Council appeals to Member States to
respond positively to the urgent appeal of the Secretary-General to fill
vacancies in the Civilian Support Group. It also urges Member States and other
actors to respond positively to the appeals for assistance in the development of
the East Timor defence force, police service and justice sector; and in
supporting social and economic development and poverty reduction.
“The Security Council looks forward to the day in the near future when
East Timor will join us as a Member of the United Nations and to working
closely with its representatives. The Council notes that the East Timor
Government today submitted a letter to the Secretary-General requesting the
admission of East Timor as a Member of the United Nations.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.”

2
