General AHembly-Twenly-ninth Ses1ion

84

Bearz,.g in mind the inadmissibility of a refusal to
apply the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 11
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full adherence to, and effective implementation of, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 on the protection of war victims
by all States, in particular those signatories to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949,
Considering that the desire to know the fate of loved
ones lost in armed conflicts is a basic human need
which should be satisfied to the greatest extent possible, and that provision of information on those who
are missing or who have died in armed conflicts should
not be delayed merely because other issues remain
pending,
l. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 to all armed conflicts, as stipulated
by those Conventions;
2. Calls upon parties to armed conflicts, regardless
of their character or location, during and after the end
of hostilities and in accordance with the Geneva Conventions of 1949, to take such action as may be within
their power to help locate and mark the graves of the
dead, to facilitate the disinterment and the return of
remains, if requested by their families, and to provide
information about those who are missing in action;
3. Appreciates the continuing efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross to assist in the
task of accounting for the missing and dead in armed
conflicts;
4. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to cooperate, in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, with protecting Powers or their substitutes
and with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in providing infonnation on the missing and dead in
armed conflicts, including persons belonging to other
countries not parties to the armed conflict;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the second session of
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and
Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3221 (XXIX). Improvement of the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, having considered at its twenty-eighth
session the item entitled ''Creation of the post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights",
it decided, in its resohition 3136 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms",
Recognizing the need for adequate information and
documentation on which consideration of this item
should be based,
Noting that the International Covenants on Human
Rights 12 will enter into force in the near future,
11 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.

1 2 Resolution 2200 A ( XXI), annex.

Noting that the Secretary-General plans to issue
shortly up-to-date versions of the comprehensive studies
prepared for the International Conference on Human
Rights, held at Teheran in 1968, 13 on methods and
measures taken within the United Nations system in
the field of human rights,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Member States, the specialized agencies and
regional intergovernmental organizations on alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. lnvites appropriate non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to submit to the Secretary-General any
relevant material on the subject, taking into account
that such material will not be politically motivated
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
concise analytical report based on the views and material submitted under paragraphs 1 and 2 above and
taking into account the above-mentioned instruments
and studies and any other relevant material;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2278th plenarv meeting
6 November 1974
3222 (XXIX).

Human rights and fundamental
freedoms

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which stresses respect for the dignity and worth
of the human person,
Recalling that, in resolution 2860 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971, it declared its conviction of the
historic significance and the value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
Recalling Economic and Social Council re~olutions
1864 (LVI) and 1869 (LVI) of 17 May 1974,
Highly indignant at the continuing repression and
inhuman treatment inflicted on peoples still under
colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling also its resolution 3059 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 on torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Reaffirms its attachment to the principles, values
and ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Reaffirms also its determination to ensure to all
persons, without any distinction whatsoever, the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Reaffirms further the right of all peoples, in particular the peoples of southern Africa, to self-determination, freedom and independence, and the legitimacy
of their struggle to free themselves from colonial and
foreign domination in conformity with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
• i:i_ For the report of the Conference, see Unite-0 Nations pubhcat1on, Sale~ No.: E.68.XIV.2.

Resolution• adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

4. Expresses its satisfaction with the efforts made
by Governments, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations associated with the United Nations which have provided
moral and material assistance to the peoples of the
dependent Territories in Africa and elsewhere with a
view to the more effective observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
5. Strongly condemns the policy of· those States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and of other Powers which are assisting the racist
regimes in southern Africa and elsewhere to repress
the profound aspirations of peoples for the enjoyment
of human rights and to prevent the exercise of those
rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Commission on Human Rights the records of the
discussion on the question and the relevant report of
the Third Committee to the General Assembly.

2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3223 (XXIX). Dttade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2919 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, in which it proclaimed the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its determination to
achieve the total and unconditional elimination of
racism and racial discrimination, against· which the
conscience and sense of justice of mankiqd have long
been aroused and which in our time represent serious
obstacles to further progress and to the strengthening
of international peace and security,
1. Takes note of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1863 (LVI) of 17 May 1974;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Secretary-General 14 submitted in accordance with
paragraphs 18 (/) and 18 (h) of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination ;15
3. Condemns the intolerable conditions which continue to prevail in southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right to self-determination
and the inhumane and odious application of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
4. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of oppressed peo{>les to liberate themselves
from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien domination;
5. Urges all Member States to co-operate loyally
and fully in achieving the goals and objectives of the
Decade by taking such actions and measures as:
(a) Implementing United Nations resolutions bearing on the elimination of racism, apartheid, racial discrimination and the liberation of peoples under
colonial domination and alien subjugation;

(b) Signing and ratifying the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 16 the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, 11
the International Covenants on Human Rights 18 and all
other relevant instruments;
( c) Formulating and executing plans to realize the
policy measures and goals contained in the Programme
for the Decade;
(d) Reviewing internal laws and regulations witlt a
view to identifying and rescinding those which provide
for, give rise to, or inspire racial discrimination or
apartheid;
(e) Supplying the Secretary-General with comments
and views as to the draft agenda and timing of the
world conference referred to in paragraph 13 (a) of the
Programme for the Decade, as well as in relation to
the implementation of that Programme;
(/) Complying, when due, with the provisions of
paragraph 18 ( e) of the Programme for the Decade,
which call for Governments to forward a report every
two years on the action taken under the Programme for
the Decade, on Hie basis of a questionnaire circulated
by the Secretary-General, and for these reports to be
transmitted to the Economic and Social Council for its
consideration;
6. Requests national sports federations of Member
States to refuse systematically to participate in all
sports or other activities together with the representatives of the racist regime of South Africa;
1. Urges all States, United Nations organs and
bodies, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to ensure, inter
alia:
(a) Immediate termination of all measures and policies, as well as military, political, economic and other
activities, which enable racist regimes in southern
Africa to continue the repression of the African people;
( b) Full support and assistance, morally and materially, to the peoples which are victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination and to the liberation movements;
8. Call.s attention to the vital importance of examining the socio-economic and colonial roots of racism,
aparthe;d and racial discrimination, with a view to
eliminating them;
9. Stresses the importance of mobilizing public opinion in support, morally and materially, of the peoples
which are victims of racism, apartheid, racial discrimination and colonial and alien domination;
10. Commends the active involvement of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in
the implementation of the Programme for the Decade
within its competence under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
11. Expresses the hope that adequate resources will
be made available to the Secretary-General to enable
him to undertake the activities entrusted to him under
the Programme for the Decade;
16 Resolution

14 E/5474, E/5475; see also A/9666 and Add.1-6.
1G Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.

85

2106 A (XX), annex.
3068 (XXVIII), annex.
1s Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
11 Resolution
