S/PV.8804

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8804th meeting

Thursday, 24 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Swarup
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Repkin
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2021/584)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16570 (E)
*2116570*

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Yair Lapid. I congratulate the members of the new
Government and look forward to working with them
to advance the two-State solution and lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I turn now to developments that have occurred
since the submission of the written report.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2334 (2016) (S/2021/584)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Wennesland is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/584, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I am devoting my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to the
eighteenth report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2021/584). The
written report members have already received covers
the period between 23 March and 11 June.
Before turning to recent developments, I wish to
reiterate that the cessation of hostilities reached last
month between Israel and Hamas remains very fragile.
The United Nations works closely with all concerned
parties and partners, including Egypt, to solidify a
ceasefire, allow the entry of urgent humanitarian
assistance and stabilize the situation in Gaza. I urge all
sides to refrain from unilateral steps and provocations,
take steps to reduce tensions and allow those efforts to
succeed. All sides must do their part to facilitate ongoing
discussions to stabilize the situation on the ground and
avoid another devastating escalation in Gaza.
I also wish to acknowledge the new Israeli coalition
Government, which was sworn in on 13 June, under
the leadership of Prime Minister Naftali Bennett
and Alternate Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
2/13

24/06/2021

In occupied East Jerusalem, 15 Palestinian
households still face the imminent threat of eviction
by the Israeli authorities from their homes in Shaykh
Jarrah. The High Court has scheduled a hearing on
2 August to consider a leave to appeal request from
some of the families. Separately, the Jerusalem District
Court postponed until 8 July its decision on an appeal
against an eviction order related to two residential
buildings in the Batan Al-Hawa neighbourhood of
Silwan in East Jerusalem.
Unfortunately, violent incidents have continued
on a daily basis throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory since the submission of the written report.
Clashes have repeatedly broken out in Beita village,
near Nablus in the West Bank, in the context of
protests against the construction of a new Israeli
settlement outpost, Eviatar. Although a military
order was issued on 9 June, designating the outpost a
closed zone and ordering settlers to vacate, settler and
significant Israeli security forces presence persisted,
and Palestinian protests continued. On 11 June, Israeli
security forces shot dead a 16-year-old Palestinian and
on 17 June, another 16-year-old Palestinian succumbed
to his wounds from shots sustained by Israeli security
forces the previous night, after he reportedly threw
an explosive device towards them. Since 3 May, five
Palestinians have been killed and some 100 Palestinians
have been injured by live ammunition in and around
that area.
On 12 June, Israeli civilian security guards shot
dead a Palestinian woman at the Qalandiya checkpoint
near Jerusalem, after she reportedly ran towards
them holding a knife. On 15 June, several thousand
right-wing Israeli activists, including members of the
Knesset, marched through Jerusalem’s Old City, with
many participants chanting racist slogans against Arabs
and Muslims. The march, initially set for 10 May, was
held amid a heavy Israeli police presence after having
been rerouted by Israeli authorities from its planned
trajectory throughout the Muslim quarter of the Old
City. In protests and clashes that occurred in the context
of the march, in East Jerusalem, as well as other parts of
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the West Bank, 66 Palestinians, including 12 children,
were injured by rubber bullets, sound grenades and
physical assaults.
On the same day, rallies were organized throughout
the Gaza strip by national and Islamic forces, protests
erupted at the fence and militants in Gaza released
incendiary balloons towards Israel, starting dozens of
fires. In response to the incendiary balloons, from 16 to
17 June, Israeli Defense Forces targeted what they said
were five Hamas facilities on the strip, causing damage
but no injuries.
On 16 June, a Palestinian woman was shot dead
by Israeli security forces at the Hizma checkpoint near
Jerusalem after reportedly attempting to carry out a
ramming and stabbing attack against Israeli soldiers.
Between 19 and 23 June, confrontations continued
between Israeli civilians and Palestinian residents in
Shaykh Jarrah.
On 23 June, Palestinian activist and parliamentary
candidate Nizar Banat was pronounced dead, hours
after being arrested by Palestinian Security Forces at a
house in Hebron. According to the victim’s family, the
Forces aggressively beat and physically assaulted the
victim during the arrest.
I will turn now to several observations concerning
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) during the
reporting period. I remain deeply troubled by continued
Israeli settlement expansion in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. I am concerned in particular
about the approval of a plan to expand the Har Homa
settlement in East Jerusalem. If implemented, the plan
would further consolidate the continuum of illegal
settlements separating East Jerusalem from Bethlehem
and other Palestinian communities in the southern part
of the West Bank. I am also concerned by the continued
establishment of settlement outposts, which are also
illegal under Israeli law. As we have seen, the recent
establishment of Eviatar has already led to protests and
clashes with tragic outcomes.
I again underscore, in no uncertain terms, that
Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant violation of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and international law. They are a major obstacle to the
achievement of a two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. The advancement of all
settlement activity must cease immediately.

S/PV. 8804

The continued demolition and seizure of Palestinian
structures, including humanitarian projects and schools,
is also deeply concerning. I call on Israeli authorities to
put an end to the demolition of Palestinian property and
the displacement of Palestinians and to approve plans
that would enable those communities to build legally
and address their development needs.
The reporting period witnessed an alarming
increase in the level of violence between Israelis and
Palestinians, including hostilities between Israel and
factions in Gaza at a scale and intensity not seen in
years. I am especially concerned by the attempt to
exploit the sensitive status of Jerusalem and to use
it to justify a broader armed conflict. Those events
have only deepened divisions between Israelis and
Palestinians and are making progress towards peace an
even greater challenge. The incitement and the violence
must stop immediately.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and
mortars towards Israeli civilian population centres from
highly populated civilian neighbourhoods by Hamas,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and others is prohibited by
international humanitarian law. Palestinian militants
must cease that practice immediately. The Israeli
authorities must also abide by the rules of international
humanitarian law governing armed conflict and take
all feasible precautions to spare civilians and civilian
objects in the conduct of military operations.
I am appalled that children continue to be victims
of violence. Children should be afforded special
protection from violence. They should never be the
target of violence or put in harm’s way, nor should
they be encouraged to commit or participate in acts of
incitement or violence.
I am also deeply concerned by the increased
intensity of settler-related violence and by violent
attacks between Israeli and Palestinian civilians in
the occupied West Bank. I urge Israel to ensure the
safety and security of the Palestinian population in
line with its responsibilities under international law.
The perpetrators of violence on all sides must be held
accountable and swiftly brought to justice.
I also note with concern reports of armed civilians
carrying out attacks against Palestinians in proximity
to the Israeli security forces. I reiterate that the security
forces must exercise maximum restraint and may use
lethal force only when it is strictly unavoidable in order
to protect lives. Israeli and Palestinian authorities must

21-165703/13

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

24/06/2021

carry out thorough, independent, impartial and prompt
investigations into all instances of possible excessive
use of force.

an emergency meeting at which it will discuss how to
quickly mobilize donor support in a common effort
with the Palestinian Authority.

On too many occasions during the reporting
period, officials exacerbated tensions and violence
with unacceptable rhetoric and provocative actions that
contributed to the dangerous dynamics on the ground.
Violence and incitement must be clearly condemned
and unequivocally rejected by all. In that context, I
commend initiatives by civil society organizations and
other leaders calling for peace, reconciliation and the
rejection of violence.

The $150-million shortfall in the programme
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains a major
concern. I welcome the resumption of funding from
the United States in April and call on Member States
to ensure that the Agency has the resources needed to
conduct its operations.

The fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of
two Israeli soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remains an
important humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas to
release the full information on their status immediately,
as required by international humanitarian law. I also
remain concerned by the continued Israeli practice of
withholding the bodies of killed Palestinians and call
on Israel to return withheld bodies to their families,
in line with its obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Turning back to Gaza, in the context of a
fragile cessation of hostilities, the United Nations
is continuing to coordinate the delivery of urgent
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza. I
highlight the $95 million humanitarian flash appeal
launched on 27 May and thank members for the pledges
and contributions made so far. All parties must also
facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian relief.
We are now moving quickly to ensure that there is a
well-coordinated international response focused on the
two million people in Gaza who have suffered for far
too long.
I am particularly concerned that the Kerem Shalom
crossing to Gaza from Israel has been effectively closed
for over five weeks, with some narrow exceptions
for food, animal feed and limited humanitarian
items. Kerem Shalom should be open for regular,
non-sensitive trade.
In the coming days, the United Nations, the World
Bank and the European Union will soon release a rapid
damage needs assessment that will estimate the longerterm reconstruction and recovery needs in Gaza.
In the first week of July, the donor group of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians will convene
4/13

It is also critical that the Egyptian-led
intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts continue. The
United Nations stands firm in its support of Egypt in
that regard, and I call upon all Palestinian factions to
make serious efforts to ensure the reunification of Gaza
and the occupied West Bank under a single, legitimate,
democratic national Government. Gaza is and must
remain an integral part of a future Palestinian State, as
part of a two-State solution.
In that context, I note that the postponement of the
Palestinian elections has compounded frustrations and
undermined hope for the Palestinian national project. I
commend the tireless efforts of the Palestinian Central
Elections Commission, which ensured that all technical
aspects were effectively implemented.
I am deeply concerned by the news today of the
death of political candidate and activist Nizar Banat,
who died in the context a Palestinian security forces
arrest operation. I call for an independent investigation
into his death and for those responsible to be
held accountable.
In conclusion, I would once again like to highlight
the significant risks we face over the coming period as
we confront the prospect of a renewed escalation. While
immediate international efforts are rightly focused
on solidifying the cessation of hostilities, providing
humanitarian assistance and beginning the process
of Gaza’s reconstruction, recent events have also
highlighted the urgent need to re-establish a political
horizon and restore hope to Palestinians and Israelis.
The United Nations remains committed to
supporting the parties in resolving the conflict
and ending the occupation in line with the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements in pursuit
of achieving the vision of two States — Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sovereign Palestinian State — living side by side in peace
and security within secure and recognized borders, on
the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States.
Even as we focus on the pressing challenges in
Gaza, I reiterate our determination to work with Israelis
and Palestinians, fellow members of the Middle East
Quartet and key regional and international partners
to lay the groundwork for a return to meaningful
negotiations towards a viable two-State solution.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing and for all of his work over the past few
weeks to preserve calm. We understand that he wants
the opportunity to have a more in-depth conversation
in closed consultations, so we will keep our public
remarks brief.
Let us start where we all agree. We are all thankful
for the end of hostilities, which surely saved the lives
of many innocent people. Ending the violence was a
necessary first step, but we all know it will not be the
end of the story. The situation in the region remains
precarious, and the efforts to avoid violence and reduce
tensions are critical. It is essential to take steps to
ensure calm and refrain from provocative actions.
Long before the cessation of hostilities, the United
States, as well as our partners and allies, began
working on ways to support better lives for Israelis
and Palestinians. And on 25 May, Secretary Blinken
announced $38 million in new humanitarian assistance
for the West Bank and Gaza. We also announced
our intention, working with Congress, to provide
$75 million in additional development assistance and
economic assistance over the next year, supporting
relief and recovery in the West Bank and Gaza. Our aid
will go far, but the needs — especially in Gaza — are
vast. We call on the rest of the Security Council and the

S/PV. 8804

international community to support these efforts and
offer humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable.
We welcome the United Nations efforts to support
relief and recovery and we would also appreciate
efforts to facilitate the flow of goods into and out of
Gaza. We need a mechanism which allows authorities
to mitigate any risk of diversion. It is absolutely critical
that Hamas cannot divert resources and assistance from
the Palestinian people who need it most, so all of us
must work and coordinate with the United Nations,
Israelis, Palestinians and other key actors to ensure that
the designated beneficiaries are the ones who actually
receive international assistance. They deserve to have
their immediate needs met so that they can recover
from the latest round of violence.
Of course, a sustainable solution will require more
than emergency aid. It requires Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and our international partners, working
together, to chart a more constructive path forward.
We need to address the underlying social tensions and
avoid triggering the flashpoints that only make it more
difficult to move forward.
There is new leadership in Israel. We congratulate
the new Government and hope it can make serious
headway on those issues. Israelis and Palestinians
deserve equal measures of security, democracy, dignity
and prosperity. Achieving that goal is critical to
ensuring peace and stability and avoiding violence over
the long term. But in the meantime, we look forward
to working with the new leadership in Israel, the
Palestinian Authority, regional States and the Security
Council to take concrete steps towards a better future
for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing
and for his valuable contribution to de-escalation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2021/584).
Despite the ceasefire, the situation on the ground in
the occupied Palestinian territories remains very tense.
We are concerned about potential renewed outbreaks,
given the ongoing provocations and aggression by
groups of settlers and the occupying forces against
Palestinian civilians and the fact that the sanctity of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the holy sites in Jerusalem
is violated.

21-165705/13

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also note with much concern that the occupying
Power is implementing settlement plans that had
been frozen in areas crucial for the contiguity of
the Palestinian State, as indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General. The occupying Power also
continues to demolish Palestinians’ homes and
confiscate their properties, including internationally
funded humanitarian projects. We join the SecretaryGeneral in warning about the grave consequences of
the occupation authorities evicting Palestinian families
from their homes in East Jerusalem, especially from
Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan.
We also strongly condemn the serious violations
against children in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the use of live ammunition by the occupying
forces, according to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2021/437).
Tunisia once again calls on the international
community, especially the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities and put an end to those violations
and practices, which are condemned by international
law and conventions. The international community
must bring pressure to bear on the occupying Power
to respect international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. It must refrain
from any unilateral acts that could again lead to violence
and undermine any prospect for a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East. Tunisia also
reiterates its call on the international community to
guarantee protection for Palestinian civilians and to
activate the principle of holding the occupying Power
accountable for its acts of aggression and violations of
international law.
The devastating effects of Israel’s aggression
against Gaza Strip in May, the ongoing unjust blockade
and the violence against Palestinian residents in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, in addition to the
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, have
exacerbated the suffering of Palestinians. That requires
redoubled efforts to increase the humanitarian response
in the occupied Palestinian territories and to support
rebuilding efforts. In that regard, we look forward to
the response of the international community to the
humanitarian appeal of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
for Gaza.
Palestine is still waiting for long-awaited justice to
be served, an end to the occupation, the restoration of
6/13

24/06/2021

Palestinian rights and the establishment of a sovereign
Palestinian State along the 1967 border, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. The Security Council has a
historic responsibility to guarantee the implementation
of its relevant resolutions, the latest of which is resolution
2334 (2016), and to put an end to the occupation and the
misery of the Palestinian people.
Given the delicate and sensitive nature of
the situation, there is an urgent need today for an
international, comprehensive and unified response — in
coordination with the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral, the Quartet and regional parties — to relaunch
serious and credible negotiations in accordance with
a timeline to reach a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East, based on international law,
international legitimacy resolutions the agreed terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. We believe that
this is the only way to restore security and stability to
the region.
Tunisia will maintain its principled support for the
struggle of the brotherly Palestinian people to put an
end to the occupation and restore all their legitimate
rights which are not subject to statute of limitations.
Mr. Swarup (India): I, too, thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
The recent developments in Palestine are of concern.
After a period of brief calm, tensions are rising again
in Gaza. The launch of incendiary balloons from Gaza
targeting civilians in Israel and the retaliatory strikes
into Gaza threaten to restart the cycle of violence,
which recently caused immense suffering and resulted
in deaths. We urge all parties to honour the ceasefire
arrangement to ensure that the situation does not spiral
out of control.
The situation in the West Bank remains volatile.
We are concerned at the potential for renewed violence
in East Jerusalem and other parts of West Bank over
the legal process that could lead to possible evictions in
the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods, in East
Jerusalem. Incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, as
witnessed during the recent escalation, only drive and
fuel violence.
We urge all parties to de-escalate the situation and
to refrain from acts of provocation, intimidation and
incitement that exacerbate tensions. Any attempt to
unilaterally change the status quo that undercuts efforts
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to advance a negotiated two-State solution should also
be avoided.
The attention of the international community
should not be diverted from the immediate need to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
civilian population, particularly in Gaza. Such
assistance should reach the Palestinian people through
verified channels. We call for reinforced cooperation
between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities in the
area of humanitarian aid delivery, including food and
medicine, and the movement of patients in and out of
Gaza. We welcome the role played by United Nations
agencies in facilitating the delivery of such aid, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in particular.
The rehabilitation and reconstruction of Gaza
should also be prioritized. We recognize the centrality
of the Palestinian Authority to the delivery of
international assistance to the Palestinian people. We
encourage all Palestinian parties to work with the
Palestinian Authority to ensure the well-being of the
people of Palestine. We take note of the postponement
of the reconciliation meeting of all Palestinian parties
that had been facilitated by Egypt and hope that the
parties will overcome the current stalemate. We believe
that intra-Palestinian unity is critical to achieving a
peaceful settlement of the Israel-Palestine conflict.
The peace process can no longer be kept on the
back burner. The continuation of the impasse only
exacerbates the trust deficit between the parties and
increases the chances of the cycle of violence recurring.
I again underscore the need for the immediate
resumption of the Middle East peace process and
direct negotiations between Israel and Palestine.
India supports all diplomatic efforts, including by the
Quartet, that are aimed at strengthening the collective
commitment of the international community to resume
those negotiations and facilitate the peace process.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s unwavering
commitment to the establishment of an independent,
viable and democratic State of Palestine. There is
no alternative to a two-State solution for ensuring
meaningful and enduring peace.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his valuable briefing.
Since the ceasefire was announced on 21 May, the
situation in and around Gaza has been relatively calm.

S/PV. 8804

However, we remain seriously concerned about the
situation in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
where the violence continues to cause civilian
casualties. According to reports, in the last few months
at least 39 Palestinians have been killed and more than
8,000 injured, many of whom were shot in the back.
The use of excessive force and live ammunition
against civilians is deplorable. If such incidents
continue in one place, it is only a matter of time before
they spark the next cycle of violence in other places.
Viet Nam therefore calls on the Israeli authorities to
exercise utmost restraint.
At the same time, we are also troubled by reports
of inflammatory rhetoric, particularly racist slogans
against Arabs. Neither anti-Arabism nor anti-Semitism
is acceptable, as they not only erode trust but also
undermine any chance for reconciliation. There is
every security reason to condemn and eliminate hateful
and racist acts of all kinds. It is the responsibility of the
relevant authorities not to allow such acts to happen.
We remain deeply concerned by the continued
demolition and seizure of Palestinian property,
including internationally funded humanitarian projects,
and the possible forced eviction of Palestinians from
their homes in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan. We call on
the Israeli authorities to end those activities and abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian
law. Settlement expansion, demolitions and forced
evictions only deepen distrust, undermine prospects
for negotiations and trigger violence.
Viet Nam calls for every effort to be made to bring
the parties back to the negotiating table towards a twoState solution that includes the establishment of a State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, that
peacefully coexists alongside the State of Israel, with
secure and internationally recognized borders on the
basis of the pre-1967 lines and a negotiated settlement,
and in accordance with international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. We also welcome the efforts of the relevant
parties to promote the Middle East peace process.
Finally, we are gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza following the hostilities
in May. In that connection, we welcome the recent
launching of an additional $164 million humanitarian
and early recovery appeal by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). We call on the international

21-165707/13

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community to support that appeal and other emergency
response actions implemented by UNRWA in Gaza and
the West Bank to bring life back to normal, including
the restoration of critical infrastructure.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I, too,
would like to thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing.
On 22 May, the President of the Security Council
issued a press statement welcoming the announcement
of a ceasefire in Gaza (SC/14527). However, it is
worrisome that less than a month later, the Israeli
Government approved the Flag Day parade in the holy
city, a move that escalated tensions, and once again
conducted air strikes against Gaza.
Those acts have cast a shadow over the already
fragile ceasefire. China urges all parties, Israel in
particular, to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from any provocations, violence targeting civilians, or
any acts that might intensify friction.
Israel must seriously uphold and respect the
historic significance and current status of the holy
city of Jerusalem and sincerely respect and protect the
religious rights of Muslims.
Israel’s illegal settlement activities in the occupied
territories constitute an obstacle to peace between
Palestine and Israel and to the prospect of the twoState solution. In total disregard of the objections of the
international community, Israel has been advancing its
settlement plans, approving more than 540 additional
housing units and ordering the demolition of the houses
of 50 Palestinian families.
In Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan, in East Jerusalem,
Palestinians still face the risk of eviction and live in fear
of becoming homeless and displaced. The settlement
activities being undertaken totally contravene
international law and represent a serious violation of
the right to self-determination and sovereignty of the
Palestinian people. As such, they constitute one of the
triggers of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
We urge Israel to observe resolution 2334 (2016),
immediately cease its settlement activities in the
occupied territories, stop its demolition of Palestinian
houses and its eviction of Palestinian people, and
effectively halt the deteriorating violence relating
to settlers.
8/13

24/06/2021

The conflict in May caused numerous civilian
casualties, including 66 children in Gaza, and heavily
damaged infrastructure in Gaza, thereby exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories, In its
press statement SC/14527, issued in May, the Council
called for the rapid and sustainable reconstruction and
recovery in Gaza. China has provided Palestine with
$1 million dollars in cash as emergency humanitarian
assistance. We welcome the efforts of the United
Nations, the World Bank, Egypt and other countries
of the region towards rebuilding Gaza. We urge
Israel to open the relevant crossings in Gaza, fully
lift its blockade against Gaza as soon as possible
and facilitate access for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction supplies rather than creating obstacles
and setting preconditions.
The protracted turmoil in the Palestinian-Israeli
situation in recent years is caused largely by the fact
that the Middle East peace process has been diverted
from its correct track, the United Nations resolutions
have not been implemented and Palestine’s right to
independent statehood has been repeatedly violated.
The international community must take an objective
and impartial stand and make vigorous efforts to
relaunch the peace process. The Security Council must
implement its mandate to maintain international peace
by promoting efforts to alleviate the situation, rebuild
trust and seek a political settlement. Countries that
have significant influence in the region must take an
objective and impartial stand and refrain from favouring
one side and from practising double standards.
China supports the United Nations, in particular
Special Coordinator Wennesland, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
other regional organizations, Egypt, Qatar and other
countries in their continued efforts to promote peace
talks and strengthen international coordination so as to
foster broader and more effective cooperation towards
peace. As a true friend of the Palestinian people, China
will continue to to firmly support the just cause of the
Palestinian people to achieve their national rights and
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with full sovereignty and East Jerusalem as its capital,
on the basis of the 1967 borders.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his detailed briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
with its usual words of death, destruction and violations
of all kinds.
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My delegation followed the Special Coordinator’s
briefing with great interest, and we take note
of the Secretary-General’s observations on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (see
S/2021/584). The report gives no cause for optimism,
and we can but reiterate the same truths. After several
years of paralysis, in 2016 the Security Council reached
a historic consensus, which enabled the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). The objective of that resolution
was to preserve the two-State solution as the basis for
a just and lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by demanding that Israel immediately cease all
illegal settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Five years later, it
is regrettable to note that Israel continues to ignore that
resolution as well as many others that preceded it on the
same issue.
The Niger deplores the lack of effective action
to implement resolution 2334 (2016), and we remain
concerned about the worrisome elements highlighted in
the latest report of the Secretary-General. Among such
elements, one can note the violations of the principles
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular the unbridled continuation
of the illegal expansion of settlements on Palestinian
land, including in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
That practice of expropriation and settlement of
Palestinian land has reached a new milestone, with the
planned evictions from the Sheik Jarrah and Silwan
neighbourhoods, which, unfortunately, led to the
deadly 11-day conflict between the Israeli army and
Hamas last month.
My delegation notes that the intensification of
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories undermines the rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination,
eroding the prospects for the establishment of a
future sovereign, contiguous, independent and viable
Palestinian State, while also increasing the risk of
confrontation. The Security Council must therefore do
everything that it can to stop such activities.
At this point in my statement, I would like to mention
another equally worrisome element, also highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report, which characterizes
Israel’s policy in the occupied Palestinian territories,
namely, the continued demolition of Palestinian
structures, the seizure of property and the forced
eviction of Palestinian families from their homes, very
often on the basis of military regulations. In only three

S/PV. 8804

months, no fewer than 72 Palestinian structures have
been demolished or seized and nearly 218 households in
East Jerusalem, comprising 970 people, including 424
children, face eviction proceedings in Israeli courts.
The despair and desolation of entire families put on the
street can only fuel the risk of further confrontation.
All that is done in flagrant violation of international
law, which forbids the occupying Power from taking
such actions. We call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to work to reverse the trend that has led to the deplorable
acts of the past month, which will only deepen the
divisions and jeopardize the possibility of a peaceful
coexistence between the two peoples.
Therefore, in the light of the events of May, we
call on the international community, the Quartet,
the members of the Council and regional actors to
continue to use their influence to achieve a halt to all
acts and practices that jeopardize peace and peaceful
coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians. It is also
crucial to work for the resumption of the peace process
with a view to achieving the only viable two-State
solution to the conflict.
The situation in Gaza is another source of concern
so rightly addressed by the Secretary-General’s report.
As we know, long before the outbreak of tensions in
May, the Gaza Strip, a veritable open-air prison, was
languishing under the weight of an illegal blockade that
Israel has maintained over the area for 15 years, with
almost half of its population unemployed, a density of
almost 5,500 inhabitants per square kilometre, a failing
health system and a very high rate of contamination
with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That harsh
reality has been compounded by the consequences of
the recent Israeli bombardment, with the total or partial
destruction of several civilian infrastructures, including
residential houses, health centres and schools, the
presence of a large quantity of explosive remnants of
war, including buried bombs, and nearly 8,500 people
without shelter. Those many challenges require urgent
responses for the reconstruction and recovery of Gaza
and the protection and survival of its people.
In that regard, we call on the international
community to be more generous to the population
of Gaza, who have suffered so much. It is essential
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East be provided with
the means to continue to deliver its vital services to the
thousands of Palestinian families in need, especially

21-165709/13

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

after the Israeli bombardment during this time of
the COVID-19 pandemic. It is equally crucial that
Israel, as the occupying Power, fully comply with its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
to ensure the well-being and survival of the population
under its control.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
that now more than ever it is time for us to step up
our efforts and pressure to make resolution 2334
(2016) fully relevant. It is time to act for the creation
of a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian
State because maintaining the status quo will simply
perpetuate hatred, violence and human suffering
in this magnificent region, the cradle of three
monotheistic religions.
The Niger welcomes the efforts of Tor Wennesland
and reaffirms its full commitment to supporting all
of the international community’s efforts to reach a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Wennesland, for his continued efforts
in advancing the peace process with his counterparts in
the Middle East Quartet and key regional partners, as
well as Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
The Secretary-General’s current report (S/2021/584)
reminds us once again of the fragility of the 20 May
ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas. Based
on the current events over the past couple of weeks,
of great concern is Jerusalem becoming the core of
clashes, with different parties trying to exploit the
sensitive status of Jerusalem to pursue violent ends.
While congratulating the new Israeli Government,
we urge it now to resolve possible forced evictions of
Palestinian families from their homes in Sheikh Jarrah
and Silwan neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem. We call
on all parties to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and
acts of provocation and incitement, including violent
rioting, marches and the exploitation of popular anger
by extremist groups. Such acts contribute further to the
fragility of the peace of Jerusalem and of the region.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects alarming
figures of fatalities, injuries and displacements. I
reaffirm Kenya’s condemnation of all acts of violence
and other breaches on resolution 2334 (2016), by all
parties, including acts of terrorism as well as all acts
of provocation, incitement, evictions and any form of
10/13

24/06/2021

collective punishment in the destruction and demolition
of civilian infrastructure.
We strongly condemn the recent launches of
incendiary devices from Gaza by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other militant groups. No cause
can justify the deliberate targeting of civilians. Those
terrorist acts must cease.
As Kenya has stated before, the practicality and full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will need to
address the issue of settlements, territorial contiguity
and the viability of the two-State solution. The
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian
occupied territory, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, remains a major obstacle
to the realization of the vision of a two-State solution,
whereby two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace and within secure and recognized borders
based on the 1967 lines.
The implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will
also need to address the immediate socioeconomic
repercussions of acts that violate all aspects of the
resolution, including those that continue to entrench the
economic isolation of parts of the region from the wider
regional and global economy.
All those elements have implications for the peace,
security and stability of the broader Middle East region.
Kenya welcomes the ongoing efforts towards an
integrated humanitarian recovery package in Gaza.
The strengthened role and reinforced funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East will also go a long way to
addressing a broader set of socioeconomic challenges
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We encourage
all efforts to ensure that the recovery and rebuilding
is protected from being exploited by terrorist groups,
who use human shields to launch their attacks or hide
their weaponry.
We welcome and urge continued efforts aimed at
ensuring equity in access to vaccines and medical care
as a prerequisite for equitable socioeconomic recovery.
I conclude by reaffirming that the recent gains
achieved following the 11 days of hostilities in May need
to be safeguarded to reinforce the underlying principles
of resolution 2334 (2016) — namely, achieving the
stabilization of the situation, reversing negative trends
on the ground and creating conditions for successful
direct final-status negotiations. We saw immediate
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

positive regional mediation efforts and dynamics, and
we believe that, if they are reinforced by a commitment
to the principle of building bridges on multiple
platforms, they will contribute to the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing, which,
together with the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/584), painted a grim picture of developments in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
Illegal settlement activity further entrenches the
illegal Israeli occupation, undermining the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, encroaching
on Palestinian land and natural resources, hampering
free movement and increasing the risks of violent
confrontation. And it undermines the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution.
Ireland condemns violence by Israeli settlers
against Palestinians, including damage to property and
farmland, and recalls Israel’s obligation to ensure the
safety and security of the Palestinian population and
to investigate.
Ireland also strongly condemns rocket and other
attacks by Hamas and others from the Gaza Strip
into Israel. Ireland calls on Hamas to provide full
information on the fate of two Israeli civilians and on
the remains of two Israeli soldiers, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
We acknowledge Israel’s legitimate security
concerns but recall that self-defence must be exercised
in a proportionate way and in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
In the wake of the recent conflict, Ireland calls
on Israel to work with others to ensure the unimpeded
provision of humanitarian assistance to the people of
Gaza. Failing that, the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate and the needs of the people of
Gaza will continue to grow. Israel must also facilitate the
passage of essential humanitarian and reconstruction
personnel, including Palestinian nationals.
Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s call for an
integrated and robust package of support for swift and
sustainable reconstruction and recovery that supports
the Palestinian people and strengthens their institutions.
We reiterate our strong support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine

S/PV. 8804

Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies and commend its staff for their continued
unstinting service. The de facto authorities in Gaza
must allow them to do that work — not least for the wellbeing of the civilian population. We must acknowledge,
however, as Mr. Wennesland has, that humanitarian or
economic support alone will not address the challenges
in Gaza or in the occupied Palestinian territory as a
whole; only progress towards a lasting political solution
can do that.
Ireland welcomes the new Israeli Government
and looks forward to constructive engagement. We
urge Israel to take steps to address the root causes of
conflict by ending the expansion of illegal settlements,
demolitions and the threat of forced evictions and
allowing for legal construction for Palestinians. As
resolution 2334 (2016) makes clear, such steps are
essential for salvaging the two-State solution and
reversing the negative trends that imperil the vision of
a viable, contiguous Palestinian State on the 1967 lines,
alongside a secure state of Israel, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I also
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Today we are called on to reflect together on the
ongoing crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory. For
more than 54 years, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
afflicted the Middle East landscape. For the situation
to be mutually acceptable and conducive to a desirable
future for Palestinians and Israelis alike, the violence
must end, and a negotiated political agreement must
conform to a two-State solution, putting an end to
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory. Indeed,
Special Coordinator Wennesland just re-emphasized
the critical importance of the latter. In our view, this is
the only way to achieve lasting peace in the Middle East.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is deeply troubled
by the progressively worsening situation on the ground,
which is moving us further and further away from the
two-State solution. We strongly condemn the Israeli
air strikes in Gaza on 15 June in violation of the
announced ceasefire of 21 May. We call on all parties
to refrain from violence and any acts that would impede
the resumption of constructive dialogue between them.
My delegation rejects the status quo of the
continued Israeli occupation and displacement of
Palestinians in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
as well as the blockade of Gaza that led to the recent

21-1657011/13

S/PV.8804

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

hostilities. We continue to be concerned about the
possible eviction of several Palestinian families from
their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
occupied East Jerusalem. We reiterate our call to Israel
to adhere to international law and comply with relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), and to end the ever-increasing settlement
activities, property demolitions and evictions in
Palestinian territory.
The Security Council must assume its obligations
and responsibilities in maintaining peace and security.
We must send the strong, clear and unequivocal
message to the Israeli Government that policies of
violence against civilians, of provoking religious
sentiment and of political prevarication will not lead to
a positive outcome.
In Gaza, reconstruction demands several urgent
steps, including a unified Palestinian Government
and the lifting of the 15-year-old Israeli blockade.
We commend the role of the United Nations and its
partners in implementing the critical economic and
humanitarian interventions. However, more needs
to be done to build back better, improve resilience
and successfully recover Palestinian livelihoods. At
this critical juncture for Palestinians in Gaza, it is
imperative that the international community increase
funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and support
the flash appeal requesting $95 million to address
the needs of 1.1 million Palestinians in the areas of
protection, health, water and sanitation, education and
food security.
In closing, we remain committed to working with
the parties and members of the Security Council for an
end to the occupation with the creation of a thriving
Palestinian State living side by side in peace with
Israel, within secure and recognized borders, and a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the Road Map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his briefing.
In the context of the information provided by
the Special Coordinator on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), we express our concern about
the continuing illegal settlement activity, which is one
12/13

24/06/2021

of the main obstacles to achieving a two-State solution.
We are seriously concerned by the fact that the recent
increase in the pace of issuing construction permits for
new housing units, as well as the seizure of Palestinian
property, has led to escalation.
Over the past month, Palestinians, especially those
in the Gaza Strip, as well as people in Israel, have
witnessed the horrendous consequences of an armed
confrontation. Some 259 Palestinians died, of whom 66
were children. Unfortunately, according to information
we have received, tensions in East Jerusalem,
particularly in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood and
around the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, have not
abated. In those areas and in areas in the West Bank,
clashes between Palestinians and Israelis have been
taking place, and at any moment the situation could
spiral out of control.
In that regard, we call on both sides to show
restraint, and we call on the new Government of
Israel to reject unilateral steps that create irreversible
realities on the ground. We think it is important to,
through the mediation of regional partners — first
and foremost, our Egyptian friends — solidify the
still fragile cessation-of-hostilities regime. We draw
particular attention to the need to preserve the status
quo of Jerusalem’s holy places, with the special role
being played by the Jordanian monarchy. The most
pressing challenge remains providing humanitarian
assistance to the people of Gaza and restoring destroyed
infrastructure. In this regard, we highly value the work
being done by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. whose
funding should be stable and predictable.
In the interests of achieving long-term stabilization,
which is possible only through a just resolution of the
Palestinian question on an international legal basis,
including United Nations resolutions, we intend to
continue efforts aimed at launching a direct PalestinianIsraeli dialogue. We call on our Quartet colleagues
to consider our well-known initiatives, including an
expanded-format meeting with the participation of
States of the region.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
We welcome the formation of the new Israeli
Government, which we hope will continue to
cooperate with the Palestinian Authority, particularly
21-16570

24/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on security, tax-collection and public-health matters.
We also recognize that nearly 30 per cent of the new
Government’s cabinet members are women, and we
hope that the full, equal and substantive participation
of women and minorities will continue to grow.
Furthermore, we applaud efforts towards
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. At the same time, we
urge the Palestinian Authority to call new elections.
Regular, transparent and inclusive elections are a
central foundation for building a democratic State.
Despite last May’s ceasefire, we note with concern
the fragile stability in the area. In the past week alone,
there have been reports of rocket fire from Gaza, and
violence persists in East Jerusalem. We condemn such
attacks on Israel and deplore the disproportionate use
of force by the Israeli army and law- enforcement
agencies. We urge the parties to avoid provocations and
attacks on the civilian population and infrastructure
and that they exercise maximum restraint.
It is imperative that the endless cycle of violence
and reconstruction, which has prevailed in the Gaza
Strip in recent years, be broken. We welcome the recent
meetings between Israeli and Egyptian officials and
the efforts of the Special Coordinator. We hope that
these meetings will contribute to promoting a genuine,
durable and sustainable ceasefire. The prosperity of
the Palestinian population is an element in the security
and stability not only of Palestine and Israel, but of the
Middle East as a whole.
Restrictions on freedom of movement by land and
sea are one of the main causes of the severe humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip.
Population growth has increased the demand for
goods and services, while restrictions severely impact
economic activity. As the Palestinian territories
enjoy close commercial, cultural and family ties, the
movement of people and goods is therefore essential. We
accordingly believe that it imperative to lift the blockade

S/PV. 8804

of Gaza once and for all, guarantee unrestricted access
for humanitarian operations and redouble support
for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. With
regard to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
in addition to the situation in Gaza, the construction
and expansion of settlements continues, as well as the
clashes, in the occupied territories.
Jerusalem must serve an example of tolerance and
coexistence where its inhabitants can live in harmony.
In accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, we condemn all actions
that attempt to alter the demographic composition,
character and status of the city of Jerusalem. The
construction and expansion of settlements, the
confiscation and demolition of property and the
consequent displacement of the Palestinian population
are violations of international humanitarian law,
which represent an obstacle to the peace process. We
call on the civilian population to refrain from attacks
and provocations and urge the Israeli Government to
definitively suspend the eviction of Palestinian families
residing in East Jerusalem.
Lastly, I reiterate the urgent need to address the
underlying causes of the conflict and actions that are
in violation of international law, such as settlement
expansion, for the sake of the peace process, and the
viability of a future Palestinian State. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s call for the two-State solution,
based on international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions. We hope that the Middle East Quartet for
peace and other initiatives will bear fruit as soon as
possible. Palestinians and Israelis deserve a better
prospect for peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

21-1657013/13
