S/2021/930

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 November 2021
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Thirty-second report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 28 July 2021 (S/2021/689).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in its observer capacity,
attended the 117th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, held in Kuwait and Baghdad
on 16 September. Owing to continued coronavirus disease (COVID-19) restrictions, the
session was held in a hybrid format, with both in-person and online participation.
3.
The representative of Kuwait updated the Technical Subcommittee on the
ongoing process of identifying human remains recovered from Samawah, Muthanna
Governorate, and transferred to Kuwait in 2019. He attributed delays in the
identification process to the poor condition of the remains, noting that they had been
severely commingled, but expressed confidence that the process would soon be
completed. He highlighted the progress that had been made by Kuwait, noting that
the complex process of reassembling the commingled human remains and the
subsequent DNA analysis had led to the identification of 40 individuals from the 44
sets of human remains in 48 caskets that had been delivere d to Kuwait in 2019. In all,
38 of the 40 individuals were matched against the Kuwait DNA database of Kuwaiti
and third-country missing persons, and the remaining 2 individuals were matched
against the list of missing persons maintained by Saudi Arabia. Th e remains of the
individual who was identified most recently were repatriated by Kuwait to Saudi
Arabia under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in
October 2021. The process for identifying the remaining four sets of human remains
continues in Kuwait. When the process is concluded, Kuwait will hand over to Iraq
any remains that were not matched against its missing persons database.
4.
The representative of Iraq explained that the Iraqi Medico-Legal Directorate had
tried to reassociate the remains recovered in Samawah in 2019 and had tried to conduct

21-15163 (E)

111121

*2115163*

S/2021/930

DNA extraction before handing them over to Kuwait, but noted the challenge posed by
the condition of the remains, which had been commingled owing to improper handling.
As a way forward, he proposed exchanges of technical laboratory expertise between
Kuwait and Iraq. The representative of Kuwait welcomed the proposal for bilateral
cooperation at the technical level and extended an invitation to the Iraqi delegation to
visit the laboratory in Kuwait on the margins of the next meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee held in Kuwait, should the COVID-19 situation permit it.
5.
Regarding the remains recovered in Samawah in January 2020 and transferred
to Kuwait in September 2020, the representative of Kuwait confirmed that their
reassembly had been finalized and that the identification process had begun. The
representative of Kuwait expected that the process for identifying that set of remains
would be more expeditious than for the first set, which had been recovered and
transferred to Kuwait in 2019.
6.
The representative of Iraq informed the Technical Subcommittee that the
Ministry of Defence had made continued attempts to reach out to two potential
witnesses with information on sites in Samawah. He added that the Ministry had been
making efforts to obtain more information on another potential site in Samawah,
which was previously referred to by the Governor of Muthanna and discussed by the
members of the Technical Subcommittee during its 10 9th meeting, held on 29 July
2019. The representative of Kuwait emphasized that Samawah remained a promising
site for further exploration.
7.
Providing an update on points of interest at the Karbala’ sites, the representative
of ICRC reported that an existing arrangement with a member of the Technical
Subcommittee regarding the provision of satellite and aerial imagery would be
extended to Iraq and Kuwait, which would allow ICRC to include Karbala’ in requests
for such imagery. The representative underlined the ongoing commitment of ICRC to
researching the national archives of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and to keeping the parties updated on progress made in that area.
8.
Regarding the Khamisiyah site, the representative of Ira q stated that, following
an exploratory mission conducted by the Ministry of Defence on 16 and 17 June, the
excavation mission for the site remained postponed owing to COVID -19 restrictions.
He expressed hope that the mission would be conducted before the end of 2021. ICRC
noted through its representative that it would include the Khamisiyah site in the
requests for satellite and aerial imagery.
9.
The Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to follow up with the authorities
responsible for the Salman Pak site (the cemetery) on the process of rehabilitating graves.
10. Updates were provided on plans to facilitate a visit to Kuwait of a witness with
possible information on the naval base in Kuwait, a subject discussed during the 116th
meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, held in June 2021. The representative of Iraq
noted that all official authorizations had been granted by the Government of Iraq to
facilitate the visit of the witness to Kuwait, including the issuance of a passport. The
representative of Kuwait reiterated the readiness of Kuwait to facilitate the visit,
which could be planned on the margins of the next meeting of the Subcommittee held
in Kuwait or before that, if possible, should the COVID -19 situation permit it.
11. The representatives of Iraq and Kuwait exchanged updates on efforts to contact
a witness who claimed to have information regarding the Mahawil site in Babil
Governorate. The representative of Iraq noted that the Ministry of Defence had
continued to reach out to the witness, but had not yet scheduled a meeting. During the
meeting of the Technical Sub-Committee, the representative of Kuwait managed to
contact the witness and confirmed that individual’s readiness to cooperate and to be
recontacted by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq. The representative of Iraq affirmed
2/4

21-15163

S/2021/930

that the Ministry would soon make further attempts to establish contact with the
witness. The representative of Kuwait stated that the Mahawil site was promising, as
had been mentioned by the Iraqi delegation during previ ous meetings.
12. Outreach efforts regarding the identification of further witnesses were discussed
during the meeting of the Technical Subcommittee. The representative of Iraq
presented the Subcommittee with a video of a new call for witnesses and reitera ted
the commitment of the Ministry of Defence to continuing to broadcast calls for
witnesses through the media on a quarterly basis, the most recent of which was issued
in August 2021 and which contained contact details for the Human Rights Directorate
of the Ministry, the ICRC delegation in Iraq and Kuwaiti diplomatic representation in
Iraq. The representative of Kuwait reiterated that it was important for witnesses to be
able to contact the offices of ICRC as well as Kuwaiti and Iraqi diplomatic
representations outside Iraq. The representative of Iraq agreed to consider the Kuwaiti
proposal with relevant Iraqi authorities.
13. On 24 August, my Special Representative for Iraq met in New York with the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait, Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi, who praised UNAMI
cooperation with ICRC and with the members of the Tripartite Commission. The
Ambassador invited both my Special Representative and my Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance to visit Kuwait. The Spe cial
Representative accepted the invitation and noted that a visit would soon be planned.
14. On 13 September, my Deputy Special Representative met the Undersecretary of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Legal and Multilateral Affairs of Iraq, Qahtan
Al-Janabi, with whom she discussed the Kuwaiti missing persons and property file.
The Undersecretary reiterated his Government’s commitment to cooperating with all
sides and to the resolution of outstanding issues between Iraq and Kuwait.
15. On 20 September, UNAMI met the Directorate of Human Rights of the Ministry
of Defence of Iraq and discussed preparations for the training of the Ministry’s
dedicated staff on the use of ground-penetrating radar. The training, which was
postponed owing to COVID-19, is scheduled for November 2021. UNAMI is
organizing the training in partnership with geospatial expert trainers at the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
16. During the meeting of my Deputy Special Representative with Mr. Al-Janabi,
Mr. Al-Janabi noted that additional books, microfilm and other property had recently
been located in various departments. He expressed confidence that another shipment
containing additional Kuwaiti property could be sent to Kuwait by the end of 2021.
Mr. Al-Janabi reiterated his Government’s commitment to identifying any means that
could facilitate the search for the missing Kuwaiti national archives.

IV. Observations
17. With the COVID-19 pandemic continuing to pose a global challenge, it is
encouraging to witness the commitment of and continuing collaboration between the
members of the Tripartite Commission and the significant efforts of the Technical
Subcommittee to make progress on the important file under the steadfast guidance
and leadership of ICRC. The combined efforts of the Ministries of Defence, Foreign
Affairs and Health of Iraq attest to that country’s continuous commitment to playing
its part in making progress in that regard.
21-15163

3/4

S/2021/930

18. Despite the complexities of the identification process owing to the commingling
of the human remains, the General Department of Criminal Evidence in Kuwait is
steadily bringing to light the identity of missing persons. The proposal between
Kuwait and Iraq to exchange technical laboratory expertise is another sign of
constructive relations between the two sides.
19. The continued efforts of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq to reach out to new
witnesses with information and leads regarding potential burial sites have begun to
bear fruit. I hope that new information will come to light soon that will help to point
to the location of new possible burial sites. I encourage the Tripartite Commission
members to do their utmost to provide any available aerial and satellite imagery that
could contribute to that end.
20. I welcome the efforts of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq to locate
additional missing Kuwaiti property, and I hope that progress can be made with regard
to the missing Kuwaiti national archives.
21. In the coming period, my Special Representative for Iraq, my Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance and the UNAMI staff
will continue to spare no effort to advance progress on the very important
humanitarian file.

4/4

21-15163
