S/PV.7373

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7373rd meeting

Thursday, 29 January 2015, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Klein
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

15-02480 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1502480*

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): May I start by
conveying our appreciation for your efficient and
productive presidency of the Security Council during
the month of January. I wish to commend you, Sir, for
your poise in presiding over our work.
In 2015, we continue to face significant challenges,
with persistent conflicts provoking untold human
suffering and an ever-growing number of victims.
Death, refugees, displaced persons, new and more
divers terrorist threats are contributing to a world where
our remarkable scientific and technological progress
contrast sharply with the most heinous behaviour of
some human beings.
It is it is this dual reality that we have been facing in
the Security Council while trying to find solutions to the
grim realities of our contemporary world. Quite often,
it appears that those who foster war and disintegration
might have the upper hand, but we must not fall into
despair because the international community has
entrusted to us the inalienable task of upholding the
principles of peace and the rule of law. I would like
to share my views on some areas for the Council has
not performed how it should, given its inability to unite
and, in other instances, to find common ground to
address what are very complex issues indeed, related to
war and the search for peace.
The continuing crisis in Syria, the rising tensions
of the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
the deteriorating situation in Yemen, the growing
threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and
the mounting threats relating to the situations in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic constitute heavy burdens for which
we must remain as steadfast and effective as possible,

2/18

29/01/2015

with a view to reducing the growing threats of conflict
and the humanitarian disasters associated with them.
We remain current deeply concerned by the lack
of unity within the Council to foster an effective
political solution to the conflict in Syria. Even though
there has been significant progress in the destruction
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, no real
progress has been made to find a political solution,
which remains the best way forward. We continue to
urge members of the Council to unite and promote a
diplomatic and peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis
through dialogue and negotiations.
We are also concerned at the lack of significant
progress towards the resumption of peace talks between
Israel and Palestine, which is also due to the lack of a
consensus position within the Council and the Council’s
inability to move forward in supporting the two-State
solution for Israel and Palestine.
Yemen, which was on the right path towards
democratic reform, is slowly spiralling out of control.
Here, again, the Security Council should be more
assertive due to the risk of Al-Qaida terrorists advancing
into the Arabian peninsula.
Fortunately, the Security Council has been able
to keep its unity in the fight against terrorism. The
proliferation of terrorist groups, such as ISIS, Al-Qaida
and Boko Haram, among others, and the alarming
growth and reach of their operations, post a grave threat
to the world. We must preserve our essential unity in
this fight, which concerns us all.
Even though there has been some significant
progress in the peacekeeping missions in Africa, we
are concerned by the fragile nature of many situations.
In the Democratic Republic of the Cong, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, despite being
under an ultimatum to disarm and surrender, continues
to defy the Security Council. We should not allow this
to continue.
Another case where the international community
and the Security Council are striving to broker a peace
agreement, the Central African Republic, has obtained
meagre results to date.
Burundi also continues to experience political
turmoil, ahead of legislative and presidential elections
currently scheduled for May and August 2015,
respectively, requiring the commitment of the Security
Council to assist in the electoral process.

15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Regarding Mali, we are witnessing a grim situation,
with terrorist acts, attacks on peacekeepers and great
difficulties in engaging in a meaningful political
process. We applaud the role of Algeria in leading
efforts to bring about a peaceful solution.
The threat of Boko Haram has finally met with a
response from the Security Council. We must now step
up our efforts to assist the countries of the region to
face that terrorist group, which has provoked so much
suffering and destruction.
In Central and West Africa, the near future is full
of uncertainty, with a number of countries expected
to hold elections, requiring the strong support and
commitment from the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and political missions in those
regions with good offices missions to prevent potential
conflicts associated with those electoral processes.
Before concluding, I would like to mention the
important debates on inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security
and on post-conflict peacebuilding. We agree that
inclusive developments is key for preventing conflict
and enabling long-term stability and peace. With
regard to post-conflict peacebuilding, the successful
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants, the
incorporation of gender issues and the promotion of
dialogue and pluralism are essential elements for the
consolidation of peace.
In conclusion, we are fully dedicated to the work
of the Security Council, to promoting its unity as a
prerequisite effectively to resolve fundamental issue
related to international peace and security. We will
continue to cooperate with our partners in the Council
in dealing with ongoing and emerging situations alike
in the most effective way.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): As a newly elected
member of the Security Council completing our first
month of service, New Zealand thanks Chile for its
very able stewardship during January, not least in the
thematic debates your promoted, Sir, and the important
visit to Haiti, which you proposed and which give us a
great deal of valuable information. We also commend
your scheduling of meetings at short notice when the
need arose, and your use of the full range of available
tools for members to engage informally in discussions
on critical emerging issues. I would highlight, in that
regard, the informal interactive dialogue on the Central

S/PV.7373

African Republic Commission of Inquiry and the Arria
formula meeting on human rights and peacekeeping
operations.
In discharging its day-to-day duties, it is very
important that the Council not lose sight of its
responsibility on behalf of the broader United Nations
membership to respond quickly to emerging threats to
peace and security. When urgent matters do require our
attention, New Zealand encourages all members to work
constructively together to reach swift agreement on the
Council’s public positioning. If, for example, in just the
past week, we had remained silent on the most clear-cut
issues — and I think in particular of events in Nigeria,
Yemen and Lebanon — and if we had been unable to
agree on even the simplest language of condemnation
or concern, then the Council’s relevance could have and
would have been called into question. Acting swiftly
and speaking with unanimity will help ensure that
ongoing relevance. Making that comment, I find myself
very much aligned with the similar comments made by
my colleague, the representative of Angola.
Reflecting on the Council’s work in January, New
Zealand has viewed a number of issues with very
deep concern, not least the continued perpetration of
atrocities by Boko Haram. We welcome the efforts of
Nigeria and the region to combat that threat, including
the establishment of the multinational task force.
Boko Haram is, without a doubt, a significant threat
to international peace and security, and New Zealand
hopes that the Council will support regional efforts to
combat that threat, and extends its hand of support to
Nigeria in its efforts to combat Boko Haram.
In the absence of regular conflict-prevention
briefings, it is very important that the Council take
every other possible opportunity to be briefed by the
Secretariat on emerging issues, including, if necessary,
by doing it under “Any other business”. We welcome
such developments during January, in particular in
respect of Yemen, on which we had two such briefings
at short notice. Obviously, the Council, with its very
full agenda, must find a balance between responding
in a timely manner to events through its products
and statements and ensuring that such messaging is
representative of all 15 members.
In that regard, New Zealand thanks its fellow
Council members, both permanent and elected, for
their ongoing work as penholders on particular issues
and situations. That is important work on behalf of
the Council. We do, however, regard it as essential

15-024803/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

that all members be given adequate time to consider
both formal and informal texts, particularly when the
relevant timelines are well-known, well-established
and known in advance, such as with dates for the
renewal of mandates, and that, where necessary, there
be adequate time for face-to-face negotiations on the
texts in question.
Wrap-up sessions can be valuable opportunities
for us to reflect on the way we have gone about our
business during the month under review, and to assess
how those methods might be improved. Moreover,
a measure of public and therefore transparent selfreflection can also provide the broader United Nations
community with some insight into the workings of
the Council, particularly given that so much of our
business is inevitably transacted in the consultations
room, through email exchanges or in small informal
groupings of Council members. While New Zealand
feels that there is real utility in this wrap-up format,
not least from a transparency perspective, we believe
we should make even more efforts to ensure that these
meetings are dynamic and relevant. We specifically
suggest that future presidencies consider recommending
to the Council that these sessions be opened up to allow
representatives of regional groups to participate under
rule 39 and to give us their assessment of the way in
which the Council is going about its work on their
behalf.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this wrap-up session for the month
of January 2015 in open format. As Malaysia has stated
before, open meetings of this nature allow for greater
transparency and afford better insight into the work of
the Council, especially for non-Council members and
other stakeholders. We will continue to support the
holding of such sessions. I also take this opportunity
to thank you personally, Cristián, and your team at the
Chilean Mission for guiding us through the Council’s
work in January with great leadership, wisdom and
patience.
At the same time, I would like to thank you and
Ambassador Samantha for the briefings on the Council’s
recent mission to Haiti (see S/PV.7372), which, in our
view, went smoothly and successfully. Malaysia shares
the assessment that the Council’s visit to Haiti was
especially timely. We believe that the visit provided the
necessary impetus for the parties in Haiti to continue to
pursue peaceful negotiations with a view to resolving
their differences and in order to overcome the deadlock

4/18

29/01/2015

over electoral reforms, which has prevented the country
from realizing its political and socioeconomic potential
for far too long.
Malaysia also commends Chile for organizing
three open debates during the course of its presidency.
The themes for the debates — namely, the situation in
the Middle East (see S/PV.7360), inclusive development
and the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/PV.7361), and the protection of civilians — are all
current issues and brought about broad participation
from non-Council members, attesting to the importance
of these issues.
At this stage, I would like to share some of the
reflections, insights and experience that Malaysia has
gained after joining the Council roughly a month ago.
The first observation is on how quickly time passes
when one is a Council member. Secondly, and although
I note that this point has been raised before, I feel
compelled to reiterate it. The Council’s work appears
to have increased over time and continues to do so.
The fact that the Council remains engaged and meets
more frequently on various issues and situations on its
agenda indicates the importance and centrality of its
role in managing and maintaining international peace
and security. Given the enormity and gravity of its
responsibility, the Council must continue to ensure that
it is able to respond and address such challenges in the
most appropriate, effective and timely manner.
As you rightly indicated, Mr. President, the Council
has adopted a number of important resolutions and
made a good number of important pronouncements of
position on various developing or escalating situations
around the world. For instance, we recall that, for this
month, the Council has adopted several important
resolutions — resolution 2196 (2015) on the situation
in Central African Republic, resolution 2197 (2015) on
Cyprus, and resolution 2198 (2015) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On that note, my delegation
would like to emphasize that the quality of the Council’s
resolutions lies in their implementation and follow-up.
Malaysia hopes that all relevant parties will commit
to implement the provisions of those resolutions.
The Council must remain vigilant in monitoring the
implementation of its resolutions, and we should not
hesitate to address instances of non-compliance.
In addition, the Council has also discussed and
pronounced itself on a number of issues and situations
through numerous statements to the press. We share the
Council’s deepening concern on the markedly increasing
15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

number of terrorist attacks around the world. In addition,
we remain deeply concerned by the escalations of armed
conflict and violence in several situations around the
world. In this context, we are disappointed that the
Council was unable to reach consensus on addressing
the deteriorating situation in Yemen. At the same time,
the deteriorating humanitarian situations in several
conflict areas, including Palestine, Syria and Ukraine,
continue to remain high on the Council’s agenda. It is
a matter of concern that the Council remains sharply
divided on these situations. The incident in southern
Lebanon yesterday is yet another grim reminder of how
untenable the current situation in the Middle East is.
Moving forward, we hope that Council members
will continue to work towards bridging differences
in order to discharge the Council’s Charter-mandated
responsibilities. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to
contributing in that regard.
On working methods, Malaysia is pleased to note
the Council’s continued use of technology, including
through the use of video-teleconferencing facilities, to
engage and interact with the United Nations presence
on the ground. We believe that such practices should
continue. We also note that, on many occasions, the
Council has reacted promptly to address certain
developing situations, including through the early
issuance of press statements. We believe that prompt
reactions by the Council are an important feature of
its work and should continue. Malaysia notes that the
“Any other business” agenda item continues to be used
by countries to discuss certain issues on an exceptional
or urgent basis. We support the continued use of that
practice, as it affords the Council the ability to convene
and react quickly to emerging issues and developing
situations.
We also note the convening of the Arria Formula
meeting initiated by Lithuania on the role of human
rights components in United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions. We value the opportunity provided
to exchange views with colleagues on the ground, in
particular on how the Council could better support not
only their mandates but the mandates of peacekeeping
and political missions as a whole. We believe that
greater use could be made of the Arria Formula format.
In conclusion, I wish to once again express my
delegation’s heartfelt appreciation to you and your
team, Mr. President, for the exemplary manner in
which you guided the Council’s work this this month.
We are pleased and honoured to have worked with you

S/PV.7373

in furthering the aims and purposes of the Council. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the delegation of China on its upcoming presidency of
the Council next month. Malaysia stands ready to work
closely with China and all Council members in pursuit
of our common goals and objectives.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. We greatly appreciate Chile’s leadership
as President this month in enabling the Council to
successfully conduct its work. China will serve as
President for the month of February, and we will do
all that we can to ensure the success of our work next
month. We hope that we will continue to enjoy the full
support of all colleagues on the Council.
With regard to the Council’s work this month’, I
should like to focus on three issues.
First, on the situation of the Middle East, China is
deeply worried about the serious difficulties facing the
peace process in the Middle East, and expresses deep
regret over the fact that the Council failed to adopt draft
resolution S/2014/916, on the question of Palestine,
submitted by Jordan on behalf of the Arab Group of
countries (see S/PV.7360). The stalemate in the peace
talks will inevitably lead to further escalation. China
hopes that the Palestinians and the Israelis alike will
adhere to their strategic choice of peace, stay the course
of the peace talks, meet each other half-way and resume
peace talks as soon as possible. The international
community should enhance coordination and be openminded in an effort to help both sides restore trust.
The Security Council should assume the necessary
responsibility to play an active role in promoting
peace talks, ending the occupation and faciliating the
reconstruction of Gaza. China is ready to enhance its
cooperation with the international community and
to play a greater role in promoting a solution to the
question of Palestine.
The recent security situations on the Lebanese-Israeli
and Syrian-Israeli borders are also troubling. China
urges all parties to abide by the relevant Council
resolutions and the ceasefire agreement, exercise
restraint and avoid actions that might escalate tension
so as to restore calm.
Secondly, on Africa, the Council has considered the
situations in Mali (see S/PV.7355), Côte d’Ivoire (see
S/PV.7358), Burundi (see S/PV.7364), the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.7367) and the work of

15-024805/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

United Nations Office for West Africa (see S/PV.7357),
as well as other topics concerning Africa. This year,
many African countries are planning to hold elections
that attract the broad attention of the international
community. China hopes that he United Nations and
the international community will actively engage in
preventive diplomacy, enhance communication with
relevant countries and support them to successfully hold
their respective elections. China greatly appreciates
the unique and important role played by the African
Union and other African regional and subregional
organizations in addressing regional and internal
conflicts. We hope that the international community
will strengthen cooperation and coordination with the
relevant regional organizations in Africa in jointly
addressing regional challenges and maintaining African
peace and stability.
Thirdly, on Yemen, China is deeply troubled by the
dramatic worsening of the situation in that country. The
top priority now is for all parties in Yemen to exercise
restraint and to avoid actions that might escalate
tensions. They should also bear in mind the long-term
interests of their country and their people; resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultations;
fully implement the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement and the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
initiative; and reach a broad-based consensus on the
future of the country. We support the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Benomar, in his
mediation efforts and good offices. We also welcome
the GCC and other international partners in playing a
constructive role in helping Yemen restore stability at
an early date. China will enhance coordination with the
parties concerned and encourage the Council to play
an active role in finding a solution to the question of
Yemen.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to personally thank you,
Mr. President, and the entire delegation that you head
for the skilful and effective completion of the role of
President in the month that is ending, which has once
again been characterized by a very heavy agenda. I will
focus on a number of key issues.
One focus of our programme of work was the
meeting on the issue of inclusive development (see
S/PV.7359). We agree with the premise that the
interconnection of the issues of ensuring security, human
rights and development has become more relevant in

6/18

29/01/2015

the current period of the United Nations post-conflict
reconstruction of States. The United Nations needs
to assume a coordinating role. Peacebuilding support
must be based on national priorities that are developed
by national Governments and be geared towards the
development of national capacity. At the same time, we
call for moderation and caution in considering issues
within the framework of unofficial formats, particularly
those by the Security Council. We consistently support
the efficient division of labour among the principal
United Nations bodies, as well as consideration by the
Security Council of only those issues that have a direct
bearing on international peace and security.
Discussions in the Security Council have been very
productive on another important topic: peacebuilding.
We reiterate our assessment that the primary aims of
States that have overcome the most active stages of
conflict are consolidating national reconciliation and
establishing security and peace for all their people,
which are essential to avoid any repetition of armed
conflict.
Once again, we did not hear any good news from
the Middle East in the month of January. It has been a
year now since the Palestinians and Israelis suspended
their negotiations, and their rift is widening. The
situation on the ground continues to worsen, and the
issues concerned with normalizing the situation in the
Gaza Strip after the bloody conflict in 2014 still remain
unresolved. Under those conditions, all opportunities
must be used to unblock the peace process. Russia,
especially, is working hard to hold a ministerial meeting
of the Quartet as quickly as possible. Also, the work of
the Security Council needs to be more focused on the
Middle East peace process.
Another source of concern is the escalating
situation on the borders between Israel and Lebanon
and Syria. We call on all sides for restraint and caution.
We understand that emotions are heated, but the region
cannot afford to have another hotspot of conflict. That
could completely destabilize the region against the
backdrop of growing terrorist threats. In that regard, I
would like to express our condolences to the delegation
of Spain in connection with the death yesterday of a
Spanish peacekeeper of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.
The Syrian conflict that has been dragging on has
a very negative impact on the situation in the Middle
East. We would like to once again emphasize that the
only way to stop the conflict is through dialogue. In
15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

order to launch the process of national reconciliation,
all opportunities must be utilized. In that connection,
we have undertaken considerable efforts in launching
inter-Syrian consultative contacts in Moscow. Russia’s
efforts on the Syrian settlement are completely
transparent. We are always ready to work on the basis
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
with all those who are truly interested in launching the
process of political resolution.
Everyone needs to understand that the process
will be lengthy and will require additional efforts in
developing a truly effective format for dialogue. Not all
representatives of the opposition who were invited to
Moscow were able to attend. We do not consider that a
major problem. Efforts to promote national dialogue in
Syria will continue, not only by us; we see added value
in the efforts by Egypt. We will welcome any effort by
other States or organizations that are aimed at creating
optimal conditions for inclusive national dialogue,
within the framework of which the Syrians will reach
an agreement by themselves. We also see potential
in the mission of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, who is promoting a
number of interesting ideas that, of course, will require
the support of all interested parties.
The Council has considered the situation in
the Ukraine twice this month. Unfortunately, the
discussions have been highly politicized, while the
recent tragedies there have become pretexts for stoking
frenzy rather than promoting honest discussion about
the reasons for the Ukrainian crisis and ways of
overcoming it. We have again seen the flawed practice
of colleagues attempting to include unadoptable
provisions for propaganda purposes in documents
that are humanitarian in essence. We are certain that
genuine results in settling the conflict can be achieved
only through direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donetsk
and Lugansk, which the Ukrainian authorities have
declined for the time being, having adopted the ruinous
course of trying to solve the situation in the south-east
by force. Without the inclusive political process that
must be the framework for parameters of constitutional
reform, as required by the Geneva declaration and the
Minsk negotiations, an national settlement will be
unattainable.
In conclusion we would like to once again welcome
the delegations of Angola, , Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela, which joined us on 1 January and
which right from the start have begun to make very

S/PV.7373

useful contributions to the work of the Council. We also
wish every success to the delegation of China, which
will lead the Council in February. It can count on our
full support.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Mr. President,
I join my colleagues in expressing my delegation’s
appreciation to you personally and to your team for your
efficient presidency of the Council during this month.
A good part of the work of the Council in January
was carried out in the form of open debates and open
briefings, including an open briefing by the Chairs of
the sanctions committees. We also appreciate your use
of Arria formula and interactive dialogues during the
presidency, and we appreciate the kind words of our
Malaysian colleague with regard to the Arria formula
meeting that was organized by my delegation.
Although start-of-the-month horizon-scanning
seems to have fallen out of grace in the Council,
yesterday’s initiative of the Department of Political
Affairs to brief the Council on the situation in Nepal
was a useful reminder, in our view, of why that format
is important. As the Council continues to cope with ever
more numerous crises and wider conflict geography, in
the face of the largest numbers of persons displaced
and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance since the
Second World War, a renewed focus on prevention is
urgent. It is increasingly difficult to muster pledging
funds and troops for peacekeeping operations, and if
we do not improve the United Nations early warning
and conflict-prevention capacities, the gap between the
urgent needs and our ability to address those needs will
continue to widen, with tragic consequences.
In this respect, we welcome the Department of
Political Affairs’ continued use of informal briefings,
“Any other business” briefings, or any other formats
that may serve the purpose of drawing the Council’s
attention at an early stage to potential crises and
conflicts before they erupt, in order to work out
early preventive responses. Being discussed by the
Council should not be seen by countries as some sort
of stigma to be avoided at all costs until it is too late.
On the contrary, it should be seen as a preventive and
helpful remedy that significantly reduces the losses,
particularly human losses, and provides gains in the
longer term.
In Yemen, things this month have taken a dramatic
turn. The country, viewed as a success story only a
year ago, has suffered a significant setback, with both
the President and the Prime Minister resigning from

15-024807/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

their offices and the country itself on the brink of
fragmentation. The Council has been warned about the
continuous spoiler activities of ex-president Saleh and
the consequences of the further violent advances of the
Houthis, including a growth in violent sectarianism,
terrorists strengthening their foothold, and even the
split of the State itself.
The national dialogue outcomes were the result of
a legitimate and inclusive process and cannot simply
be brushed aside if we are ever to achieve sustainable
peace and development in Yemen. We need to push all
political actors in Yemen to agree and, most importantly,
to strictly comply with a new, clear timeframe for
the implementation of key stages in the transition.
Whatever road map is agreed, it must be backed by
credible means to ensure implementation. Otherwise,
the Council’s pronouncements will continue to be
perceived as no more than empty threats.
Some of my colleagues have referred to the issue
of credibility or relevance of the Council, as my
colleague from New Zealand has said. We find it very
unfortunate that, at this critical stage, the Council
failed a few days ago to come up with a statement on
the latest developments in Yemen, and was unable to
muster unity when it was most needed. Next month, the
Council is to review the Yemen sanctions regime, which
was created to help prevent exactly what has happened
in that country — to stop spoilers from undermining
the transition process. That is what we have failed to
do. We believe that a serious discussion is in order
about where we go from here in order not to lose the
Council’s credibility and impact on this very fragile
and potentially explosive situation.
This month, the Council extended the sanctions
regime against the Central African Republic. I wish to
commend the excellent work of the Panel of Experts,
which has produced an impressive report and submitted
19 statements of cases. Although some positive signals
have been seen emanating from the Central African
Republic in the past days, the situation remains
extremely fragile, as seen from the recent kidnappings
of ministers and continuous human rights violations.
Our inaction at this stage would send a bad signal to
all those who are still engaged in perpetrating abuse
and fomenting violence, undercutting our ability to
impact on the further developments of the situation in
the country, and also raising doubts about how serious
we are about tackling impunity.

8/18

29/01/2015

While we note ongoing discussions between the
warring groups of the Central African Republic, we
believe that general amnesty or Government posts
should not be a reward for those committing war crimes,
crimes against humanity and gross violations of human
rights. We also hope that the sanctions committee will
be able to take necessary action within the context of
the recent report of the Panel of Experts.
Finally, let me turn briefly to the issue of Ukraine.
A few days ago, we held our thirtieth open briefing on
the situation in that country (see S/PV.7368). If only
open briefings translated into changes on the ground.
While the Council has managed to maintain a focus
on the continuous deterioration of the situation in
eastern Ukraine and occupied Crimea, we have no
real impact on the ground, alas. In spite of Ukraine’s
efforts to keep the ceasefire alive, the militants have
unilaterally abandoned the ceasefire and continue their
attacks, with a growing number of civilian casualties.
Russian weaponry and mercenaries, without which the
conflict would have expired long ago, continue to flow
freely across the border. In the meantime, while the
events in Mariupol were exploding, Russia concluded
a comprehensive agreement on alliance and strategic
partnership with Georgia’s breakaway Abkhazia region,
which means a de facto annexation of that territory in
all but name. We remain profoundly concerned by the
pattern of expansionist behaviour of Russia vis-à-vis
its neighbours. The Council’s ability to respond to such
situations is once again being tested, as is its credibility.
Let me conclude by joining my colleagues in
wishing the best success to the Chinese presidency
during the month of February. They can count on our
support and cooperation.
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, and to
congratulate you on your leadership and the great work
done by your team for the development and success of
your presidency. At the end of the first month of my
country’s presence, for the fifth time, on the Security
Council, I would like to make some general observations
at this first wrap-up session in which my delegation is
participating.
We are pleased to see the good atmosphere of
collaboration within the Security Council and the many
concrete outcomes we have been able to negotiate and
adopt in recent weeks. My country is and will be a
constant and faithful partner in this work, and we are
15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

very aware of the importance and centrality of the
work of the Security Council to the entire international
peacekeeping and security architecture, as well as the
Council’s responsibility. It was precisely in order to
help maintain peace in the world that we presented our
candidature, and we have always borne in mind that
in electing us, the Member States of the Organization
have entrusted us with that responsibility.
Spain champions a Security Council that is open to
discussion, seeks to broaden its sources of information,
and takes advantage of the work and knowledge of
the entire United Nations system. In that effort of
transparency, we will therefore listen to all Members
of the United Nations on matters on the agenda of the
Security Council, particularly those with a special
interest in them. We will promote decision-making that
bears in mind the points of view of countries, regional
organizations and other stakeholders.
This first month during which we have participated
in the work of the Council has shown us that it is
essential to work in an orderly and predictable fashion,
but that it is equally important to have the necessary
flexibility to deal with questions that call for our
attention. The consultations held on the crisis in Yemen
or, yesterday, in the case of Lebanon, where sadly a
Spanish Blue Helmet lost his life, have demonstrated
the unanimity that Members have always shown in
the fight against terrorism. Moreover, we believe that,
beyond the calendar marked by mandate renewals
and regular consultations and debates, it is essential
for the Council to address all issues affecting world
security, which constitute a variable geometry, and to
use its tools, interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings, which we clearly welcome.
I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to
the Chilean presidency for the ministerial-level debate
held on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security, presided over by
President Michelle Bachelet (see S/PV.7361). That
meeting reminded us that peace has many dimensions
and that the Security Council should bear all of them
in mind when it confronting an issue or creating or
renewing a specific mandate.
The Council’s mission to Haiti, on which we heard
a briefing earlier today (see S/PV.7372), reflected the
importance of the Security Council’s trips to keeping
it up informed and effective on issues on its agenda.
We also welcome tomorrow’s debate on the protection
of civilians. My delegation especially appreciates the

S/PV.7373

focus on the particular vulnerability of women and
children in conflict that the presidency has emphasized
for the debate. Spain is deeply invested in all questions
related to the issue of women, peace and security,
the interconnectedness of which we will continue to
support and champion at all times.
In my delegation’s opinion, the overall outcome of
this month’s work is positive, both because of results
achieved and because the Members of the Council have
come together in a solid group able to agree on many
things. It is essential, however, to show unanimity and
resolve in our response to situations that call for the
Security Council to speak out firmly and in a timely
fashion. That has not always been possible this month,
as those who have spoken before me have made clear.
I wish the greatest success to the delegation of
China when it assumes the presidency of the Council
in February, and I reaffirm that all members count on
our delegation’s continuing to build and strengthen the
Council’s resolve.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I would like
to thank the Mission of Chile for its steady leadership
during the busy month of January. We are grateful, Sir,
for your team’s diligent and conscientious hard work.
As these first few weeks of 2015 have shown,
this year we will be returning to several of the same
crises that we faced last year, while also needing to
turn to new challenges. This month, the Council has
discussed continuing crises in Syria and Ukraine,
growing terrorist threats in West Africa, and continued
friction in the Middle East. With your leadership, sir,
we travelled to Haiti to review the composition of the
United Nations Mission there and to assess the political
climate leading up to elections, as we just discussed
this morning. We also again used the Arria Formula
to inform ourselves informally about human rights
components of peacekeeping operations, and we thank
Lithuania for its initiative in that regard. Tomorrow, we
will finish the month with an important open debate
on protection of civilians. Looking ahead, we see a
number of issues that will certainly need our continued
attention.
First, on Ukraine, according to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the past two
weeks have been the deadliest period in Ukraine since
the 5 September agreement was signed in Minsk.
During this time, an average of 29 people have been
killed each day. More than 5,000 people have been

15-024809/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

killed and almost 11,000 wounded since the conflict
began in April 2014. The conflict reached a new low
point with the attacks on the civilian population of
Mariupol, well away from the Minsk ceasefire lines.
We continue to believe that the only viable solution to
this situation is a political solution, not a military one.
The United States of America urges Russia to withdraw
its armaments and forces from eastern Ukraine and end
its support to the separatists.
On the situation in Yemen, we see that the Security
Council members clearly recognize the seriousness of
the crisis following the resignation of President Hadi
Mansour, the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. We
agree that an immediate ceasefire remains imperative
and that the Yemeni people deserve a clear path back
to a legitimate Yemeni Government, consistent with
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, the national
dialogue outcomes and the resolutions of this Council.
Any understanding reached on the ground should
include clearly defined timelines to complete Yemen’s
draft constitution, to hold a referendum and to launch
national elections. We also continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Adviser Jamal Benomar,
along with the group of 10 ambassadors in Sana’a.
We are pleased to see that some Security Council
members this month raised the findings of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
fact-finding mission reports on Syria, which clearly
point to the Al-Assad regime’s using helicopters to
drop barrel bombs filled with chlorine on three villages
in northern Syria. These actions are clear violations of
resolution 2118 (2013), and the Council should certainly
condemn such actions.
Turning to Africa, we fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s observation that the parties
in Mali need sufficient time to resolve contentious
political issues in order to ensure a truly inclusive,
viable and implementable agreement. That said, we do
need to start seeing progress on this agreement. We
strongly support the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the robust
implementation of its mandate to protect civilians
and United Nations personnel and facilities, as
demonstrated by the critical and important use of its
attack helicopters when its peacekeepers came under
hostile fire in Tabankort in northern Mali on 20 January.
On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/1
to show its concern over security in the eastern part of
10/18

29/01/2015

the country due to the ongoing activities of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). As
the Council said in its statement, the surrenders so
far are not sufficient and do not come close to the full
demobilization of the FDLR that we have called for.
The FDLR must be held accountable, and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must continue to
apply robust military pressure on the FDLR elements
that refuse to demobilize.
In early January, the United Nations Office in
Burundi formally closed and transitioned to the United
Nations Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi
(MENUB) with a mandate to support the country’s
electoral process ahead of the 2015 elections. MENUB
will play an important role in providing support to
the Government in the development of an inclusive
and transparent 2015 elections cycle. We urge the
Government of Burundi to engage productively with the
new Mission to ensure that all political and civil society
leaders play an active role in the electoral process and
that the people of Burundi enjoy a fully free and fair
electoral process.
This month, Special Representative Bernardino
León succeeded in bringing together key Libyan
political leaders for a United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue, holding two rounds in Geneva so
far, one on 14 and 15 January and another that began
26 January. We all welcomed these initiatives through a
press statement on 17 January. We especially commend
those who are engaging in the talks, which are aimed at
producing a unity Government, and we encourage other
Libyan leaders to participate in this effort as well.
For the last three consecutive wrap-up sessions, we
have ended our remarks on the issue of terrorism, and
this month, sadly, is no different. As the Council stated
in its 19 January presidential statement S/PRST/2015/4,
we all condemn the attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram, particularly the suicide bombings in Maiduguri
and Potiskum involving the use of children as suicide
bombers. These events were simply heartbreaking, and
serve as another example of why combatting terrorism
continues to merit the Council’s close and sharp
attention.
This Council also strongly condemned the series
of outrageous terrorist attacks in and around Paris on
7 and 8 January, including the barbaric and despicable
shooting at the offices of Charlie Hebdo magazine.
We have expressed it before, but it is worth repeating
15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

that we extend our deepest sympathies to the people of
France, my country’s first friends, and our condolences
to the family and friends of the 12 people murdered
at the offices of the magazine, the policewoman who
was killed the following day, and the four people who
were murdered in the attack on the kosher market. As
President Obama said in the wake of those attacks,
we must continue to work to see that all our countries
are working together seamlessly to prevent attacks
and to defeat the terrorist networks. The freedom of
expression is a key element in every democracy, and
senseless violence cannot change that.
To conclude, I want to renew a warm welcome
to the newly elected members. We already enjoy and
benefit from working with them. To our Chinese
colleagues who take over the presidency on Sunday,
we look forward to working with them cooperatively
in February and, of course, we wish them a happy new
year — the Year of the Sheep — on 19 February.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing this wrapup session, which provides us with an opportunity to
assess the work of the Council in the month of January.
The open debate on inclusive development for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
held on 19 January (see S/PV.7361), presented an
opportunity for Council members and the wider United
Nations membership to share views on the link between
security and development. Nigeria commends the
Chilean delegation for convening the debate and for
its leadership role in the drafting of the presidential
statement adopted at the debate (S/PRST/2015/3). We
reiterate our firm belief that inclusiveness is vital to
peace and security. Therefore, in our view, the topic
should continue to be of interest to the Security Council.
The Security Council mission to Haiti underscores
the importance of the Council’s direct engagement
with countries on its agenda. The trip allowed Council
members to see first-hand the situation on the ground
and to hear directly from the country’s leaders. We are
satisfied with the outcome of the mission, the report of
which we have just heard (see S/PV.7372).
Nigeria appreciates the unity of purpose
demonstrated by the Council in the adoption, on
19 January, of the presidential statement on Boko
Haram (S/PRST/2015/4). We are cooperating with our
neighbours and coordinating our efforts in order to
effectively confront the menace of the terrorist group.

S/PV.7373

Terrorism is a global problem that requires a global
response. We shall therefore continue to count on the
support of our bilateral and multilateral partners in that
important endeavour. We thank the delegation of New
Zealand for the reaffirmation of its support.
We would like to conclude by thanking you and
your delegation, Sir, for the astute manner in which you
have presided over the Council this month. We extend
our best wishes to the delegation of China and give
assurances of our support and cooperation as it prepares
to assume the presidency of the Council in February.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, let me congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your entire team for the
authority, dedication, efficiency, enthusiasm and
leadership with which you and your delegation have
conducted the work of the Council’s presidency in
the month of January. This has been a month of great
activity, and we would like to focus on several aspects
of particular importance for my delegation.
With regard to the question of Africa, the Council
addressed the situations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia
and West Africa, with particular emphasis on Mali.
Venezuela aspires to be a constructive participant in
that area and is ready to work with African regional
and subregional organizations and all countries of the
region in order to resolve conflicts and build lasting
peace.
The informative Council meeting on peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict, chaired by Mr. Heraldo
Muñoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, on
14 January (see S/PV. 7359) highlighted the role of
exclusion and inequality as root causes of relapse into
conflict.
It is important to highlight some points of
agreement on how to advance the peacebuilding
process, such as the importance of inclusive political
dialogue and short-, medium- and long-term funding
with proper coordination among national, regional and
international entities in implementing recovery policies,
as well as the importance of the leadership of the
country concerned in the design and implementation of
the State’s reconstruction policies. The Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in that regard.
Venezuela shares the goals just mentioned but
recalls that, without addressing the fundamental

15-0248011/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

causes of conflict and relapse — including inequality,
the impact of colonialism, foreign intervention and
occupation and economic dependence — lasting peace
will not be achieved.
January was a busy month in the Middle East.
Events in Yemen were the subject of the Council’s
focus. We hope that a political settlement will be
arrived at between the parties to enable the country to
restore calm and achieve a durable peace agreement
based on strict respect for the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question (see S/PV.7360), provided States
Members of the United Nations an opportunity to
draw attention once again to the Council’s inescapable
responsibility of promoting, with the support of the
parties, a negotiated political solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. That task has become increasingly
necessary to strengthen the credibility and confidence
of the international community in this organ, especially
when a draft resolution (S/2014/916) of fundamental
importance to the Palestinian people did not attain
sufficient votes in the Council for adoption on
30 December (see S/PV.7354), despite majority support
in the General Assembly.
The achievement of a firm and lasting peace on that
issue will require and end to Israeli military occupation
of the Palestinian territories and the establishment
of a Palestinian State with pre-1967, internationally
secure borders, coexisting peacefully with Israel, in
accordance with international law, including the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Security Council should therefore spare
no effort in playing a more active and constructive
role in promoting the two-State solution. We urge the
parties to resume at the earliest negotiations to achieve
a firm and lasting peace.
Venezuela reiterates its strong support for including
Palestine as a fully fledged State Member of the United
Nations and urgently calls upon Israel to immediately
resume the transfer of the customs revenues it is
holding, cease its blockade of Gaza and end its illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territories.
My country was honoured to see President Michelle
Bachelet Jeria, of the brotherly country of Chile,
presiding over the Council on 19 January (see S/PV.7361).
The topic of the open debate, “Inclusive development for
the maintenance of international peace and security”,

12/18

29/01/2015

helped to highlight the links among peace and security
and development. It was a broad debate with the
participation of over 80 countries. Although we have
some doubts about the appropriateness of addressing
that issue in the Security Council, we value the efforts
made by the Chilean delegation to highlight the inverse
relationship between inequality and exclusion, on the
one hand, and peace and the well-being of nations, on
the other. We cannot but agree that combating social and
economic inequality and exclusion in all their aspects
is an urgent task of all States that desire lasting peace.
In that context, we value the presence of President
Bachelet Jeria in presiding over the Council.
Another issue that attracted the attention of the
Security Council during the month was the working
visit to Haiti from 23 to 25 January, on which we heard
a briefing this morning (see S/PV.7372), which we fully
endorse. We participated in the mission, together with
the other members of the Council. The mission made
it possible to reaffirm the Council’s support to the
Government and the people of Haiti in their in their
efforts in building peace, democracy and stability
and promote the country’s recovery and sustainable
development. Furthermore, the visit allowed us to see
on the ground the important role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti in maintaining peace.
Venezuela therefore reiterates its appeal for
ongoing and increased assistance to Haiti with a view
to assisting it in overcoming the economic and social
problems that have affected the country for decades
and that were further exacerbated by the natural
disaster of 2010. Venezuela welcomes all assistance to
the Haitian people. We support a free and sovereign
Haiti’s democratic development and political and social
stability.
Concerning the situation in Syria, Venezuela
would like to reiterate that the only way to stop the
armed conflict and the complex humanitarian situation
in Syria is through a negotiated and inclusive political
solution to the crisis. To that end there should be an
immediate ceasefire, which will help to reach a
firm and lasting peace ensuring reconciliation for
our brotherly Arab country, with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We support efforts
aimed at achieving peace in Syria and reject any
outside interference or financing of armed and terrorist
groups designed to effect regime change in this Arab
State, in violation of international law. In that regard,
Venezuela welcomes the Russian Federation’s offer to

15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

provide a platform for a dialogue between the parties
to the conflict.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate
our fraternal congratulations to the delegation of Chile
on its successful leadership of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to wish every success and our full
support to the delegation of China during its presidency
for the month of February. Lastly, we support and agree
with New Zealand’s proposal that during these wrap-up
meetings of the Council we should include the voices of
the countries involved in the Council’s decisions.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
leadership you have shown in conducting the work of
the Council during your term, as well as your entire
support team.
You have made a sustained attempt to continue
the Council’s efforts to meet the requirements of
transparency, as outlined in presidential note S/2010/507.
We commend your initiative in organizing an open
debate on development as it relates to the maintenance
of international peace and security (see S/PV.7361), a
subject that the Security Council had not covered since
2011 and that attracted great interest among Member
States, along with the fact that your country’s President
personally took part in and led the debate, which
culminated in the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/3). As we affirmed in our statement
in the debate, security and development are highly
interdependent, and even while the responsibility
for preventing conflict lies chiefly with States, the
Security Council nonetheless has a primary role to play
in countries in post-conflict situations, particularly
when it comes to implementing its resolutions.
Regarding the meeting on the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/PV.7359), Council members noted
the progress that has already been made in that area,
while emphasizing that much still remained to be done.
Among other things, the Security Council is awaiting
with interest the results of the forthcoming 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture, a process
that began last month conjointly with the General
Assembly. For our part, we emphasized the importance
of proper identification by States themselves of their
national priorities as a basis for intervention by the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as on strengthening
national institutions so as to restore the authority of the
State and ensure the provision of basic services to the
people.

S/PV.7373

Concerning Burundi, while some progress has
been made in achieving peace and stability, much
remains to be done, particularly when it comes to
expanding the political space. However, we welcome
the establishment of the United Nations Electoral
Observer Mission in Burundi, which on 1 January
began official operations alongside the African Union,
the European Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie, while hoping that the elections will
adhere to democratic standards so as to ensure stability
and peace in the country.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is still worrying, owing to the political challenges
related to the electoral process and the threat posed by
armed groups, including the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda. We welcome the launch of the
joint military operation against those groups between
the Congolese armed forces and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, while hoping that the necessary
measures will be taken to ensure the protection of the
civilian population and their access to humanitarian
aid.
My delegation has concluded that, regrettably, the
Council remains divided on the issue of the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Far from
calming the atmosphere of defiance between Israelis
and Palestinians, recent events have seen the prospects
for the speedy resumption of negotiations recede even
further. At the meeting on the situation in Palestine
(see S/PV.7360), Council members noted the failure
of the draft resolution submitted to the Council on
30 December (S/2014/916), the purpose of which was
to reach an agreement on ending Israel’s occupation by
the end of 2017. However, we should note that Council
members were unanimous in urging the international
community to play an active role in promoting a twoState solution.
We commend Chile for organizing a mission to
Haiti designed to enable the Council to see at first hand
the implementation of the stabilization process in Haiti
in the wake of the disaster that devastated it in 2010.
In conclusion, I would like to once again reiterate
my congratulations to you and your team, Sir, for the
enormous amount of work tackled, the relevance of the
subjects addressed and the perseverance you displayed
throughout your term. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate China on its assumption
of the presidency for the month of February, assure its

15-0248013/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

entire team of my delegation’s unreserved support and
wish them every success.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Chilean
Mission on guiding the Council smoothly through a
hectic first month of 2015. I would also like to welcome
once again our five new colleagues, whose contributions
we are already appreciating.
I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s wrap-up meeting, and pleased that we are
again holding it in public. We have covered a broad
range of issues in January, including the worrying
developments in Yemen, the escalating violence in
Ukraine, the situations in the Middle East, Syria, Mali
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as emergency discussions on Lebanon and Nepal. I
congratulate you on the informative open debate on
inclusive development and the prevention of conflict
(see S/PV.7361), and I look forward to tomorrow’s
debate on the important role that women must play in
the protection of civilians.
Together with the United Nations community,
we commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the
liberation of Auschwitz and expressed our solidarity in
the fight against anti-Semitism. In addition, the Council
travelled to Haiti to see at first hand the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. And
sadly, we have already agreed on five press statements
this year condemning new terrorist atrocities.
Equally sadly, we have also started this year as
we finished the last, addressing a series of seemingly
intractable conflicts that have divided us. In this
seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations, it
is more important than ever that we face up to those
challenges and work harder to overcome the divisions
that have prevented the Security Council from taking
action. I would like to mention three such conflicts.
First, we have already met twice this year to discuss
the worrying escalation in violence in eastern Ukraine.
The separatist attack on Mariupol last Saturday that
killed 30 people was a provocative and indiscriminate
act that risks increasing the scope and severity of this
crisis. This was not the first separatist attack targeting
civilians this year. They could not have carried these
attacks without Russian support and military hardware.
Because despite our calls, the Minsk agreements
of 2014 in September remain unfulfilled and the
Russian military support for the separatists continues

14/18

29/01/2015

unabated, in clear violation of Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity. If Russia wishes to work for a
peaceful solution, it needs to match its leaders’ words
with deeds. Trust in Russia is currently at a low and
hard work will be required to regain it, but a political
settlement should be achievable and Russia will find
willing international partners, if it is prepared to change
course on Ukraine.
We have also discussed the brutal conflict in
Syria. An additional 76,000 people were killed in
Syria in the course of last year, the majority through
the regime’s barbaric actions, including indiscriminate
shelling of civilian areas. Persistent, credible reporting
of continued regime use of chemical weapons, in the
form of chlorine, is an outrage which warrants Council
attention. And, despite adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), the grave humanitarian situation continues to
worsen.
Let us not sit and watch another year go by as the
toll of death and misery mounts. It is more imperative
than ever that we come together to support a political
process, in line with the Geneva communiqué of the
Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex) that brings
an end to the violence. We look forward to Staffan de
Mistura briefing the Council on his latest efforts next
month and working with Council colleagues to find a
viable end to this appalling conflict in the course of
2015.
This month we also discussed perhaps the most
intractable issue of all — the Middle East peace process.
For over 50 years, the Council has toiled with this issue,
and a solution is long overdue. The Council shares the
same core commitment to a negotiated settlement that
leads to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. But last year the
prospects for a two-State solution moved backwards.
This year we must turn that momentum around. We
must remain open to working with partners to revisit the
parameters resolution. With sufficient time for proper
negotiation, we may yet secure the full support of the
Council for a resolution of this nature, which could help
to kick-start a sustainable peace process.
The challenge for the Council during this
anniversary year will be whether we can make progress
on these and other seemingly intractable conflicts. The
overlap of views between us is greater than many give
us credit for. The differences are relatively few, but
they are acute. To succeed we will need to focus on
these differences and not let them disrupt the areas that
15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

we do agree on. We owe it to all those suffering from
the effects of conflict to do our utmost in these efforts.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the entire Chilean team for the work you carried out
in January. You have begun this year very well, with a
heavy programme combining a useful field mission in
Haiti and a dense and productive agenda in New York.
Moreover, we were honoured by the presence of the
President of Chile, Ms. Bachelet Jeria, in the Council.
January 2015 will remain forever in the collective
memory of the French people. The terrorist attack
against the newspaper Charlie Hebdo, the crimes that
followed it against the representatives of the security
forces, and then the anti-semitic attack at the Hyper
Casher market were deeply shocking for France and
the rest of the world. On behalf of my country, I would
like to once again thank the United Nations for its
exemplary support through the statement (SC/11727)
issued by the Security Council on 7 January, through
the minute of silence observed by the Council and
through the commitment of the Secretary-General, who
came to express his support to us in the French Mission
in New York, as well as the representatives of so many
of Council members’ countries for their expressions of
solidarity.
The attacks underscore the extent to which, in
an interdependent world, the security of all of us is a
common good. More than ever, peace and stability in
the Middle East cannot be disassociated from those of
Europe. More than ever, France is committed to the
future of the Middle East. In that connection, the current
political crisis in Yemen has created a power vacuum in
which Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is prospering.
In that context, we reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
aimed at promoting the establishment of a Government
of national unity and the continuation of the process of
political transition. Those conditions are necessary to
continue combatting terrorism in that country.
Early 2015 has also been marked by the rapid
deterioration of the situation in Ukraine and the
renewal of combat by separatists supported by Russia,
in violation of the ceasefire and the Minsk agreements,
which they committed to uphold last September. The
attacks carried out by separatists these past few days,
and in particular the offensive launched in Mariupol,
seemed to indicate that they were deliberately targeting
civilians. As the Secretary-General recalled to the press

S/PV.7373

last Saturday, they could constitute serious violations
of international humanitarian law. It is urgent to
de-escalate the situation and to put the political process
back on track. That will require a more constructive
attitude on the part of Russia, which needs to stop
supporting the separatists, in particular by supplying
them with weapons.
There can be no military solution to the conflict.
The Minsk agreements of September 2014 remain the
only basis for a lasting solution to the conflict. France
continues to mobilize and will continue its efforts
in close contact with its German partners and the
Ukrainian and Russian authorities in the framework of
the Normandy format meetings.
I shall now turn to the African crisis. The influence
of Boko Haram is spreading in Nigeria, as we saw in
January, and beyond to neighbouring countries. The
atrocities being committed are growing worse. The
humanitarian consequences are horrible and pose a
threat to the peace and stability of the region. In May
2014, the Paris summit warned about this phenomenon
and led to the mobilization and strengthening of
regional cooperation, as has been recalled by the
follow-up meetings, in particular the Niamey meeting
held on 20 January.
The next step is to make the Multinational Joint
Task Force operational without delay by developing a
concept of operations, a concept of logistics support,
rules of engagement and all other necessary documents,
as was agreed in Niamey. The decisions follow and
comply with the call launched by the Security Council
in an important presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/4)
adopted on the eve of the Niamey meeting. France,
like its partners, stands ready to consider a binding
resolution of the Security Council authorizing the
regional force on that basis.
In Mali, the escalation of fighting between
armed groups in recent weeks is very worrisome.
In implementing its mandate, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) had to use force on 20 January
against a rebel group — the Mouvement national pour
la libération de l’Azawad — which was firing on the
city of Tabankort and on the MINUSMA camp. As
underscored by the majority of Council members
during consultations on 6 January, the deteriorating
security situation requires joint pressure on the part of
the international community on all parties to cease the
fighting, respect the ceasefire and resume the Algiers

15-0248015/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

negotiations without delay with a view to achieving
lasting and inclusive peace. Before the peace talks
resume in Algiers, we will propose a presidential
statement of the Council to demand, in the clearest
possible way, that the Malian parties return in good
faith and without delay to the path of peace.
January was an important month for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; 2 January — the date of the
ultimatum established for the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda — marked the failure of
the disarmament process of that armed group. The
Council reacted immediately by holding an emergency
meeting to examine the situation and adopted a strong
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/1) on the need to
take immediate action against that group. As we come
to the end of the month, we expect the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, now more than
ever, to assume their responsibilities and undertake
operations against the armed group.
The Council also met to discuss the findings of
the strategic review of the United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fourteen years
on since the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo deployed in
the country, we must step up efforts to ensure that
the mandate of the Mission, in particular in terms of
protecting civilians, is more actively and effectively
implemented. According to the recommendations of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, we need
a force that is more modern, mobile and responsive, but
also more determined, if we are to make a difference
on the ground and persuade the population of the added
value of our efforts.
The Council spoke forcefully on 22 January
regarding the riots in Kinshasa. We warmly welcome
the outcome of the crisis. However, we must remain
alert. We call once again for the legal framework and
timetable for the elections to be developed by consensus.
Finally, the first half of 2015 will be an important
period for the Central African Republic in its return
to stability and peace. We welcome the continuing
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which should continue at a
steady pace. We also welcome the robust posture
that MINUSCA has already adopted and which it is
particularly important to strengthen in this period.

16/18

29/01/2015

Major milestones are on the horizon as we
approach the Bangui Forum and the legislative and
presidential elections. They must allow us by August
2015 to inclusively complete the transition period
led by President Catherine Samba-Panza, with the
support of international partners and the tripartite
mediation led by President Denis Sassou Nguesso.
The Security Council must remain engaged to ensure
that these essential steps for the stabilization of the
Central African Republic succeed, that the timetable
is respected and that the efforts of all parties focus on
these same goals.
Achieving stabilization also means combating
impunity and respecting human rights. The report just
issued by the international investigation commission
makes an important contribution in that regard.
I conclude by thanking once again the Chilean
presidency and wishing the best of luck to China as it
takes over in February.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank your delegation, Sir, for its
successful leadership of the Security Council over the
past month. In that regard, we welcome the initiatives
of your presidency focusing on international peace and
security and peacebuilding.
I would like to recall in particular the open debate
held on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security (see S/PV.7361), which
was presided over by the President of the Republic of
Chile herself. The meeting reiterated the importance
of inclusive development to safeguarding international
peace and security, how complementary programmes
and policies promote the link between political,
security and development actions, and the importance
of upholding human rights and the rule of law.
National ownership is key to achieving lasting
peace. The open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding
(see S/PV.7359) was another opportunity to emphasize
the lasting effects of peacebuilding, the comprehensive
evaluation of the peacebuilding architecture, which will
be reviewed later this year, as well as the importance
of peacebuilding to consolidating political gains
and to building the capacity of States concerned to
complement international efforts. We look forward to
tomorrow’s meeting on the protection of civilians and
the role of women in that regard.

15-02480

29/01/2015

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of China, which will assume the presidency
of the Council in February, with our full support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.
Over the past month, the Security Council held
an open debate at the ministerial level on inclusive
development for the maintenance of international peace
and security (see S/PV.7361). The Council adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3) containing
important guidelines in this area, including on the
participation of women and young people, inclusive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, the effects of the illicit exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources and transnational
organized crime, and the need to adopt a broad and
comprehensive approach supporting the activities of
the whole system in the context of its three pillars,
including during transition periods under missions
mandated by the Council.
We thank all members of the Council who
contributed to that statement and participated in the
debate presided over by President Michelle Bachelet.
We hope that the statement will help ensure that the
Council’s future work integrate such a focus on inclusive
development, which would be especially relevant in
solving the situations before us at present.
In the context of the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Chile proposed the
holding of an open debate on the protection of civilians
focused on the protection challenges facing women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We hope
that that open debate, to be held tomorrow, will bring
forward ideas and solutions on a topic that deserves
our full attention, in the light of the global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
numerous review processes under way, including that
on peacebuilding. In that regard, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/2, which supports
the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
suggests ways to guide efforts in this domain.
Security Council missions are a tool for maintaining
international peace and security. Our visit to Haiti
allowed us to obtain first-hand information and to
issue an urgent unified call on all sectors urging them
to make constructive process through dialogue and by
holding fair, credible and transparent elections. Such

S/PV.7373

visits demonstrate the need for the Council to remain
attentive to solutions on the ground, such followup being all the more important when it comes to
reconfiguring peace missions.
In Haiti, the Council observed the support
for inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security provided by the
United Nations country team, and the rapid-impact
and community violence-reduction programmes being
implemented by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
The Council also, unfortunately, learned of many
deaths and was able to respond in a timely fashion,
through presidential statements, to threats and attacks
from armed and/or terrorist groups, such as the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and Boko
Haram. In that regard, a holistic approach must be
taken to such issues in the light of the underlying causes
that generate them. That will require us to ensure that
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa are
adequately supported.
The informal interactive dialogue on the final report
of the independent investigation commission on the
Central African Republic was an exemplary initiative
that allowed Council members to gather information
about the fight against impunity in the country, which
will be useful when the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic comes up for renewal.
We welcome the joint reviews of country situations,
missions and offices with their respective sanctions
regimes, including the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which were reviewed together with the
respective sanctions regimes, with a view to promoting
coherent evaluation and procedural efficiency. We
note with interest the consultations held on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and
we welcome those on Nepal, which demonstrate the
Council’s interest in preemptively focusing on an issue
that could require follow-up.
We are very grateful for the support received from
all members of the Council this month.

15-0248017/18

S/PV.7373

Implementation of the note by President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Finally, we wish the greatest success and offer our
full support to China during its Council presidency in
the month of February.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

18/18

29/01/2015

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

15-02480
