S/2018/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 January 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2348 (2017). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since the issuance of my previous report, of 2 October ( S/2017/824). The
report describes progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democrati c Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO); provides an overview of political developments following my report
of 17 November on the implementation of the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political
Agreement of 31 December 2016 (see S/2017/963); and provides a report on the
performance of MONUSCO uniformed personnel.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Deep divisions among political and civil society actors have continued to
characterize the political climate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the
reporting period. On 5 November, the Independent National Electoral Commission
published an electoral calendar officially postponing the presidential and legislative
elections scheduled to take place by December 2017, in accordance with the
agreement of 31 December 2016, until 23 December 2018. This prompted renewed
calls for demonstrations against the President, Joseph Kabila , and the Government by
most opposition leaders and several civil society organizations. On 15 and
30 November and 19 December, however, these calls were only marginally followed
in urban centres across the country, as authorities continued to impose a ban on public
demonstrations and to deploy the security forces prior to public protests. On
31 December, national security forces violently dispersed demonstrations called for
by the Secular Coordination Committee in Kinshasa and other cities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, resulting in at least 5 deaths, 46 people wounded an d over
140 arrests. The call of the Committee for protests to demand the full implementation
of the agreement of 31 December 2016, including confidence-building measures, to
reject the electoral calendar and to urge President Kabila not to run for office o n
23 December 2018 was supported by the Catholic Church and opposition groups. In
contrast, both the President’s Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la démocratie

17-23259 (E)

080118

*1723259*

S/2018/16

and the Government appears determined to proceed with the implementation of the
electoral calendar.
3.
On 7 November, President Kabila led a meeting of the leadership of his party to
discuss its approach and strategy for the upcoming elections. On 14 November, the
Government swiftly endorsed two draft bills critical for the holding of elections. The
first is the 2018 finance bill, subsequently adopted by parliament on 14 December,
which allocates a total of $619 million for the organization of elections, of which
$532 million is to be disbursed to the Independent National Electoral Comm ission.
The second is the electoral law, adopted by parliament on 15 December, despite the
protests of the opposition and a few members of parliament belonging to the ruling
majority, who lamented that the bill would reduce the likelihood of small politica l
parties and independent candidates gaining seats in the future legislative elections.
Women’s organizations also protested that the electoral bill did not improve women ’s
chances of being elected in parliament, including by rejecting a proposal to ensure
that women hold 30 per cent of the seats at the end of the upcoming legislative
elections; a percentage which remains below the full parity enshrined in the
Constitution. On 24 December, President Kabila signed both bills.
4.
On a related note, and in an apparent effort to help improve the pre -electoral
climate, on 21 November, the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and
the Electoral Process announced that it was working towards the release of additional
political prisoners. The Council is tasked with overseeing the implementation of the
agreement of 31 December 2016 and is led by Joseph Olenghankoy, an opposition
figure. The body stated that it would follow up on the situation of five political
figures, who have become targets of judicial proceedings, political prisoners or under
the heavy surveillance of the security services. The Council also called on the
Government to respect people’s right to hold protests and their freedom of movement,
in compliance with the Constitution. Lastly, the Council called on all political actors
to preserve peace during the pre-electoral period.
5.
On 27 November, the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo urged President Kabila to announce publicly that, in confor mity with the
Constitution, he would not seek a third term in office and urged him to support the
implementation of the confidence-building measures required by the agreement of
31 December 2016. The Conference stressed the need for the Independent Nationa l
Electoral Commission to remain independent and recommended that all political
parties use only democratic means as they compete for public office. Lastly, the
Conference called on civil society groups to remain apolitical and urged the
international community to provide logistical and financial support to the electoral
process.
6.
During the reporting period, progress towards the implementation of the
confidence-building measures has remained insufficient. In November, in response to
calls by the opposition and civil society groups for public protests across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the authorities reiterated the general ban on
opposition demonstrations, which has been in place since September 2016. During
the protests of 30 November, one person was killed, 18 were injured and 185 were
arrested in various incidents between protesters and security forces across the country.
Opposition leaders arrested prior to or on the day of the protests have since been
released.
7.
Meanwhile, voter registration proceeded in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces
as well as two territories in Lomami Province, with support from MONUSCO. As at
early December, the Independent National Electoral Commission reported more than
45 million registered voters countrywide. Despite reassurances by the Commission,
it is unlikely that voter registration will be completed by the end of January 2018.
2/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

Women constitute 47 per cent of registered voters, a decrease as compared with
previous electoral cycles (52 per cent for 2006 and 2011). In the aforementioned
provinces and territories, the registration of women has to date been even lower,
owing to the security situation. With MONUSCO support, the Commission and local
authorities are taking steps to increase the registration of women in the Kasai region.
8.
Following the publication of the electoral calendar, discussions have resumed
between the Independent National Electoral Commission and international partners
regarding the funding of the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au Congo, a
multi-partner basket fund managed by the United Nations Development Programme.
The fund has remained funded at only 6 per cent of the $123.3 million initially
identified, in part owing to donor concerns regarding uncertainties surrounding the
political transition.
9.
On 6 November, the Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo convened the inaugural meeting of the joint team of electoral experts, as
agreed on the margins of the general debate of the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly in September. The team’s main task is to support the Independent
National Electoral Commission. It comprises experts of the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the Southern Africa Development Community.
10. At the regional level, on 7 November, the African Union Peace and Security
Council reiterated its commitment to support the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and urged its member States and partners to provide their
support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the successful completion of the
electoral process. On 9 December, President Kabila, the President of Angola, João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, and the President of the Republic of C ongo, Denis
Sassou Nguesso, met in Brazzaville to discuss the situation in the region, including
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a communiqué issued at the end of the
meeting, they called on political actors to preserve peace and work towards the
holding of elections.
11. MONUSCO continues to support the implementation of the Peace, Security, and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
On 22 November, my Special Representative, together with my Special Envoy f or the
Great Lakes region, attended a meeting of representatives of the Framework
guarantors and the region in Addis Ababa to review preparations for elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and discuss coordinated regional and international
support. The guarantors reaffirmed their commitment to support a democratic and
peaceful transition through credible elections and called on all stakeholders to create
the necessary conditions for the holding of timely, peaceful and credible elections.

B.

Economic developments
12. The downward macroeconomic trend persisted. Inflation remained high and the
Congolese franc has depreciated by 30 per cent since January 2017. The exchange
rate increased to 1,614 Congolese francs to the dollar in early December, from 1,560
at the end of July. On 2 November, the Banque centrale du Congo lowered its year end inflation forecast to 49.8 per cent, from an earlier estimate of more than 52 per
cent. The institution cautioned that any loosening of the tight monetary polic y and
austerity measures could trigger a renewed acceleration of inflation.

17-23259

3/16

S/2018/16

C.

Security situation
13. During the reporting period, the security situation continued to deteriorate
across various areas of the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while some measure of stability was noted in most of the western part of the country
despite persistent tensions in the Kasai region.
14. In the East, the reporting period was tragically marked by the deadliest ever
attack by an armed group against United Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on 7 December, in Semuliki, North Kivu, which resulted in
the killing of 15 peacekeepers from Tanzania. Forty-four peacekeepers were also
injured during the attack, attributed to the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). After a
lull in their activities, ADF has resumed their attacks in the area, including against
civilians. On 22 December, the spokesperson of the Ministry of Defence and Veterans ’
Affairs of Uganda issued a communiqué indicating that, on that day, the Ugandan
People’s Defence Force (UPDF), following consultations with Congolese authorities,
had conducted a “surgical attack” on ADF camps in Beni territory. UPDF reportedly
conducted the strike on the ADF camps from Ugandan territory in the border area. On
27 December, the spokesperson of the Ministry of Defence and Veterans ’ Affairs of
Uganda issued a statement, indicating that the 22 December strikes of UPDF had
successfully targeted eight ADF camps, resulting in the deaths of some 100 ADF
elements and several wounded. In addition, the trend of attacks by armed groups
against the Congolese security forces has persisted, leading to more deadly clashes,
particularly in the two Kivu provinces. This has taken place against the bac kdrop of
an emergence of coalitions of Mai-Mai groups opposed to the Government. In North
Kivu, the most important Mai-Mai platforms are the Mouvement national pour le
renouveau, composed mainly of ethnic Nande-affiliated Mai-Mai groups, and the
Collectif des mouvements pour le changement (CMC), comprising Hutu-affiliated
Nyatura groups. In South Kivu, the Coalition nationale du peuple pour la souveraineté
du Congo, led by Mai-Mai Yakutumba has so far rallied 11 armed groups. The
coalition is also present in Tanganyika and Maniema provinces. Attacks by armed
groups against the civilian population have persisted, as have clashes between armed
groups. Inter-community tensions have also persisted in certain areas.
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
15. In North Kivu, attacks by armed groups against security forces continued. On
3 October, in Kipese, Lubero territory, three soldiers of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) were killed during an exchange of fire
with Mai-Mai combatants. On 4 October, the FARDC killed 10 Mai -Mai Mazembe in
Kanyambi and Kitsambiro. On 6 October, a group of Mai-Mai attacked a FARDC
position at Kawasewe, 35 km east of Butembo. One FARDC soldier was killed and
three were wounded. On 11 October, a coalition of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda/Forces combattantes abacunguzi (FDLR -FOCA) and Nyatura
attacked Bwiza, Rutshuru territory, killing three officers of the Congolese National
Police and five civilians.
16. In a worrisome development, suspected members of ADF resumed their attacks
against civilians and FARDC. On 7 October, suspected ADF killed 25 civilians on the
road between Mbau and Kamango. The suspected ADF also launched a series of
attacks against FARDC positions in and around the so-called ADF triangle area. On
26 and 27 October and 3 November, alleged ADF attacked FARDC positions north east of Beni town. As a result of these attacks, in early November, FARDC deployed
around 1,000 additional troops to the area.

4/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

17. On 6 October, a Mai-Mai group attacked a MONUSCO base in Mulo, Lubero
territory. Two peacekeepers were wounded, three assailants were killed and one was
injured. On 9 October, suspected ADF elements attacked a MONUSCO base in
Mamudioma. A total of 2 peacekeepers from Tanzania were killed and 18 injured, one
of whom died later from his injuries. On 7 December, in the most vicious attacks
against United Nations peacekeepers in recent memory, suspected ADF elements
killed 15 United Nations peacekeepers from Tanzania and injured 44 at their base in
Semuliki, 40 km east of Beni, in North Kivu.
18. Also in North Kivu, in particular in Masisi and in Rutshuru territories,
inter-ethnic tensions persisted. In Masisi, on 2 October, Nyatura clashed with
members of the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain in Rubaya
and took control of the village, displacing the local population. MONUSCO deployed
to protect civilians and five Nyatura were captured by FARDC. In Rutshuru, on
16 October, growing tensions between Hut u and Nande resulted in 32 houses being
set on fire in Bambo village. MONUSCO deployed and relocated 28 Nande residents
as a precautionary measure.
19. In South Kivu, following their failed attempt to take over the city of Uvira at
the end of September, thanks to the actions of MONUSCO and FARDC, members of
Mai-Mai Yakutumba have remained active in the interior of the province, especially
around the mining areas, and along the borders with Tanganyika and Maniema
provinces. In late November, the group repeatedly clashed with FARDC soldiers,
including on 26 November in Tujenge, 109 km south-west of Uvira. Two FARDC
soldiers were killed. Clashes have also taken place between FARDC and a coalition
of Mai-Mai groups in Makola, Maï-Ndombe and Kahungwe, all three villages located
between 120 km and 130 km from Uvira.
20. In Tanganyika, attacks by armed groups have increased. Between 7 October and
14 November, members of Mai-Mai Yakutumba and their allies (Mai-Mai Malaika,
Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale and Twa militias) staged nine attacks against civilians in
Kalemie, Nyunzu and Kongolo territories, in which 15 FARDC soldiers and
9 civilians were killed; 4 FARDC and 13 civilians were injured.
21. In Haut-Katanga, the Twa-Luba conflict spilled over into Pweto territory, with
intensified attacks against the civilian population and security forces. On 7 October,
a Bantu militia known as the Tabwa attacked the prison in Pweto town, resulting in
the escape of 55 prisoners, while reportedly killing three FARDC soldiers and
wounding two others. On 16 October, local militia groups burned down offices of the
Congolese National Police and the Agence nationale de renseignements in Fube,
south of Moba. On 28 October, suspected Twa militia killed five civilians in Kalembe,
west of Pweto. On 30 October, suspected Twa militia attacked a Luba militia in
Kasanbala village, north-west of Moba, which resulted in civilians fleeing towards
Zambia. On 1 November, Twa militia reportedly attacked civilians in Kansabala and
Mwashi villages, north of Pweto. Two civilians were killed.
22. In Ituri Province, the Force de résistance patriotique de l ’Ituri (FRPI) remained
the main source of insecurity and posed the greatest threat to civilians, accounting for
80 per cent of human rights violations documented in the south of Irumu territory,
including mass rape, summary executions and sexual assault. There was a sharp
increase of FRPI attacks against the Congolese security forces, in which four FARDC
soldiers were killed. FARDC and MONUSCO conducted two coordinated operations
against FRPI in the south of Irumu territory in October and November, resulting in
the killing of three FRPI elements.
23. In Haut-Uélé and Bas-Uélé provinces, activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) have decreased as the poaching season in Garamba National Park has ended,
although LRA still poses a threat to the civilian population. Mbororo herders ’
17-23259

5/16

S/2018/16

activities continued to cause inter-community tensions as the movement of their cattle
destroys crops, stoking conflict with local com munities. Refugees continued to arrive
in the area from both the Central African Republic and South Sudan, amid continued
allegations of the infiltration of armed elements from South Sudan.
Western Democratic Republic of the Congo
24. In the Kasai region, attacks committed by Kamuina Nsapu militia have
decreased, leading FARDC to halt major military operations. However, human rights
violations and abuses continue to be recorded. During the reporting period, several
cases of rape involving FARDC elements in the Kasai provinces were documented.
On 26 October 2017, in Tshikapa, Kamonia territory, Kasai province, four women
were raped by four FARDC soldiers. On 10 November 2017, three women were raped
by two men in FARDC uniforms in Kakumba, also in Kamonia territory. On
30 November, MONUSCO received reports of mass killings in Kamonia territory,
Kasai Province. MONUSCO investigation teams deployed to the area and verified
that FARDC soldiers had shot at a crowd at the market in Kabeya Lumbu on
30 November, killing at least 13 persons, including 5 women. Eight other persons
were injured by gunshots, including four women. Two of the injured later died. Across
Kasai Province, Kamonia remains the main area of insecurity with a residual presence
of Kamuina Nsapu militia and Bana Mura armed groups. The persistence of these
community-based armed groups is compounding the divisions between Luba on one
side and the Chokwe and Pende communities on the other. This is also hampering the
return of internally displaced persons. Likewise, the persisting tensions among
communities are slowing the pace of voter registration in Kasai Central and in Kasai.
25. In Kasai Central, most of the security incidents during the reporting period were
attributed to security forces, including allegations of extrajudicial killings and sexual
violence. On 13 November, in Kazumba territory, Kasai Central, an intoxicated
FARDC soldier shot at a crowd, killing a man and injuring two other people. He was
reportedly arrested.
Humanitarian situation
26. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued
to deteriorate. As at early December, 4.1 million people were internally displaced,
including 866,000 women and 2.44 million children. Over 622,000 Congolese
nationals have sought refuge in neighbouring countries, including 100,000 this year.
The country hosts more than half a million refugees from neighbouring Burundi, the
Central African Republic, Rwanda and South Sudan. Some 7.7 million people face
severe food insecurity — a 30 per cent increase on the same time last year. An
estimated 13.1 million people, including 6.8 million women and girls and 7.9 million
children, will need protection and humanitarian assistance in 2018, an increase of
50 per cent as compared with 2017. In response, humanitarian partners are rapidly
scaling up their efforts, with a focus on the Kasai, Tanganyika and South Kivu crises.
On 20 October, the Emergency Relief Coordinator declared that the situation in these
areas has reached its highest level of emergency, also known as level 3. Such a
declaration is made when the aid system needs to scale up and respond to large -scale
needs.
Human rights situation
27. MONUSCO documented 2,049 human rights violations from September to
November, a significant increase as compared with the 1,329 documented from June
to August. More than 70 per cent of these human rights violations occurred in conflict affected provinces. While State agents were responsible for 1,293 violations, armed
groups perpetrated 756. The increase in extrajudicial and arbitrary killings remains of
6/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

great concern. Of 710 victims recorded throughout the country, 284, including 47
women and 12 children, were killed by armed groups, and 426, including 38 women
and 33 children, by State agents.
28. The trend of restrictions on the political space continued, with 482 violations
linked to fundamental freedoms and political rights documented, almost double
compared with 247 such violations in the previous reporting period. Almost all were
committed by State agents (477, including 272 by the Congolese National Police and
91 by FARDC). Over 98 per cent of the perpetrators of these violations enjoyed
impunity. Journalists, political opponents and civil society activists were the main
targets of such violations.
29. A general ban on public demonstration by opposition parties and pro-opposition
civil society actors continues to be enforced throughout the country. On 15 November,
in the context of protests called by civil society groups and opposition parties, a strong
deployment of FARDC and the Congolese National Police prevented public
gatherings. Incidents occurred in Kinshasa, Goma, Kasindi (Beni territory, North
Kivu), Matadi (Kongo Central), Kisangani (Tshopo), Kindu (Maniema) and Kananga
(Kasai Central), with defence and security forces injuring at least 3 persons and
arresting 77 others, including at least one woman and two children. Most of those
arrested were later released, while seven remained in detention. On 18 November,
Congolese National Police agents disrupted the inauguration of an opposition
political party, Ensemble des volontaires pour le redressement de la République
démocratique du Congo (ENVOL)/Alternance pour la République, in Kenge, Kwango
Province. The National Civil Police clashed with supporters of the party. One party
member was injured and four were arrested.
30. No significant progress has been achieved with regard to accountability of the
defence and security forces for abuses and use of excessive force against prot estors
during previous demonstrations. A year after the 19 December 2016 protests, during
which 40 people were killed, none of the alleged perpetrators has been brought to
justice. On 4 October, in Kimpese (Kongo Central), two senior police officers were
convicted for the murder of members of the Bundu Dia Kongo/Bundu Dia Mayala
movement, in connection with their responsibility in the repression of a protest held
in February 2017.
31. MONUSCO continued to support the Congolese authorities’ efforts to address
serious human rights violations and fight impunity. Following the Mission ’s advocacy
efforts, in collaboration with the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, progress was made on some of the 38 priority cases jointly
identified with military justice authorities. In Kavumu, South Kivu Province, 18
persons, including a provincial deputy, were tried for crimes against humanity for the
abduction and rape of 38 girls. On 13 December, the Court handed down life sentences
to 12 of the accused. The court awarded reparations to victims. MONUSCO and its
partners assisted the Congolese military justice authorities in developing a
prosecutorial strategy for the trial, together with a protection plan for victims and
witnesses, and provided security and logistical support for the mobile court hearings.
32. Following this assistance by MONUSCO, the military justice authorities in the
Kasai region began addressing cases involving alleged FARDC perpetrators, rather
than focusing exclusively on armed groups. MONUSCO-supported joint investigation
missions with the military justice resulted in the indictment of 13 FARDC soldiers,
including a lieutenant-colonel and a major, in Kipese, North Kivu Province, who
allegedly perpetrated conflict-related sexual violence against more than 300 victims.
The investigation is ongoing and the military prosecutor in Beni plans to try the
suspects at the military court in Beni. In September, the Operational Military Court
in Beni issued its first judicial decision in relation to child recruitment.
17-23259

7/16

S/2018/16

33. The number of applications from MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team to perform risk assessments in accordance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy increased during the reporting period, partly as a conseq uence of country team
support for Government security forces now also requiring clearance under the Policy.
United Nations police set up an internal human rights due diligence policy task force
to enhance observance of the Policy, particularly as regards the implementation of
mitigating measures.
Sexual violence
34. Between September and November, the Mission documented 254 victims of
conflict-related sexual violence, including 149 women and 66 children. Armed groups
were responsible for 75 per cent of such incidents, while State agents were responsible
for 25 per cent. The main perpetrators include FARDC and Bana Mura militia in the
Kasai region (18 per cent of the victims) and FARDC. Sexual violence survivors still
encounter limitations in holistic service provision.
Child protection
35. Through the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict, MONUSCO verified 929 grave violations against children throughout the
reporting period, a 34 per cent increase as compared with the previous reporting
period. At least 650 children, including 177 girls, escaped or were separated from
armed groups. The increasing number of surrenders by Kamuina Nsapu militia
allowed the separation of several children. However, there are more than 1,700
allegations of child recruitment that have still to be verified. The main armed groups
involved in the recruitment of children were the Kamuina Nsapu (339), Mai -Mai
Mazembe (69), Mai-Mai Yakutumba (30) and Nduma défense du Congo-Renové
(NDC-R) (24).
36. MONUSCO also documented the killing of 40 children and the maiming of 57,
solely in the provinces of North Kivu, South Kivu, Ituri, Kasai Central and Kasai,
with more than half of these incidents (56 per cent) perpetrated by State agents. The
abduction of 78 children, mostly by Mai-Mai Mazembe and ADF, and 24 attacks
against schools, mostly by FARDC, Mai-Mai Mazembe and NDC-R were also
verified.

III. Deployment of the Mission and implementation of
its mandate
A.

Support for the implementation of the Comprehensive and
Inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December 2016
37. My Special Representative continued his good offices in support of the
implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016, at the national lev el and in
key provinces, with a particular focus on promoting the implementation of the
confidence-building measures envisaged in the agreement and the creation of a
political environment conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible elections. In
this context, he met with leaders of the opposition platform known as the Groupe des
sept partis politiques, the Governor of Haut -Katanga and the Governor of Tanganyika.
38. On 9 November, my Special Representative, jointly with my Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes region, Said Djinnit, met with the Chair of the African Union
Commission, Moussa Faki, and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Smail Chergui to discuss the coordination of those organizations ’

8/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

support for the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 13 and
14 November, in Gaborone, my Special Representative held consultations with the
Executive Secretary of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and
exchanged respectively with the incoming Chair of SADC, the President of Namibia,
Hage Geingob, and the Special Envoy of SADC to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
39. On 14 November, a day before the demonstrations planned by civil society
groups and the opposition, my Special Representative issued a statement urging the
Congolese authorities to protect the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the
Constitution, including the freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration, while
also reiterating the need for protestors to refrain from violence.

B.

Comprehensive approach to protection of civilians
40. The MONUSCO Community Alert Network transmitted an average of 570 early
warning alerts per month, which constitutes a 17 per cent increase over the previous
reporting period. Of the 486 alerts report ed in North Kivu, South Kivu and
Tanganyika, the Government and/or MONUSCO responded to 74 per cent. Most of
the alerts to which there had been no response were in areas with limited State
authority or which were difficult to access.
41. MONUSCO has now concentrated two battalions of its Intervention Brigade
battalions in Sake and Munigi, North Kivu, for projection throughout the country as
required. The Mission has also finalized the realignment of its sectors, resulting in
the establishment of four sectors covering the entire country, thus allowing for greater
flexibility for redeployment of troops.
42. MONUSCO continued actions to neutralize armed groups as well as protect
civilians. Overall, MONUSCO conducted 29 military operations, including
temporary standing combat deployments and coordinated operations with FARDC
against FDLR, ADF and FRPI, to neutralize armed groups and deter violence against
the civilian population. MONUSCO also supported explosive ordnance disposal
operations, through the Mine Action Service, to ensure that areas were safe for the
local population, including by responding to all requests for explosive hazard
management support during the reporting period.
43. In response to the massacre of 25 civilians on 7 October by suspected ADF,
MONUSCO supported air access to the remote area where the incident had taken
place for a joint assessment team composed of MONUSCO, local authorities,
including the military prosecutor, and medical specialists to document the killings.
MONUSCO also continued coordinated military operations with FARDC against
ADF in the area, with support from attack helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles,
to push ADF back from the positions they had taken from FARDC, within the context
of the broader protection plan developed by the Mission to address the re-emerging
ADF threat to the civilian population. To overcome the difficult conditions its
peacekeepers face in the ADF area of operations, including poor road access,
especially during the rainy season, MONUSCO has been rehabilitating a strategic
road to enable improved access for military operations, access to civilian populations
in need of protection and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
44. Since the attack against its peacekeepers on 7 December, the Missi on has
reinforced its presence at the Semuliki base with a composite task force comprising
one South African platoon, two Malawian platoons and a Tanzanian special forces
platoon (121 soldiers). The neighbouring Kamango base, deemed to be at potential
risk, has been similarly reinforced. A section of Force engineers has been deployed in
Semuliki to commence close support field engineering tasks. Additional attack

17-23259

9/16

S/2018/16

helicopter and utility helicopter assets have been positioned at Mavivi to undertake
close support missions as required.
45. In South Kivu, the successful defence of Uvira by MONUSCO, alongside
FARDC, from an attack by Mai-Mai Yakutumba in late September was critical for the
protection of civilians and an important demonstration of the determination of
MONUSCO to act to protect civilians. MONUSCO established blocking positions at
the entry points to the town, succeeded in repelling an attack on the city’s prison and
provided support from attack helicopters, which managed to destroy the boat fleet of
Mai-Mai Yakutumba. MONUSCO also communicated directly with Yakutumba, the
group’s leader, to dissuade him from attacking the town and made it clear that
MONUSCO would act to protect civilians. Since then, MONUSCO has enhanced its
engagement and liaison with local actors and communities with regard to threats to
civilians in the Uvira and Fizi territories, where attacks on State institutions by Mai
Mai Yakutumba remain of concern. MONUSCO is also monitoring Yakutumba ’s
expansion into mining areas in Maniema Province, which could provide an important
source of funding to the armed group, and is addressing this risk with the authorities
and mining companies.
46. Following recent base closures in North Kivu, MONUSCO is implementing
mitigating measures and enhancing community-based mechanisms to improve the
protective environment and early warning in these areas. This engagement includes
building the capacity in communities to integrate gender perspectives into
mechanisms to protect civilians, increase the involvement of women in local
protection committees and alert networks and, going forward, better take account of
women’s security needs and capabilities. MONUSCO has strengthened community
engagement through joint capacity-building sessions with the Ministry of Interior of
the province in all four locations where the Mission used to have bases. Rapidly
deployable battalion troops established a presence in several locations in these areas
to assess the security situation after the closure of the bases and to resp ond to
protection needs. Joint actions by the Mission’s civilian and military components are
a tangible expression of the comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians and
a step towards the implementation of the protection through projection conce pt.
47. During the reporting period, MONUSCO continued to support local conflict
resolution mechanisms, particularly in Tanganyika Province, by establishing two
additional intercommunal peace forums in Kalemie and Moba territories to promote
peaceful coexistence and prevent and mitigate violence between the Bantu and Twa
communities. In North Kivu, MONUSCO supported mediation efforts between the
Nande and Hutu communities in Kanyabayonga and Mirangi. These efforts, supported
by the Mission and led by provincial authorities, civil society and communities,
contributed to a reduction in tensions. In South Kivu, following the fighting in early
November among soldiers in relation to the arrest in Bukavu of Abbas Kayonga, a
former rebel leader and a prominent member of the Banyamulenge community, who
had integrated FARDC as a colonel, MONUSCO has continued to engage with local
authorities and communities to reduce the risk of an escalation of tensions.
48. In response to the increase in attacks against prisons resulting in mass escapes
of prisoners who, in some cases, have subsequently joined armed groups, MONUSCO
is providing support to 14 high-risk prisons housing prisoners who, if freed, would
pose a serious threat to local populations. These prisons are located in Kinshasa,
North Kivu, South Kivu, Ituri, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental, Haut -Katanga,
Tanganyika, Mongala and Kongo Central provinces. Action plans for each prison are
being developed, which includes targeted advocacy with authorities to address
overcrowding. Advocacy in relation to the Goma prison has already resulted in the
transfer of 153 prisoners to prisons in Kinshasa and Equateur Province, as well as the
transfer of 486 military prisoners to the former Goma prison, which has now been
10/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

rehabilitated. MONUSCO also successfully repelled attacks against the prisons in
Uvira, South Kivu and Butembo, North Kivu.
49. MONUSCO has continued to enhance its preparedness to address political and
electoral-related violence, including in urban centres. MONUSCO reviewed and,
where necessary, revised its contingency plans in the electoral context in all field
offices and Kinshasa. The Mission also reinforced the capacities of 384 civil society
members in Kinshasa, Goma and Lubumbashi, supporting 21 civil society c ampaigns
in promotion of a peaceful electoral process.
Disarmament, demobilization repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
50. During the reporting period, MONUSCO registered 263 surrenders from armed
groups, accompanied by 176 dependants. Of these, 81 foreign ex-combatants and 154
dependants were repatriated to Rwanda within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement programme for foreign
armed groups. A total of 86 Congolese combatants entered phase III of the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. The Mission received and
transferred 76 Congolese and two foreign children associated with armed groups to
partner organizations.
51. MONUSCO continued to provide logistical support to the Government -run third
national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme ex -combatant
reintegration camps of Kamina and Kitona. MONUSCO also continued to support
293 former combatants (including one female) and 1073 dependants (8 men, 242
women, 419 boys and 404 girls) of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) accommodated in the camps of Kanyabayonga and Walungu, as well as the
Government-managed camp in Kisangani.
52. During the reporting period, 219 members of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (in Opposition) (SPLM/A-in Opposition) have departed
MONUSCO camps for various destinations, including Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan, South
Sudan and the United States of America. The Mission continues to work on finding
options for the relocation of the 408 SPLM/A -in Opposition remaining under
MONUSCO care. The Mine Action Service ensured the destruction and disposal of
weapons and ammunition surrendered by these former combatants.
53. MONUSCO is expanding community violence reduction programmes across
eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with 21 reinsertion projects
targeting former combatants, 12 projects targeting marginalized youth and prevention
of recruitment into armed groups and 4 projects promoting community cohesion
through temporary training and employment, as well as public outreach activities.
Stabilization
54. MONUSCO supported the launch of two stabilization programmes in South
Kivu Province during the reporting period, as part of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy. In total, five such programmes are now operational in
the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, all financed through the
Stabilization Coherence Fund, with a budget amounting to $21 million, 15 per cent
of which is dedicated to gender mainstreaming.
55. MONUSCO also supported the establishment of a stabilizati on committee in
south Irumu territory, Ituri Province. The committee is composed of local and national
political actors, community leaders, civil society and women’s organizations. Its
objective is to help reduce the threat posed by FRPI, a local armed gro up, and resolve
long-standing conflicts between local communities.

17-23259

11/16

S/2018/16

C.

Assessment of the performance of uniformed Mission personnel in
protecting civilians
56. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to monitor and evaluate on
a regular basis the performance of the force, with a view to identifying areas requiring
improvement. MONUSCO will continue to work closely with troop-contributing
countries on this issue and will continue to update the Security Council on the matter.
57. A majority of the formed police units were found to be operationally ready and
appropriately trained and overall performed well. The most recent monthly evaluation
showed that some units continue to operate with unserviceable or expired equipment.
The Mission is actively following up with police-contributing countries to address the
issue.

D.

Assessment of the Mission’s gender responsiveness
58. During the reporting period, MONUSCO introduced the use of gender markers
to assess the Mission’s responsiveness to the needs of the female populations across
its mandate priorities, in line with delivery on the women and peace and security
mandate. The first data show that 78 per cent of MONUSCO sections and offices have
developed gender-based analysis and 65 per cent have redirected their activities to
benefit more and more women and girls.
59. Responding to the system-wide strategy on gender parity launched in September
by the Secretary-General, the Special Representative, Maman Sidikou has issued a
gender parity directive for MONUSCO, with a plan to bridge the parity gap and
increase the proportion of women among international staff from, currently, 28 per
cent to 34 per cent at the end of the cycle.

E.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
60. MONUSCO continued to implement a robust victim centred strategy in
enforcing the United Nations zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Three allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the reporting
period. Two of these allegations involved minors. In total, 18 allegations were
reported from January to early December 2017.
61. Community-based complaint networks have remained pivotal in the Mission’s
response in the areas of prevention, enforcement and remedial action. These
networks, established in areas where the Mission has a significant presence, comprise
500 members, of whom 65 per cent are women. In coordination with service providers
including the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Population
Fund, the Mission has also strengthened the victims’ assistance protocol to ensure that
all victims are supported within 24 to 72 hours of receipt of an allegation of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
62. During the reporting period, 155 security- and safety-related incidents affecting
United Nations staff, uniformed components, assets and operations, as well as
international non-governmental organizations have been reported, as compared wit h
75 such incidents documented during the previous reporting period. These include 83
crime-related incidents; 12 cases linked to civil unrest, 45 hazard-related cases and

12/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

15 incidents documented in connection with armed conflict. The Mine Action Service
delivered risk education on explosive hazards to 192 United Nations personnel.

V. Observations
63. A year ago, the signing of the landmark Comprehensive and Inclusive Political
Agreement on 31 December 2016 gave renewed hope to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. A year later these hopes are yet to be realized. After being
postponed once, in late 2016, the presidential and legislative elections that were
meant to take place by the end of 2017, in accordance with the agreement of
31 December 2016, have once again been postponed, until 23 December 2018. I regret
that the holding of these crucial elections, set to pave the way for the first ever
peaceful transfer of power in the history of the country, has been delayed yet again. I
nevertheless welcome the publication, on 5 November, of an electoral calendar by the
Independent National Electoral Commission. I urge the Commission to abide by its
calendar and spare no effort in finalizing the voter register, which has already fallen
behind schedule, as soon as possible. The completion of this critical milestone should
be promptly followed by the swift implementation of the other steps outlined in the
calendar. I reiterate the readiness of MONUSCO and the United Nations system as a
whole, in close coordination with the African Union, the European Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the International Organization
of la Francophonie, the Southern African Development Community and other
partners, to continue to support the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in holding these elections.
64. In the current, politically polarized climate, there is a real risk that plans for the
holding of the long-awaited polls could be derailed once again. In the absence of a
genuine commitment by all parties concerned to work towards the holding of free,
fair and credible elections, each passing day increases this risk. I call on all actors to
work together to implement the agreement of 31 December 2016, which remains the
only viable path out of the current political impasse. More than ever, the constructive
engagement of all key stakeholders is needed to salvage the agreement.
65. I urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to do its utmost
to steer the political transition towards a successful conclusion. I take note of its stated
commitment to do so and of the positive steps it has taken in recent weeks by
submitting to the parliament a bill to revise the electoral law and a budget for
elections. I welcome the parliament’s swift adoption of these laws. Beyond these
steps, I encourage the Government to ensure that the Independent National Electoral
Commission receives the financial support that it has been promised and to take the
lead in devising and implementing a plan for the security of the elections. Once again,
I call on the Government to lead the way in the implementation of the confidence building measures envisaged in the agreement of 31 December 2016. I am concerned
that no real progress has been achieved in this regard, as 107 political prisoners
remain in detention and the harassment of political actors and civil society figures
persists. No credible electoral process is possible in a context of harassment and
repression. I welcome the decision of the National Council for Monitoring the
Agreement and the Electoral Process to seek a solution to this fundamental issue and
to contribute to a political climate conducive to credible elections.
66. At the same time, I am concerned by the consistent rejection by key opposition
leaders of any engagement with the political process. If the voices that these leaders
claim to represent are to be heard, they must be part of the solution. I call on them to
regain the spirit of dialogue and compromise that led them to sign the agreement of

17-23259

13/16

S/2018/16

31 December 2016. Now is the time to heed the call of their people for peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections.
67. I call on the international community to maintain a coordinated approach in
support of the full implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016 to pave the
way for elections. Regional partners and bilateral actors all have a vital contribution
to make at this crucial juncture for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I take note
of the consensus among international partners to support the electoral calendar. The
coordinated support of the international community will be even more crucial in the
coming months.
68. The precarious security situation prevailing in some parts of the eastern
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a source of deep concern.
Against the backdrop of a deeply divided political landscape, armed groups in the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have grown bolder. Attacks
against security forces persist as armed groups form coalitions. This worrying trend
must be addressed, principally through political means. I condemn the renewed
attacks of the ADF armed group in North Kivu, including the killing of 25 civilians
in November, the first since January 2017.
69. I reiterate my strong condemnation of the attacks against MONUSCO
peacekeepers by armed groups, particularly ADF, which led to the killing of one
peacekeeper in September, three peacekeepers in October and 15 in December, all
from Tanzania. I renew my condolences to the Government and people of Tanzania
for their loss. These attacks against peacekeepers are unacceptable. Heinous as they
are, they will not deter the determination of the United Nations to continue assisting
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I call on the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to open investigations and bring the perpetrators
to justice. In the meantime, I have decided to launch a special investigation to
determine, with the participation of the Tanzanian authorities, the circumstances
surrounding this attack and identify concrete measures required to prevent the
recurrence of such incidents and ensure that the MONUSCO Force is optimally
configured, equipped and trained to address the continued threat posed by ADF and
other armed groups.
70. The safety of United Nations peacekeepers and other United Nations personnel
is fundamental to the very concept of the United Nations. Following this dramatic
incident, I have asked the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support to urgently develop an action plan to enhance the safety
and security of our peacekeepers in the implementation of their mandate.
71. I am deeply concerned that human rights violations and abuse s continue to
increase. The number of human rights violations perpetrated by State security forces
is constantly rising. Over a year after a series of deadly clashes between protesters
and security forces in relation to the holding of elections, none of th e alleged
perpetrators has been brought to justice. I urge the authorities to ensure accountability
and bring all perpetrators to justice regardless of their affiliation or rank within the
security forces. On a positive note, I welcome the end of the trial on 13 December for
the rape of 38 girls which resulted in the sentencing of 12 of the accused to life
sentences. This step against impunity is encouraging and must be followed by others.
72. I remain deeply distressed by the deteriorating humanitarian si tuation, which is
expected to worsen further in coming months. I call on the Government to do its
utmost to ensure a safe and secure environment for the population and I urge the donor
community to extend its assistance to those in need.
73. I would like to thank my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Maman Sidikou, who completes his assignment in January 2018. I am
14/16

17-23259

S/2018/16

grateful for his leadership and dedication during his tenure. I would also like to thank
all the personnel of MONUSCO and the United Nations country team for their tireless
efforts under very challenging circumstances. In particular, I wish to highlight the
bravery and determination of MONUSCO military and civilian personnel. I pay
particular homage to the Tanzanian contingent, which has lost 18 of its soldiers in
North Kivu Province since September. My deep appreciation also goes to the
countries contributing troops and police to MONUSCO, to donor countries and to the
regional and multilateral organizations and non-governmental organizations that have
continued to provide invaluable support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

17-23259

15/16

S/2018/16

16/16

17-23259
