158

General AssemblI- Thirty-ninth Session

aster management training capabilities and opportunities
for such training which could be offered to officials from
developing countries;
11. Requests the Co-ordinator to review and improve.
if necessary with the assistance of specialists made available by appropriate international bodies, the internal evaluation system of the Office of the Co-ordinator in order to
ensure that experience obtained from disaster relief operations is fully taken into account in the future work of the
Office;
12. Recognizes the importance of disaster prevention
and preparedness at the regional and national levels in
mitigating the effects of disasters, appreciates the work
which the Office of the Co-ordinator has performed in this
area as far as the resources available in the Trust Fund of
the Office have allowed, and encourages Governments to
continue to draw upon the services available from the
Office and other organizations concerned and to provide
the necessary resources for this aspect of technical co-operation;
13. Requests the Office of the Co-ordinator to increase
its fund-raising efforts through the means available to it;
14. Emphasizes the essential need for the work of the
Office of the Co-ordinator to be placed and kept on a
sound financial basis and requests the Secretary-General to
assign a higher priority to this;
15. Reiterates in particular its appeals to the international community in resolutions 35/107 of 5 December
1980, 36/225 of 17 December 1981, 37/144 of 17 December 1982 and 38/202 of 20 December 1983 for urgent
increased contributions to the Trust Fund established pursuant to its resolution 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November 197 4
for the purposes set out in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the activities of the Office of the Coordinator.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/208. Countries stricken by desertification and
drought
The General Assembly.
Deeply concerned about the tragic consequences of the
acceleration of desertification, combined with a persistent
drought - the most serious recorded this century - which
have been reflected in a substantial drop in agricultural
production in many developing countries and which, in
particular, have contributed to the worsening of Africa's
current economic crisis,
Noting with great anxiety that desertification continues
to spread and intensify in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Deeply alarmed by recent trends indicating that farreaching climatic changes have taken place in Africa and
are making the current situation extremely critical, as
demonstrated, in particular, by the disturbing outlook noted by the Scientific Round Table on the Climatic Situation
and Drought in Africa held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 23
February 1984, 130
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 72 of 19 December 1977.
35/73 of 5 December 1980, 38/163 and 38/164 of 19
December 1983 and 38/225 of 20 December 1983,
Aware that desertification and drought problems are
increasingly assuming a structural and endemic character
l30see E/1984/109, annex.
131 See A/39/530. annex.

and that real and permanent solutions must be found in
increased global efforts based on concerted action by the
stricken countries and the international community,
Bearing in mind that the majority of the countries affected by desertification and drought are low-income countries
and, for the most part, belong to the group of the least
developed countnes. particularly those in Africa,
Noting the efforts made by the affected countries themselves and by the international community, including the
organizations of the United Nations system, to combat
desertification and drought, particularly in Africa,
Bearing in mind the results of the Ministerial Conference for a joint policy to combat desertification in the
countries of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel and the Economic Communtty of West African States, in the Maghreb countries and
in Egypt and the Sudan, held at Dakar from 18 to 27 Jui~
1984, 131
Aware that the prime responsibility in the struggle
against desertification and the effects of the drought rests
with the countries concerned and that such action is an
essential component of their development,
Considering the interdependence between developed
countries and those affected by desertification and
drought, and the negative impact of those phenomena on
the economies of the countries concerned,
Noting the positive action taken by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office as part of a joint effort by the
United Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Environment Programme to help twenty-one
African countries, on behalf of the United Nations Environment Programme, in implementing the Plan of Action
to Combat Desertification, 13 ~
Welcoming the praiseworthy efforts of the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel in
fighting the drought in the Sahe] region and its fruitful cooperation with Governments and with organizations and
agencies of the United Nations system,
Taking note of the decision made by six East African
countries - Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the
Sudan and Uganda - to set up an intergovernmental body
in order to combat the effects of the drought in those
countries, 133
Recognizing that, given the scope and intensity of
desertification, the attainment of the objectives of programmes to fight it requires financial and human resources
beyond the means of the affected countries,
l. Welcomes the results of the Ministerial Conference
for a joint policy to combat desertification in the countries
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe) and the Economic Community of West
African States, in the Maghreb countries and in Egypt and
the Sudan, convened at Dakar on the initiative of the President of Senegal, and notes with satisfaction the final resolution adopted by the Conference;'3 1
2. Recommends that high priority should be given in
the development plans and programmes of the affected
countries themselves to the problem of desertification and
to problems resulting from drought;
3. Recognizes that particular attention should be given
to countries stricken by desertification and drought and
that special efforts should be made by the international
community, particularly the developed countries, in supl32 Report of the emced J.Vations Con_ll'rence on Desertihca11on, ,\'a,roh1, 29
·lugust-9 September /<J' 7 (A CONF.74136), chap. I.

133 See A/C 2 391,. ,rnm·x

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee~----- ___________I_S~

port of action taken individually or collectively by the
affected countries;
4. Recommends that the international community,
above all the developed countries, should continue to provide coherent short-term, medium-term and long-term
assistance to the countries stricken by desertification and
drought in order to support effectively the rehabilitation
process - in particular through intensive reafforestation - and the renewal of growth of agricultural production in the affected countries, particularly in Africa;
5. Recommends that, within the framework of bilateral
and multilateral aid programmes, the fight against desertification and drought should be granted priority in view of
the extent of those problems;
6. Takes note of decision 12/10 of 28 May I 984 on
desertification, adopted by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme, 134 calls for its
full and speedy implementation, requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to
have the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office establish
specific biennial programmes for the ongoing implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, with
the requirement that these programmes be submitted for
the consideration and joint approval of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and, lastly, emphasizes the urgent need for
increased financial support by the international community for the activities of the Office and of the United
Nations Environment Programme;
7. Emphasizes the fundamental importance of all
forms of South-South co-operation m executing programmes to combat desertification and drought;
8. Appeals to all members of the international community, organs and agencies of the United Nations system,
regional and subregional financial institutions, as well as
non-governmental organizations, to continue to provide
full support, in all forms - including financial, technical,
or any other form of assistance - to the development
efforts of countries stricken by desertification and drought;
9. Welcomes the decision of the Trade and Development Board to request the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to prepare a study on the impact of desertification and drought
on the external trade of the countries affected; 135
I 0. Requests the appropriate organs and agencies of
the United Nations to provide the Secretary-General with
all relevant studies carried out in their respective spheres
of competence, in particular with respect to food and
agricultural production, development of water resources,
industrialization and raw materials, for transmission to the
stricken countries;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in
the activities of the organs and agencies of the United
Nations, emphasis should also be placed on scientific
knowledge of the causes and effects of the phenomena of
desertification and drought and on the use of the most
appropriate technology to overcome them;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to place greater
emphasis on the situation and prospects of the countries

stricken by desertification and drought in the World /fronomic Survc1~
I J. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary steps to ensure the implementation of the different activities mentioned above and to report to the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the evolution of the situation in
these countries, and to formulate proposals for specific, coordinated action.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December ! 984

134 See Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thmy-ntnth Session,
Suf~lement No. 25 (A/39/25), annex.
5 !bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/39/15). vol. II, secl. IIA resolution 295
(XXIX), para. 6.
136 See Proceedings of the United Natwns Conference on Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 73.11.D.4), annex I.A.
I 37 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexe,· (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76JI.D.I0 and corrigendum). part one. sec1. A.

I 38 find .. F(/ih Sesswn. vol. I. Rcport and .·111111'.\I'., (l ln,Jed Na11ons pubhcation, Sales No. E.79.11.D.l4). part one. sect. A.
139 f/,,d .. S,xth Session. vol. I Report and Anrw,n (I lnitcd Nations puhhcatmn. Sales No. E.83.11.D.6). part one. ,ert. A
14 0 See resolution 35/56. annex.
141 Oft,c,a/ R,n,rds of the Thml l 'mted lVatwns Confi·n•nce 011 the LaH of
thc Sea. vol. XVII (United Na11on, puhhcat1on. Sales No. F.84.V._1). document •\ '( '( lNF.62 122

39/209.

Specific action related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries

1he (icneral Assemb/_1.
Relferating the specific actions related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries stated in
resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, " 6 98 (IV) of 31 May
1976, 137 !23(V)of3June 1979Ll8 and 137(Vl)of2July
1983 119 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 3 I/ 15 7 of 21
December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150 of
20 December 1978, 34/ l 98 of 19 December 1979, 35/58
of 5 December 1980 and 36/175 of I 7 December I 98 I
and other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing
countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies, emphasizing special and urgent measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 14''
Recalling the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea. 141 adopted on 10 December 1982,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea,
aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world markets, and the prohibitive transit, transport and trans-shipment costs impose serious constraints on the socio-economic development of land-locked developing countries,
/Voting with concern that the measures taken so far m
favour of land-locked developing countries and the assistance given fall far short of their needs,
l. Reaffirms the nght of access of land-locked
countries to and from the sea and freedom of transit
through the territory of transit States by all means of transport, in accordance with article 125 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolution 63 (III), 98 (IV), 123 (V) and 137
(VI) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in the International Development Strategy
