A/RES/63/95

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 December 2008

General Assembly
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 30

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2008
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/63/401)]

63/95. Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949, 1 as well as international standards of human rights, in particular the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 3
0F

1F

2F

Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 2443 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 and 62/106 of 17 December 2007, and the relevant resolutions of
the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Taking into account the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the
International Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a
Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 4 and recalling in this regard General
Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
3F

Convinced that occupation itself represents a gross and grave violation of
human rights,
Gravely concerned about the continuing detrimental impact of the events that
have taken place since 28 September 2000, including the excessive use of force by
the Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, resulting in thousands of

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Resolution 217 A (III).
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See A/ES-10/273 and Corr.1; see also Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 136.
2

08-47649

A/RES/63/95

deaths and injuries, the widespread destruction of property and vital infrastructure
and the internal displacement of civilians,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories 5 and the relevant reports of the Secretary-General, 6
4F

5F

Recalling the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 1993 7 and the subsequent implementation
agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
6F

Expressing the hope that the Israeli occupation will be brought to an early and
complete end and that therefore the violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people will cease, and recalling in this regard its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
1.
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly and for its impartiality;
Reiterates its demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cooperate, in
2.
accordance with its obligations as a State Member of the United Nations, with the
Special Committee in implementing its mandate;
Deplores those policies and practices of Israel that violate the human
3.
rights of the Palestinian people and other Arabs of the occupied territories, as
reflected in the report of the Special Committee covering the reporting period;5
4.
Expresses grave concern about the critical situation in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, since 28 September 2000, as a result
of unlawful Israeli practices and measures, and especially condemns all illegal
Israeli settlement activities and the construction of the wall, as well as the excessive
and indiscriminate use of force against the civilian population, including
extrajudicial executions;
Requests the Special Committee, pending complete termination of the
5.
Israeli occupation, to continue to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, especially Israeli violations of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949,1 and to consult, as appropriate, with the International Committee of
the Red Cross according to its regulations in order to ensure that the welfare and
human rights of the peoples of the occupied territories are safeguarded and to report
to the Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the need arises
thereafter;
Also requests the Special Committee to submit regularly to the Secretary6.
General periodic reports on the current situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem;
Further requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the
7.
treatment of the thousands of prisoners and detainees in the Occupied Palestinian

_______________
5

See A/63/273.
A/63/482-484, 518 and 519.
7
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
6

2

A/RES/63/95

Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967;
8.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To provide the Special Committee with all necessary facilities, including
those required for its visits to the occupied territories, so that it may investigate the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present resolution;
(b) To continue to make available such staff as may be necessary to assist the
Special Committee in the performance of its tasks;
(c) To circulate regularly to Member States the periodic reports mentioned in
paragraph 6 above;
(d) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of the Special Committee
and of information regarding its activities and findings, by all means available,
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and, where
necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special Committee that are no longer
available;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the tasks
entrusted to him in the present resolution;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
the item entitled “Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories”.
64th plenary meeting
5 December 2008

3
