S/PV.7167

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7167th meeting

Friday, 2 May 2014, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon/Ms. Paik Ji-ah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

14-31939 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1431939*

Ukraine

S/PV.7167

The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council in the month of May 2014, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. U. Joy Ogwu,
Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for her service as
President of the Council during the month of April. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council when
I express my deep appreciation to Ambassador Ogwu
and her team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Since we last met to discuss Ukraine
(S/PV.7165), on Tuesday, 29 April, although a number
of areas in the country remain calm, we have seen a
further severe deterioration of the situation in parts of
eastern and southern Ukraine. Recent developments
in those areas threaten a further destabilization of the
country and the region, as well as the unity of Ukraine
itself.
In more than a dozen cities in Donetsk oblast and
Luhansk, an increasing number of buildings are being
held by armed groups. Of most immediate concern is
the situation in the eastern city of Sloviansk. That city
of 125,000 people in Donetsk oblast has been occupied
by armed insurgents since 12 April. According to
Ukraine’s Ministry of Defence, during the ongoing

2/19

02/05/2014

operations by the authorities two helicopters were
shot down overnight, with at least one pilot killed. A
number of other casualties have also been reported on
the ground on both sides. The total number cannot be
completely verified at this stage. The acting Minister
of the Interior has stated that a number of roadblocks
around the city have been removed, but from the media
we understand that tense standoffs continue in parts of
and around the city.
At the same time, the seven military monitors
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and accompanying Ukrainian military
staff being held by gunmen in Sloviansk remain in
detention, despite repeated calls for their release. To
that end, we understand that Russian President Putin
dispatched a special presidential envoy to assist in
the freeing of the hostages. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call to those responsible for their abduction
to release them immediately, unconditionally and
unharmed.
The crisis has also escalated in the Donetsk oblast
and in Donetsk itself, where yesterday, on 1 May, selfdeclared separatists seized the regional prosecutor’s
office. There have also been reports that the Ukrainian
authorities have banned Russian passenger airplanes
from flying to Donetsk and Kharkiv. We have also read
reports of clashes during a pro-unity demonstration in
the southern city of Odessa.
I would like to share with the Council key elements
of the Secretary-General’s statement that is being
issued at the same time that we are meeting:
“The Secretary-General reiterates his grave
concern over the deteriorating situation in regions
of east and south Ukraine. Escalating violence and
reported further loss of life in the city of Sloviansk
today is a stark reminder of how dangerous
the situation has become. Expansion of militia
activities and ongoing seizures of public buildings
by unidentified armed groups undercut the letter
and spirit of the 17 April Geneva statement. He
therefore urges all sides to exercise maximum
restraint and appeals to those with grievances
to voice them peacefully, so as to avoid more
bloodshed. He calls for all parties to respect fully
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
“The Secretary-General once again calls on
those responsible for the capture and detention
of OSCE military monitors and accompanying

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7167

Ukrainian staff to release them immediately,
unconditionally and unharmed.

declaration of 17 April, which require an urgent
measures to end to all violence.

“The Secretary-General stresses that a
diplomatic solution is the only way out of this crisis
and that all sides must redouble their efforts to
revive the spirit of compromise displayed during
the 17 April Geneva talks.”

In essence, at a time when Russia is striving to
de-escalate and settle the crisis and — at the request
of our Western partners and in cooperation with
the leadership of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) — recently sent
a representative of the President of the Russian
Federation to Donetsk oblast in order to find a solution
to the situation of the military specialists from several
European countries, the Kyiv regime, with the support
of its Western sponsors, has launched the full-scale use
of military force, effectively annihilating any prospects
for the implementation of the Geneva agreement.

Finally, as I informed the Council in my last
briefing, given the deteriorating situation in the
country, the Secretary-General has asked me to go back
to Kyiv next week. I will also be going to Moscow. In
both cities, I will continue to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s message of restraint and immediate return
to dialogue, including direct and constructive dialogue
between Moscow and Kyiv.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation called for today’s
emergency meeting of the Security Council with a view
to considering the resumed punitive military operations
undertaken by the authorities of the Kyiv regime,
involving terrorists, the pro-fascist Right Sector and
other ultranationalist organizations against their own
people in south-eastern Ukraine. A sub-unit of the
Ukrainian army is using tanks, other heavy artillery
and military helicopters to launch rocket striles against
protesters and land troops. The first blood has already
been spilled and reports are coming in about the killed
and wounded. If the criminal misadventures of the Kyiv
clique are not swiftly stopped, a catastrophic outcome
for Ukraine cannot be averted. We have warned of this
on many occasions.
Punitive measures against its own people bear
witness to the current Kyiv Government’s inability or
unwillingness to fulfil its obligations under the Geneva
declaration of 17 April to ensure a speedy end to all
violence and the launch of broad national dialogue,
with the participation of all regions and political forces.
If anyone entertained any doubts, it is now clear that
the many statements of the so-called Government of
Ukraine regarding its intention to begin nationwide
dialogue in the search of settlement to the far-reaching
crisis are nothing but hypocrisy. The regime in Kyiv,
having abrogated the agreement of 21 February, is now
openly violating its commitments under the Geneva

We are particularly concerned about information
that, in the course of the punitive operations undertaken
by the Ukrainian armed forces and illegal ultranationalist
groups, English has been heard being spoken on the
radio and English-speaking foreigners have been
identified among those attacking in Sloviansk. We insist
that all outside interference in the events in Ukraine is
unacceptable. It is time for our Western colleagues to
think twice, reason with their mentees in Ukraine, and
stop toying with the destiny of the Ukrainian people to
determine their own geopolitical goals.
How else can we interpret yet another blatant
example of the double standards wielded by the
United States? Following the numerous attempts
of Washington, D.C., to tell Russia where and how
its military should be properly deployed in its own
territory, the White House has now been offended by our
appeal to the Kyiv Government to withdraw its forces
from eastern Ukraine. I recall that Washington, D.C.,
used frequently to ask former President Yanukovich
of Ukraine not to use force against his people, and
threatened him with all sorts of consequences. Now,
however, in a strange twist of logic, force may and must
be used against civilians by a Government that enjoys
no legitimacy.
The High Representative of the European Union
is not far behind her United States colleagues,
philosophizing about the State’s monopoly on the
use of force. In the current context in Ukraine, her
statement can only be characterized as provocative and
inflammatory. It would seem that not only did the High
Representative not participate in signing the Geneva
declaration, but that she did not read it. In helping those
who organized the coup d’état in Kyiv to crush the

14-319393/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

protesters, the United States and the European Union
bear great responsibility for effectively destroying the
path to a peaceful solution to the crisis.
Against that backdrop, the categorical refusal
of Washington, D.C., to support the continuation of
dialogue between the representatives of Kyiv and of
south-eastern Ukraine, under the auspices of the OSCE,
would hardly seem coincidental in its contravention of
the Geneva declaration fo 17 April. What could be a
more striking example than the fact that the United
States is bent on the use of force? We call on Kyiv, its
enablers and the signers of the Geneva declaration, the
United States and the European Union, not to commit a
fatal error and to make a sober assessment at all possible
consequences of their actions. We call firmly on the
West to end its destructive policy concerning Ukraine,
and on the self-proclaimed authorities in Kyiv to swiftly
halt all punitive operations and other measures against
the people, free political prisoners and guarantee full
freedom for journalists. That would represent a genuine
process of de-escalation.
There is a need for the urgent organization of
authentic and equitable political dialogue, with the
participation of all regions, to reach mutual agreement
on the future of the country, rather than pretend to
draft reforms within the small circle of self-styled
Government of winners. Those who gave the criminal
order to unleash bloodshed will bear full responsibility
for whatever happens in Ukraine.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I pay tribute
to the Permanent Representative of Nigeria and her
team in their presidency of the Council for last month.
Here we are once again, meeting to address the
crisis in Ukraine. Each time, the Council flaunts
its divisions and hence its powerlessness while that
unhappy country sinks into anarchy.
Let us return to the facts. In eastern Ukraine,
armed groups are gradually seizing the cities. They
enjoy no crowds of supporters other than a few hundred
demonstrators. Their heavy weaponry disqualigies
them as mere sympathetic activists. Russian officers
strut on local television. Observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and jouralists
have been taken hostage. Numerous people have
been detained; more seriously, increasingly credible
allegations are surfacing of enforced disappearances,
killings and torture. These thugs have refused to

4/19

02/05/2014

implement the Geneva agreement that was intended to
restore the Ukrainian State on its territory.
What has Ukraine done? After showing a restraint
that no other State would have exhbited in the presence
of these attacks on its authority — attacks that have been
organized, supported and justified by a neighbour — it
decided to use its army and police against the armed
gangs spreading a sense of insecurity at the expense
of people most of whom do not support them. These
gangs have so little in common with the spontaneous
coelescence of local groups that they were able to shoot
down a helicopter with a surface-to-air missile — which,
it must be acknowledged, is not commonly found at the
Kharkiv market.
By what right would anyone meddle in the internal
affairs of a State that is only seeking to restore its
violated sovereignty? At the bilateral level, we can
recall the need to act with restraint, but so far there is
no evidence that it has not done so. Going any further
would be to violate the Charter of the United Nations.
I know that reality has left that scenario far behind.
Having trampled the principle of the territorial integrity
of States, the same can be done to the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. After
all, in sin, it is only the first step that bears a cost, as
the moralists say.
Russia has proven that by renouncing, one after
the other, the principles underlying international life.
But it still has a few regrets as it spirals downwards,
so it tries, against all credibility, to blame the other. It
invokes the agreement of 21 February, which it did not
endorse and discovered only when it was too late. It
brandishes the Geneva agreement, for the achievement
of which it made no effort. Lastly, it makes accusations
that would be comical under different circumstances:
the Nazis are in Kyiv, English speakers have infiltrated
the ranks of Ukrainians — which makes me jealous
that no French speakers are included — and, finally,
the European Union is responsible for the violence.
No, the facts are much more simple. In reality,
Russia has opened a Pandora’s box. They have let the
demon of nationalism escape. They have unleashed
bands of thugs on Ukraine. The only alternatives they
are offering Kyiv are capitulation or partition — and
they are suddenly discovering that this mixture can go
completely out of control; that nationalism can oblige
them to do what they do not want to do; that the thugs
act like thugs and, finally, that Ukraine, faced with the

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

impossible choice they wish to impose on it, can hit
back. At that point, the fire-starting firefighters shriek
loudly to try to make us forget that in fact it was them
who chose this road, and that it is Russia who should
retreat.
For our part, we have been saying for weeks that we
are seeking a de-escalation — we want a de-escalation.
But de-escalation implies that Russia will calm the
armed groups it is equipping and training; that it
will see that the OSCE observers are freed — having
still not publicly condemned their capture in the first
place — and open negotiations with Ukraine; that free
elections will be held on 25 May under international
supervision in order to give the Kyiv authorities
indisputable legitimacy; and that negotiations begin
between Russia and Ukraine. Compromises are possible.
Ukraine is aware of the stakes and is ready, and the
countries of Europe, the most closely concerned in this
crisis, are too. Constitutional reform that responds to the
concerns of the people of eastern Ukraine and respects
Ukraine’s sovereignty is quite conceivable. But for that
to happen, we have to put an end to this bad spy thriller,
in which the Minister for Foreign Affairs is replaced by
an information service when a crisis has to be resolved.
What we need today is not a vodka-loving James Bond
but diplomats who can return to the principles that form
the foundations of international life.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. I would also like to thank Ambassador Ogwu
and the Nigerian team for their admirable stewardship
of the Council in April.
Thank you for convening this meeting, Mr. President.
The Russian Federation has described this morning’s
events in eastern Ukraine as a punitive military
operation against peaceful activists. This is yet
again a gross distortion of the facts. The Ukrainian
Government has the right, and indeed the responsibility,
to uphold the rule of law and protect its citizens in its
own territory. Of course, in doing so it should at all
times act in a proportionate and measured way. The
actions undertaken this morning by Ukrainian security
forces in and around Sloviansk appear to have been
just that, in an effort to relieve the city from the armed
groups, sponsored and controlled by Russia, that have
been terrorizing the local population. We urge them to
continue to make every effort to ensure that the risks to
civilians are minimized.

S/PV.7167

But let us be absolutely clear. There is no Council
member sitting around this table that would allow its
towns to be overrun by armed militants. None of us
would abrogate responsibility for the protection of
citizens on our own territory who are being intimidated
and brutalized by heavily armed groups backed by
a neighbouring country. Proportionate is not the
same as passive. The scale of Russian hypocrisy is
breathtaking. Russia stoutly supports, and indeed
arms, the most repressive regimes in the world, notably
Syria, a regime that brutally represses dissent without
any sense of restraint or concern for the protection of
civilians. Russia’s synthetic indignation over Ukraine’s
proportionate and measured actions convinces no one.
Russian claims that these are peaceful activists are
simply not credible. Peaceful activists do not have the
means or the capability to shoot down three Ukrainian
military helicopters, reportedly using man-portable
air defence systems. The use of such sophisticated
weaponry against Ukrainian forces reaffirms our
assessment that the armed groups in eastern Ukraine
include professionals funded, equipped and directed by
Russia.
The situation in eastern Ukraine has continued to
deteriorate. Armed groups stormed the Prosecutor’s
office in Donetsk yesterday, further increasing the
number of Government buildings occupied since the
17 April Geneva agreement. We remain seriously
concerned about the kidnapping and continued
detention of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Vienna Document inspectors,
and call on Russia to condemn this criminal act and
use its influence over those who are holding the
inspectors to bring about their immediate, safe and
unconditional release. We are deeply disturbed by the
reports of abductions and intimidation of journalists
reporting from eastern Ukraine. The Council discussed
the protection of journalists in an open debate last year
(see S/PV.7003). One of its clearest conclusions was on
the central importance of safeguarding a free media so
that facts and truth can be told. Instead, what we are
seeing in Ukraine is a torrent of disinformation and
propaganda.
Three days ago, all the members of the Council
emphasized the importance of the 17 April agreement
and its implementation (see S/PV.7165). Abiding by
that agreement remains the best way to de-escalate the
volatile and dangerous situation in eastern Ukraine.
It is therefore regrettable that Russia’s presidential

14-319395/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

press secretary said this morning that Russia did not
think it any longer possible to implement the 17 April
agreement. Worsening instability in Ukraine is in no
one’s long-term interest. We urge Russia to step back
from such rhetoric, to desist from its inflammatory
propaganda and to commit to de-escalating a perilous
situation. We urge Russia to throw its full weight behind
the 17 April agreement and rein in the militant armed
groups that it supports and that are responsible for the
current crisis.
Ms. Power (United States of America): In recent
months, the Council has met more than a dozen times
regarding the situation in Ukraine. Time and again, we
have urged for respect for Ukraine’s territorial integrity,
adherence to international law, and steps to reduce
tensions and de-escalate the crisis. Just this Tuesday,
we met to discuss Russia’s inexcusable failure to fulfil
its obligations under the 17 April Geneva agreement
(see S/PV.7165).
Russia is pushing two monumental falsehoods
right now. The first falsehood is that the Ukrainians are
carrying out a large-scale, uncontrolled, violent attack
on unarmed civilians. That is false. The Ukrainian
Government is carrying out a targeted effort to contain
Russian-sponsored paramilitary violence emanating
from Sloviansk, in an effort to deliver security for
Ukrainian citizens. There is horrible violence in
eastern Ukraine, and that violence is coming, as it has
been for weeks now, from Russian-directed agents
and paramilitaries and their associates. The second
monumental falsehood is that the Russian Federation is
deeply concerned about the instability in the east. The
rest of us are deeply and sincerely concerned by that
instability. But despite all its rhetoric, Russia cannot
be, because Russia is causing the instability. This
expressed concern is cynical and disingenuous, and
meant only to distract us from the reality that is playing
out before our eyes.
Today I want to focus on one main point. From
the outset, the Government of Ukraine has sought to
resolve all issues peacefully through dialogue, both
internally and with the Russian Federation. This policy
of restraint continued even after Russia subverted
Crimea, orchestrated an undemocratic separatist vote
in Crimea, invaded Crimea and announced to the world
that it had annexed Crimea — while lying about its
intentions and even its presence in Crimea every step of
the way. As its country has been carved up, as foreign
operatives have moved into its homeland, as masses of

6/19

02/05/2014

Russian troops have assembled along its eastern border,
and as Moscow has continued to threaten its territorial
integrity and its people, Ukraine has continuously, day
after day, shown remarkable, almost unimaginable,
restraint. It has done as the Council has asked. It
has implemented its international agreements. It has
refrained from military responses to aggression, even
as Russia proudly announced that it had annexed part
of Ukraine. Ukraine has over and over again committed
and recommitted itself to direct dialogue with Moscow.
And yet, in return for Ukraine’s reasonableness, Russia
has destabilized, threatened and terrorized.
In past weeks, the same scenario that played
itself out in Crimea has been repeating itself in parts
of eastern Ukraine: the same sudden appearance of
unfamiliar men and new armaments; the same strategy
of occupying buildings and taking control of the media;
the same vicious propaganda directed against the
Government of Ukraine and the same denials of Russian
involvement; and the same cries of outrage whenever
Ukraine takes a step to assert its own rights, enforce its
own laws, protect its own citizens and restore order on
its own territory.
The Ukrainian people and Government have
embarked on an effort today to reclaim one city in
the eastern part of their country. Their response is
reasonable, it is proportional and, frankly, it is what
any one of our countries would have done in the face
of that threat.
Imagine for a moment if 26,000 square kilometres
of Russian territory were seized by another country.
Would Moscow show restraint, week after week, day
after day, in the hopes that rational dialogue rather
than brute force would prevail? How would President
Putin respond, if parts of his country were seized, to
requests to remove his army from those parts of the
country? Seriously, there is some irony in Russian
demands, given the manner in which it would deal with
separatism within its borders.
It has been 63 days since Russia began its campaign
to annex Crimea, and for 63 days, day after day, the
Ukrainian Government has chosen peace. Yet in those
same 63 days, Russia, day after day, has chosen to
pursue more territory.
Consider the following facts. Pro-Russian
separatists have seized the Donetsk railway control
centre and stopped almost all train movements. That is
an illegal act. Separatists seized control of the Donetsk

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

General Prosecutor’s office, in a violent clash that left
more than two dozen people hospitalized. That is an
illegal act. Separatists seized the General Prosecutor’s
office in Horlivka. That is an illegal act. Pro-Russian
activists beat up two Radio Svoboda journalists who
were filming a protest near the Kharkiv regional
administration building on 1 May. That is an illegal act.
We could go on and on and on and on about the illegal
acts.
All told, in 17 towns in eastern Ukraine
32 buildings are under occupation, 21 by armed
personnel. In addition, we have seen dozens of
Ukrainian public officials illegally detained, three
bodies pulled from a river near Donetsk and a group
of eight, now seven, monitors of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) abducted,
in direct defiance not simply of Ukraine’s Government
but of the Council and the world community.
Alongside all of that action, we have heard the Russian
Federation building its case for intervention — outright
intervention — including President Putin saying that
eastern Ukrainian cities and Odessa were not even part
of Ukraine in the “good old days”, harkening back to
the glory of Novorossiysk. And Ambassador Churkin
has taken the United Nations Charter’s name in vein by
invoking Article 51 in self-defence, as activated during
the Russian takeover of parts of Georgia and relevant
here in the context of the crisis in eastern Ukraine. The
country that has a right of self-defence, Ambassador
Churkin, is Ukraine.
Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine is
a clear violation of international law, and Russia
fools no one by calling its troops “peacekeepers”.
Unfortunately, Russia does have a track record of using
the term “peacekeeping” as cover for unlawful military
intervention and occupation without authorization from
the Security Council. There is no evidence that the
Ukrainian Government has targeted Russian nationals
or threatened Russia in any way, in stark contrast to the
ongoing Russian actions to destabilize eastern Ukraine.
If Russia thinks peacekeeping forces are required in
Ukraine, it should come to the Security Council and
seek United Nations peacekeepers.
Those separatists are not engaged in peaceful
protest on behalf of their rights. Their rights are not
being threatened. Their ability to use their language
and have it recognized by the Government is not
being threatened. Their ability to participate fully as

S/PV.7167

voters and citizens is not being threatened. It is their
methods that have been intentionally provocative and
threatening. The separatists are not pressing their case
peacefully. They are using baseball bats, metal bars,
clubs and knives. Those are not activists, they are
armed operatives. It must stop.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the Ukrainian
Government has acted in good faith and with admirable
restraint. The area around Kyiv City Hall is now clear
of all Maidan barricades and protesters. Over the Easter
holiday, Ukraine voluntarily suspended its counterterrorism initiative, choosing to de-escalate, despite
its fundamental right to provide security on its own
territory and for its own people. Even today, as a it tries
to lawfully restore order, Ukrainian security forces are
operating in a cautious and restrained manner. Unlike
the separatists, Ukraine has cooperated fully with
the OSCE special monitoring mission and allowed its
observers to operate in regions about which Moscow
had voiced concerns regarding the treatment of ethnic
Russians. In addition, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has
publicly committed his Government to undertake farreaching constitutional reforms that will strengthen
the power of the regions. He has appealed personally
to Russian-speaking Ukrainians, pledging to support a
special status for the Russian language and to protect
those who use it. He announced legislation to grant
amnesty to those who surrendered arms.
The fact that Ukraine has now taken some steps to
try to restore order is to be expected. It is justified. It
is what each and every one of the States we represent
would do in a similar situation, and would probably
have done far earlier. The fact that Russia has chosen
to call an emergency meeting in protest is yet another
indication that the authorities in Moscow either
underestimate the intelligence of the world community
or that they are trying to exactly replicate in eastern
Ukraine the charade that they were responsible for in
Crimea. We are outraged by that prospect, but we are
not fooled.
Just as Russia and its pro-Russian militia allies
engage in a dramatic and dangerous campaign in
eastern Ukraine, the Russian Government is spreading
some of its most wild propaganda and fantasy stories
since the beginning of the crisis. Over the course of
the aggression, some of those entrusted with carrying
out the functions of the municipal Government and
those reporting impartially on the facts have begun to
slowly disappear. Local council members, local police

14-319397/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

and journalists are missing and being held by armed
operatives. International observers from the Vienna
Document observation team, as the Council knows,
are being held in hostage. Those who have an interest
and a mandate to report on the truth are being silenced,
and that silence is being filled with relentless Russian
propaganda and fiction that, it seems, they hope will
justify whatever actions they decide to take.
Today’s Russian Foreign Ministry ridiculous and
false statement purporting Western intervention would
not be so alarming if it did not suggest that Moscow is
looking for nothing short of a pretext to invade. Russia
may have the power to instigate fear, to spread lies and
to sow discord, violence and disarray across its border.
It may even have the power to abuse its veto at the
Security Council. But, as we have said in the Chamber
before, it cannot veto the truth.
These are dangerous days for Ukraine and for all of
us. If there is hope to de-escalate, Russia must pull back
its troops from the eastern border of Ukraine, it must
cease its campaign of instability inside of Ukraine, and
it must work to release the international observers and
journalists who have been taken by armed men working
on behalf of Moscow’s agenda.
Over the past 63 days, in the face of aggression
and annexation, the Council implored the Ukrainians
to demonstrate restraint, and they heeded our call. We
also asked Russia to stop invading its neighbour. Sadly,
it did not. For that, Russia must be held accountable.
In conclusion, I reiterate the support of my
Government for the principles of the United Nations
Charter. We continue to support the scheduled 25 May
elections, which will enable the people of Ukraine to
choose their leaders freely and fairly. We continue
to seek a peaceful, democratic, inclusive and united
Ukraine. We remain committed to a diplomatic process.
Finally and most urgently, we call on Russia to
cease its provocative acts and to fulfil the Geneva
commitments from which it has walked away.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.
The situation in eastern Ukraine is deteriorating
in a worrying manner. Everything must be done so
that it does not degenerate into an open conflict with
incalculable consequences for international peace and
security.

8/19

02/05/2014

We are deeply concerned by the actions of
pro-Russian militias separatists supported by Russia,
who are clearly trying to destabilize the east of Ukraine
and to prevent the holding of presidential elections on
25 May.
Faced with violations of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity for two months now, the Ukrainian
authorities have demonstrated restraint. They did not
respond militarily to the occupation or annexation
of Crimea by the Russian Federation. Until now,
the Ukrainian authorities have shown the greatest of
restraint in responding to the proliferation of cases of
illegal occupation of public buildings by armed militias,
the growing number of attacks against Ukrainian
security forces and the surge in violence against those
demonstrating peacefully in favour of the unity of
Ukraine in the east of the country.
We deeply regret that the confrontations today near
Sloviansk and during the demonstrations in Odessa have
led to deaths and scores of injured, according to media
reports. We reiterate our call for the de-escalation of
tensions and for restraint on all sides, fully in keeping
with the joint statement adopted on 17 April in Geneva
by the chief diplomats of Ukraine, Russia, the United
States and the European Union. This is no time to tear
up that agreement, but to uphold it. The loss of human
life over the past few hours could have been avoided if
all parties involved had done the necessary to implement
the Geneva statement.
As we meet here, the situation on the ground
is chaotic. The presence throughout the territory of
Ukraine of impartial observers from the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) is crucial for establishing the facts
and defusing the war-mongering propaganda. Neutral
monitoring and reporting of the facts will help create
the conditions to de-escalate this dangerous situation.
The OSCE special monitoring mission must be able to
fully carry out its work to support the de-escalation
measures set out in the Geneva statement.
The safety of the international observers deployed
across Ukraine must be guaranteed by all of the
parties. We take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
condemnation of the kidnapping of a team of military
inspectors deployed under the OSCE 2011 Vienna
Document. We reiterate our call on Russia to continue
using all of its influence on the pro-Russian separatists
to free, unconditionally and without delay, the seven

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

monitors from OSCE participating States, whom they
have been detaining in Sloviansk for one week now, as
well as the Ukrainian personnel accompanying them.
Luxembourg continues to believe that a peaceful
way out of this crisis can be found. Nothing can replace
direct substantive dialogue between Kyiv and Moscow
to find a diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
For that dialogue to take place, we must urgently
proceed to the de-escalation of tensions. We hope that
Mr. Feltman’s upcoming visit to Moscow and Kyiv
will contribute to that. The good offices of the United
Nations are needed now more than ever.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I join
other speakers in expressing my confidence, on behalf
of the delegation of Argentina, in Korea’s leadership
during the month of its presidency. I also express my
recognition and gratitude to the Nigerian presidency of
last month.I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his briefing on
the situation in Ukraine.
We are meeting for the second time this week to
discuss once again the alarming situation in Ukraine,
showing that the Security Council has a responsibility
to express — and for Argentina, to reiterate — its
concern that wide-scale violent confrontations could
result from the growing tensions. The alarming reports
coming from Solviansk suggest that such confrontations
have occurred and that there is a serious risk of entering
into a spiral of violence with grave consequences for
Ukraine, the region and the international community.
Argentina condemns the acts of violence reported
in eastern Ukraine that have claimed human lives.
Unfortunately, the calls by the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and the international community
on all parties to seek to calm the situation, exhibit the
greatest of self-control and to contribute to constructive
dialogue have not been heeded. The spirit compromise
shown in Geneva has deteriorated rapidly and must be
recovered in order to find a political and diplomatic
solution to the crisis.
It must be made clear to all parties that a peaceful
solution to the difficult situation in Ukraine cannot
be achieved through unilateral acts of any sort. It is
particularly crucial that all parties fully respect human
rights law and international humanitarian law, respect
the rights of all minorities and ensure that all actions
are strictly within international law.

S/PV.7167

The only solution that Argentina, like the rest of
the international community, considers desirable and
necessary is that reached through an inclusive national
dialogue with the participation of all of the parties
involved. However, to launch such a dialogue process
and move towards a solution, it is crucial to create
conditions conducive to negotiation, build confidence
among the various communities and provide assurances
to all Ukrainians throughout Ukraine that their main
concerns will be addressed, with full respect for
Ukraine’s right to see to its internal affairs.
We have witnessed further confrontational rhetoric
once again, speeches fomenting hate, discrimination,
hostility and violence, and actions that serve only
to escalate the already highly volatile situation.
All of this seriously undermines any effort by the
international community to encourage the parties to
enter into constructive dialogue towards a peaceful
politico-diplomatic solution to the crisis.
It is therefore crucial that the most influential
actors engage in constructive diplomacy, refrain from
confrontational rhetoric and use their influence on the
parties for progress in the effective implementation
of the measures agreed on 17 April in Geneva. Those
measures are necessary, indeed indispensable, for
de-escalating tensions and finding a way out of the
crisis.
Finally, human lives are at stake and regional
stability is at risk. Respect for the founding principles
of the Charter of the United Nations must be ensured,
including the universal principles of the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Ukraine. The Security Council has met several times
in a short period to address this situation, but we have
not manifested the capacity to play a constructive
role to find a way out of the crisis. Members’ calls
to de-escalate tensions, exercise restraint and pursue
dialogue have no effect because they are not coherent.
We have not been able to send out a message in a
single voice or to take any sort of action. But it is not
too late. The worst can still be averted. Perhaps the
Council will — it should — be able to send the same
message today as the one the Secretary-General made
today, in the same terms, in the same spirit and with
the same convictions, that is, that we must assume
our responsibility to maintain international peace and
security.

14-319399/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): When we met on 29 April
on the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7165), we urged
Russia to abide by the commitments it made in Geneva
on 17 April, including to refrain from violence,
intimidation and provocative actions. Since then, as
Under-Secretary-General Feltman has just told us,
the situation has further deteriorated severely. This
planned and coordinated destabilization could not
happen without external support. The shooting down of
Ukrainian helicopters in Sloviansk today by surface-toair missiles is dramatic further evidence of that. We are
witnessing well-armed, well-trained personnel, using
military weapons, who are intent on armed provocation.
We have seen further takeover and consolidation of
control by armed militia groups over key facilities in
cities and towns right across eastern Ukraine, including
Donetsk, Kharkiv, Mariupol, Sloviansk and Holivka.
Orchestrated violence has today spread to Odessa.
Journalists in eastern Ukraine have been detained.
There are kidnappings and torture. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers,
detained on 25 April, are still being held hostage a
week later. That is an affront to the entire international
community, and they must be released immediately.
Those actions by pro-Russian groups are clearly
not a legitimate protest or an attempt to protect Russian
speakers from alleged or spurious threats. They are
calculated, cynical and highly provocative actions,
obviously designed to undermine Ukrainian State
authority, to intimidate and de-stabilize. They make
a mockery of what Russia has committed to in the
Geneva agreement.
Ukraine itself is working to implement its Geneva
commitments. It has submitted to Parliament a draft law
and amnesty for protesters who surrender their weapons.
It has initiated a process of constitutional reform aimed
at decentralizing power. It has committed to holding a
broad public debate on possible constitutional change.
However, in response to the extreme provocation that
Ukraine is facing, Ukrainian authorities have the right
and responsibility to seek to reinstate State authority
and restore public order over all their territory.
Ukrainian authorities have given clear messages to
militant groups as to what is required of them, as Interior
Minister Avakov has said: “Free the hostages. Lay
down weapons. Vacate administrative buildings, and
get municipal infrastructure back to normal”. That has
not happened. In these circumstances, it is appropriate

10/19

02/05/2014

and necessary for the Ukrainian Government to take
measures to try to ensure security and protect its own
citizens in its own territory.
We have seen a statement from Russia’s Foreign
Ministry earlier today describing — hypocritically,
shamelessly — the policy of those who have supported
Ukraine as “destructive”. But what is destructive
is Russia’s reckless interference in its neighbour’s
affairs — destructive of Ukraine’s stability and
territorial integrity, destructive of the Geneva
agreement, destructive of regional security, destructive
of the Charter of the United Nations and the laws
governing relations between countries and destructive
of Russia’s own standing and credibility.
We are at a very dangerous, manipulated moment,
and Russia must immediately de-escalate the situation,
ensure that militia groups desist in their armed rebellion,
implement the Geneva agreement and demonstrate,
as President Putin has claimed, that it has no further
territorial ambitions on Ukraine. That certainly does
not appear to be the case.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to express appreciation to the Ambassador of
Nigeria and her team for their outstanding leadership of
the work of the Council last month. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Feltman
for his briefing.
In recent days, the situation in some areas in southeastern Ukraine has been characterized by ongoing
tensions and escalation that have resulted in casualties.
That is a matter of deep concern to China. China has
indicated on many occasions its principled position
on the question of Ukraine. We hope that the parties
concerned will proceed from the need to safeguard
the fundamental interests of various ethnic groups in
Ukraine, maintain regional peace and stability, keep
calm, exercise restraint and avoid further deterioration
of the situation.
A political solution is the only way out of the
crisis in Ukraine. A fundamental settlement to the
crisis in Ukraine needs to take into consideration the
history and the reality, and accommodate the legitimate
rights, interests and aspirations of various regions and
ethnic groups within Ukraine, as well as the legitimate
concerns of all parties, so as to achieve a balance of
their interests.

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

For some time, various parties, including China,
have worked actively to promote peace and facilitate
negotiations. The four-party talks in Geneva among the
Russian Federation, the United States, the European
Union and Ukraine agreed on the need to take measures
to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine. We hope that
the parties concerned will stick to dialogue and
consultations, effectively implement the agreements
reached, forcefully promote the process of political
settlement and achieve stability and development in
Ukraine as soon as possible.
China calls on all parties to seek a political
settlement to the question of Ukraine through dialogue,
not confrontation. We will continue to support
international good offices that will help to de-escalate
the situation and promote a political settlement.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your accession
to the presidency of the Council, and I wish you and
your entire team every success in your endeavours. I
would also like to pay tribute to Mrs. Joy Ogwu and her
team for Nigeria’s excellent stewardship of the Council
last month. I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman for
his briefing.
Despite repeated calls for restraint and for calm,
Chad notes with great concern that the situation in
eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate politically and
in terms of security and runs the risk of degenerating
into a war with incalculable consequences. A number
of missions, attempts at arbitration, mediation and
other efforts have been undertaken to contribute to
de-escalating the situation and to opening the way to
dialogue. The results, however, have fallen far short of
expectations.
Chad condemns the most recent acts of violence in
eastern Ukraine, which have led to a number of deaths
and significant material damage. Given the grave
situation, Chad reiterates its call for an immediate halt
to the fighting and for adherence to non-violence, both
by Government forces and the separatists. We also
launch an appeal for the release of the seven observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe still being held in detention. We remain
convinced that a solution to the Ukrainian problem is
necessarily a political. It must be sought in full respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of
Ukraine and in keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations.

S/PV.7167

Chad also reiterates its call for calm, restraint and a
de-escalation of the situation. We call on the countries
with influence on the parties to use all means possible to
establish direct dialogue between the parties. With that
in mind, we encourage the international community,
especially the Secretary-General, to redouble efforts
to bring about a rapprochement between the parties in
order to find a peaceful solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): Let me start by
congratulating the Korean delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. I wish you every success during your tenure,
Madam. I would also like to express my delegation’s
appreciation and gratitude to the outgoing presidency of
Nigeria for its wise stewardship of the Council during
the month of April. I would also like to thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman for his brief but troubling information.
I would like to return to a question that has been
already raised: What would a country do if a group
of people in one of its towns decided to break away
and declare themselves above the country’s laws and
Constitution, arm themselves illegally and attack local
Government, administrative and justice buildings and
take hostages and practice enforced disappearances,
beatings and killings? If such groups were supported
by sponsors from abroad and propped up by massive
propaganda campaigns demonizing the people and the
Government, and if provocations were expanding into
other regions of one’s country, would one sit and wait
for the country to be decimated, or would one act in the
country’s interest, protecting its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity?
Ukraine has taken belated and highly cautious
actions against those who are determined to carve it
up and parcel it out. Like any other State represented
in this Chamber, it has the right to protect its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity by all means
necessary.
As far as punitive actions go, let us be frank.
There were more victims on Thursday in Aleppo after
a market bombing by barrel bombs: at least 33 people
were killed and many more were wounded. That
took place a day after a barrel bomb was dropped by
a Government aircraft on an elementary school in
another part of the city, killing at least 20 other people,
including 17 children. Russia has so far not condemned
that punitive act by the Al-Assad regime, like countless

14-3193911/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

similar acts by the regime in the course of more then
three years of ongoing war in that country.
Today in eastern Ukraine, two Ukrainian helicopters
were shot down by mobile air defence systems, killing
two military officers and injuring seven others. Another
army helicopter was also damaged. Militants used
grenade launchers and portable air defence systems.
Peaceful protesters do not use grenade launchers that
can shoot down helicopters, or perhaps planes at some
time in the future. Peaceful protesters do not take
their morning walks armed with heavy weapons and
automatic weapons. They do not kidnap and shamelessly
parade international observers. Today provocations and
instigations are being carried out in yet another city in
Ukraine, as our Australian colleague has mentioned,
and there have now been deaths in Odessa.
Had the separatists respected and carried out the
Geneva statement, had they not taken up arms against
their own State in the first place, none of that would
be happening. It would not be happening had Russia,
the only Power with real influence on the separatists,
denounced such acts of aggression and called on the
separatists to accept a peaceful path of talks with the
central Government. Instead, Russia chose to continue
to put the blame on Ukraine, the only side that is actually
taking some steps — at gunpoint — to implement the
Geneva statement.
In addition to the various initiatives that were
referred to a couple of days ago during the Council’s open
briefing (see S/PV.7165) — an amnesty law, a limitation
of presidential powers, decentralization — Ukraine’s
Prime Minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, has now
announced that the Government will submit a draft law
to the Parliament on a referendum on national unity,
territorial integrity and decentralization, to be held
on 25 May together with the presidential elections.
He again stressed that decentralization would grant,
in certain territories, additional guarantees to the
Russian-speaking population, as well as to members of
ethnic minorities.
But I guess that people in eastern and southern
Ukraine do not really know that such initiatives even
exist, because an aggressive propaganda machine has
drowned out the voice of Kyiv, with its alternative
narrative of Ukraine’s demonization. They simply will
not be allowed to know that viable alternatives exist
to the path of war, because that is not in the plans of
those who cannot wait to disrupt the 25 May elections

12/19

02/05/2014

and proceed with Ukraine’s dismemberment, under
false referendums, the so-called “will of the people” or
any sham pretext still in use by pro-Russian militants
and their State sponsors. And we must very carefully
watch on 11 May, when the self-proclaimed so-called
“people’s mayor” of Donetsk republic is demanding
a new referendum be held. I would not be surprised
if another request to join Russia follows after that
referendum.
My Government condemns all attempts to destroy
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and firmly rejects all Russian attempts to
validate its intentions and threats to use armed forces or
to send Russian Federation peacekeepers into Ukraine’s
territory.
A couple of days ago, we expressed support for the
Secretary-General’s initiatives and called for stepping
up international mediation efforts. We now welcome
the fact that Under-Secretary-General Feltman will
be going to the region. We fully stand behind the
efforts to de-escalate the situation. We also think, as
the representative of Luxembourg has stated, that
the international observers who are there to provide
unbiased, objective information must be allowed to
work across all of Ukraine’s territory, in order to help
us all better understand what is happening there, but
also to help in de-escalating the situation before it
becomes much worse.
The international community must mobilize to
prevent the crisis from turning into a real bloodbath. For
we have seen, time and again, how deadly, horrifying
and inhuman the results of incitement and demonizing
the other can be. We have seen it in South Sudan, in
the Central African Republic and elsewhere. In a tragic
twist of irony, in the middle of Europe two sisterly
nations, two Slavic Orthodox nations, may start killing
each other, both victims of ruthless manipulation
through propaganda, orchestrated by the Kremlin. The
Geneva statement is the only thing we have on the table
now. We should go back to it. We hae to let it work. It is
in the interests of all of us.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Madam
President, for accepting to shepherd the Security
Council in the month of May. My delegation wishes you
green pastures.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
update.

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

The delicate nature of the situation in Ukraine
impels us to urge great circumspection by the contending
parties in order to avoid a degeneration of the crisis into
full-blown military confrontation. That consideration
is even more pertinent today, as developments on the
ground have assumed an anarchical dimension. The
reported downing of two Ukrainian military helicopters
yesterday and the seizure of a local railway control
centre near Donetsk by unidentified armed groups
amplify our concerns. The brazen takeover and control
of public establishments by armed groups has led to
the recent response by the Government of Ukraine.
We acknowledge the responsibility of the Government
to maintain public order and the rule of law. It is also
possible to restore public order in a measured manner
to avoid degeneration into a full-blown conflict.
Our call on all parties to de-escalate tensions could
not be more urgent. We reiterate our position that the
outcome of the Geneva meeting of 17 April among
Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the European Union
and the United States provides the path to the resolution
of the conflict. There are, however, prerequisites to
that. All sides must refrain from violence, intimidation
or provocative action. All armed groups must disarm
and vacate illegally seized buildings.
The doors to a diplomatic solution must remain
open. The international community, including the
United Nations and the relevant regional organizations,
must remain engaged and committed to finding a
peaceful solution that takes into consideration the
interests of all people of Ukraine. We would like to
see Ukraine return to peace, security and stability, and
its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
respected in accordance with the Charter of United
Nations.
The
alternative
would
resemble
falling
dominoes — not only in the region but in every other
region in the world. Perhaps we should all study the
domino theory. We would be mortified by what we saw.
The current scenario is for us simply mortifying. It
is our collective responsibility to prevent the domino
theory from being replayed out in our times.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We would
also like to congratulate the Republic of Korea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We thank the delegation of Nigeria for
all its work as President of the Council last month. And

S/PV.7167

we thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.
Jordan would like to express its deep concern
about the most recent developments in Sloviansk in the
east of Ukraine, in addition to the spillover violence
in other regions of the country, including in Odessa.
We call upon all parties to demonstrate restraint. We
call for a return to calm and for de-escalation and
full cooperation with the monitors affiliated with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We reiterate our appeal for the release of all
hostages held by rebels in Sloviansk, including the
OSCE monitors.
What is happening today in the east of Ukraine
is not civil war, but rather a mutiny. The actions
of the rebels, including the ongoing occupation of
seized Government buildings, the use of force, the
intimidation of civilians and threats to their life and
security, are in violation of the law. As Mr. Feltman
said, the continuation of those actions runs counter to
the letter and spirit of the Geneva agreement signed in
April. We reaffirm Ukraine’s right to take appropriate
and effective measures to halt violations in the eastern
part of the country, preserve its unity and sovereignty,
safeguard the security of its citizens and uphold
constitutional and legal order.
At the same time, we call upon the Ukrainian
Government to work towards a peaceful solution to
the crisis and respect international norms in dealing
with the situation. It is important to uphold the relevant
human rights principles and to spare no effort in
immediately engaging in dialogue with stakeholders
to reach a peaceful solution. We must not lose the
opportunity brought about by the Geneva agreement,
which is a guarantee for calm in the east of the country
and for preserving the territorial unity of Ukraine. We
appeal to the stakeholders to implement the agreement
and bring pressure to bear on the rebels to end the crisis.
Rebels and all active stakeholders in Ukraine
should refrain from racist or hate speech. There is a
need to guarantee a return to stability in the country. We
call upon all players to help the Ukrainian authorities
in their efforts to guarantee success on the political
transition process and to start a comprehensive and
direct dialogue with all linguistic groups.
Finally, we underscore the importance of respecting
the legitimate aspirations of the Ukrainian people and of
working tirelessly to ensure that presidential elections

14-3193913/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

are held within the set time frame in May, in line with
those aspirations and while ensuring the future that
Ukrainian citizens deserve, within the framework of a
comprehensive, effective and lasting political process.
Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of
Korea on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We would like to reiterate our commitment to
providing ongoing support towards the success of its
stewardship. We also thank the delegation of Nigeria
for its excellent work in the presidency during the
month of April.
We value the briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman.
Since the Council last met to discuss the situation in
Ukraine (see S/PV.7165), just three days ago, the crisis
has escalated and, once again, we see acts of violence
involving separatist groups. The crisis is very quickly
entering a dangerous and unpredictable phase. We
regret that turn of events and we would like to express
our deep concern at the recent events in Sloviansk that
had fatal consequences.
The Council must contribute to generating
maximum restraint and moderation from the parties.
We reiterate our call upon all parties to use all means
conducive to finding a peaceful settlement of the
crisis through inclusive political dialogue. It is also
extremely important that parties focus on a peaceful
way out of the crisis through direct political dialogue,
that they refrain from acting unilaterally and that they
support international mediation efforts, in keeping with
General Assembly resolution 68/262. In that context,
we reiterate our condemnation of the kidnapping of
observers affiliated with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and we reiterate our call for
them to be released immediately and without conditions.
Now more than ever, it is vital to work in a spirit of
compromise like that which we saw during the Geneva
talks on 17 April, which then led to the joint declaration
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, the United States of America, Ukraine and
the European Union. That agreement lays out specific
steps for reducing tensions and restoring security for
all citizens, such as, inter alia, refraining from the use
of violence or intimidation, the disarmament of armed
groups and the handover of illegally occupied buildings.
Once again, we reiterate the need for respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity

14/19

02/05/2014

of Ukraine. Similarly, we reaffirm the responsibility
incumbent on States Members of the United Nations to
show restraint in the use of force or the threat thereof
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State.
Chile believes that it is necessary to strengthen
the possibilities for a diplomatic solution to be found.
To that end, we support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and, in particular, we welcome the visit of
Under-Secretary-General Feltman to Ukraine and
Russia, which at this time Chile believes is the top
priority. Chile also believes any further escalation of
the crisis should be avoided by entering into dialogue
and through confidence-building measures, with a view
to contributing to the establishment of an environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections on
25 May.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I also thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing.
The situation in Ukraine has further deteriorated
in the past few hours. Ukrainian forces have launched
operations against the separatist militants in the
eastern part of the city of Sloviansk. The rebels have
continued to seize public building in cities in eastern
Ukraine, mainly in Sloviansk and Donetsk, where the
Prosecutor’s office is even occupied by the militants.
They even shot down two Ukrainian helicopters on
Friday, killing two crew members. In the meantime,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) military observers are still being
illegally detained by separatist militants. We are of
course deeply concerned by all those developments,
which further deteriorate the already delicate situation
in eastern Ukraine. We strongly condemn the violent
methods used by armed separatists and we call for a
proportionate response by the Ukrainian forces.
However, we should put our full support behind the
good offices of the Secretary-General in resolving the
crisis in Ukraine. We are happy to hear that Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman is going to Ukraine and Moscow. I call upon
all Council members to trust him, to trust his envoys
and to give them the means and the political backing
necessary to conduct a meaningful mediation in
Ukraine and the region.
The strongest condemnation of Rwanda or of any
other Council member on the deterioration of the crisis
will not solve the Ukrainian conflict. We all know that

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

only a genuine dialogue by the Ukrainian parties, on
the basis of the 17 April Geneva outcome, and a strong
commitment on the part of of those who have influence
on them, who need to ensure that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine are preserved,
can solve this crisis. Otherwise, the situation will
further escalate, the conflict will become regional, or
worse, and it would be useless to continue to convene
emergency public briefings of the Security Council if
the concerned parties and countries are not willing to
be responsible and solve the conflict. In that regard, we
need to scale down the rhetoric.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the continuing tensions in eastern Ukraine. Despite the
agreement reached in Geneva on 17 April, the situation
in Ukraine is showing no signs of abating. We are
particularly alarmed by the fresh violence that erupted
in Sloviansk over night, including violent attacks
targeting two Government helicopters by illegal armed
groups. We strongly condemn those attacks, which
resulted in the death of two Ukrainians. Such instances
point to a serious deterioration in the situation. All
provocative actions and hostile rhetoric aimed at
destabilizing Ukraine must cease immediately.
In the light of the ongoing situation in Ukraine, we
reiterate that constructive dialogue among all concerned
parties will be the only way to achieve a peaceful
solution. In that regard, we call for all parties to the
Geneva statement to implement their commitments.
We also fully support the Secretary-General’s good
offices and diplomatic initiatives. We hope that UnderSecretary-General Feltman’s upcoming visit to Ukraine
and Russia will contribute to a de-escalating of tensions
on the ground.
With the important elections scheduled in May, it is
still all the more important to ensure the environment
is conducive to fair and free elections in the country
without any intervention or influence by outside forces.
We hope that the Ukrainian Government will lead a
inclusive and transparent constitutional process.
We once again reaffirm our full support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

S/PV.7167

I resume now my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. We wish you every success in fulfilling that
duty. We also want to thank the Nigerian delegation
for its successful presidency last month. I would also
like to extend our thanks to the Security Council
delegations for their support of, and solidarity with, the
Government and the people of Ukraine. I also thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing today.
Ukraine remains committed to the implementation
of the agreements reached at the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the
European Union and the United States in Geneva on
17 April. Free and fair presidential elections on 25 May
remain a top priority of the Government of Ukraine.
We reject all attempts by Russia to blame the
Government of Ukraine for allegedly failing to
implement the agreements. We wouldl ike to say
that, despite numerous calls by the international
community, the Russian Federation has made no
efforts to de-escalate the situation and implement the
Geneva agreement. Instead, Russia strongly supports
illegal militant groups operating in the eastern region
of Ukraine, endangering civilians, seizing hostages and
creating an atmosphere of terror and violence.
Security, as well as the protection of the rights
and fundamental freedoms of all the people of
Ukraine, remains a top priority for the Government
of Ukraine. Therefore, the purpose of the counterterrorist operation, the active phase of which has been
renewed in Sloviansk, is to isolate illegal militants from
the civilian population of the city. The commander
of the counter-terrorist operation has ordered the
heavily armed illegal militants to immediately free all
hostages, including monitors of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, to evacuate all
seized administrative buildings and to stop the violence
and massacres. The Ukrainian authorities are ready to
provide amnesty to all those members of militant groups
who have not committed serious crimes. Inclusive
political dialogue with peaceful protesters remains a
top priority for the Ukrainian Government.
We officially state that no tanks or missiles are
used against civilians. Russian statements about the

14-3193915/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

02/05/2014

participation of non-governmental armed groups in
the counter-terrorist operation are not true. Russian
statements as to the involvement of English-speaking
foreigners are absolutely cynical and false. We officially
state that the only foreign military personnel in eastern
Ukraine are Russian saboteurs and mercenaries.

groups of armed Russian saboteurs, who were stopped
by our guards. That is why we call on our Russian
partners to immediately stop supporting all the illegal
militants on Ukraine’s territory and other actions aimed
at undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of my country.

The Ukrainian side, as well as the Russian Embassy
in Kyiv, was not duly informed about today’s arrival in
Ukraine of Vladimir Lukin, the so-called representative
of the Russian President whose mission is, as he says,
to contribute to the liberation of the hostages taken
in eastern Ukraine. Despite the circumstances of
Mr. Lukin’s arrival, and taking into account the highest
priority that the Ukrainian Government attaches to
the release of all hostages held by illegal militants,
we are ready to discuss with Mr. Lukin, as with other
interested mediators, his practical contribution in order
to resolve the problem.

In conclusion, I would like to cite the statement
made today by Mr. Oleksandr Turchynov, Acting
President of Ukraine. He said that Ukraine demands
that terrorist saboteurs and all those who have taken
up arms in our country lay down their weapons and
surrender their hostages and occupied administrative
buildings. Those who lay down their arms and are not
involved in serious crimes will be given amnesty, but
those accused of murder and torture will be punished.
Ukraine, he said, would secure peace and stability in
spite of all the efforts to organize acts provocation and
unrest aimed at destabilizing the situation in the east
and and south of the country, particularly in Kharkiv
and Odessa. He said that he would also like to appeal
to the leadership of the Russian Federation to end the
hysteria about the events taking place in Ukraine and
to cease its threats and intimidation. If it is concerned
about violations of citizens’ rights, it should protect
them in its own country, where human rights are
systematically violated. He also called on Russia to end
its acts of provocation against Ukraine and to refrain
from using terrorism, sabotage and military threats as
a form of pressure on it. Despite all the problems and
opposition, he said, peace would be ensured in Ukraine
and the terrorist threat in eastern Ukraine would be
stopped.

I would like to remind the Council that, due to
the particularly dangerous situation in Sloviansk, in
accordance with our 2003 law on combating terrorism,
Ukraine’s National Security and Defence Council has
taken the decision to launch a large-scale counterterrorism operation. Owing to increasing threats to
the civilian population, this morning the active phase
of that counter-terrorism operation was renewed in the
area of the cities of Sloviansk and Kramatorsk, where
units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the National
Guard and the Ukrainian Border Service were engaged.
The counter-terrorist operation is being implemented
exclusively by the law-enforcement agencies of Ukraine.
At the moment, nine terrorist checkpoints have been
taken under the control of Ukrainian law-enforcement
agencies in Sloviansk. The illegal militants, many
of whom are foreign mercenaries, are using heavy
firearms against the Ukrainian special forces. They
have shot down two Ukrainian helicopters with rocketpropelled grenades, man-portable air defence system
guided missiles and anti-aircraft guns. Two officers
have been killed and seven wounded. The terrorists
do not hesitate to use members of the local peaceful
population as human shields. The brutal tactic of firing
from residential buildings is used widely in Sloviansk
by the terrorists, who are very well aware of the
Government instructions to its law-enforcement agents
not to answer fire coming from residential buildings.
I would also like to mention that this evening there
were also attempts to break through the State border by

16/19

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, who has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our encyclopedically educated and eloquent
French colleague inserted an interesting quotation in
his statement, to the effect that when we sin, it is only
the first step that carries a cost, and the subsequent
ones are easier. Indeed, we can find affirmations
of his words of wisdom in the history of the still
young twenty-first century. Among other things, the
twenty-first century has presented humankind and
international relations with the gift of practices such as
enforced regime change, done in an attempt to impose
someone’s geopolitical vision on other countries of the
world. It is very clear that every such attempt launched
early in the twenty-first century has resulted in terrible

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

destabilization. But, having taken that first step, the
people who made those attempts have nonetheless been
unable to stop and have gone on with them. This time
that has led to serious destabilization in Ukraine.
I would like to remind the Council that, during the
several months of crises preceding the overthrow of
the lawful administration between 21 and 25 February,
our Western colleagues never once called for a halt to
the violence perpetrated in Kyiv and other regions of
Ukraine against the lawful authorities. There were no
calls to President Yanukovych to use every possible
means at his disposal as lawful President, including
that of force, in order to impose order in the country.
But now, for some reason, those calls are coming loud
and clear.
During this entire crisis, Russia has wanted only
one thing, which is to avoid destabilization in Ukraine
and settle everything through negotiations. We
proposed tripartite talks among Ukraine, the European
Union and Russia at the start of the crisis on the political
confrontation that focused on whether Ukraine should
sign an association agreement with the European Union.
For some reason, the European Union, with the support
of the United States, rejected our proposal. When the
25 February agreement was reached, we supported it.
We still believe that many of the 25 February positions
are right, and that they must be kept to if we hope to
bring Ukraine out of political crisis. We helped to
conclude the 17 April Geneva agreement. It is a simple
agreement, but it points to a way out of the crisis in
the country. The one thing that is essential is that the
agreement be fulfilled.
But the most striking and infuriating thing is
that the demands of the people of eastern Ukraine
are basically fairly simple. Finding themselves in a
situation in which the nation’s capital was occupied by
an illegitimate authority, to a large degree consisting
of hostile nationalist radical elements, the people
asked that their rights be guaranteed. They demanded
federalization. It was noticeable that for a long
period — almost two months after the overthrow of the
lawful Government — no one there took up arms for at
least a couple of months. They were all waiting for some
constructive reaction from Kyiv to their demands for
protecting their own interests. Not once did any kind of
reasonable reaction or serious initiative emanate from
Kyiv. Today some of our colleagues spoke approvingly of
the most recent — today or yesterday — pronouncement
of Mr. Yatsenyuk, in which he talked about 25 May,

S/PV.7167

for which presidential elections are scheduled, and that
there will be some kind of poll on decentralization of
the country. A poll. The people have been fighting on
the barricades for weeks, and they think they have to
conduct a poll in order to figure out people’s opinion
about what they want.
What bothered me more than anything today was
how calmly and approvingly our Western colleagues
spoke about the search operations that the Kyiv
authorities are now carrying out in eastern Ukraine.
They gave the impression that they know what the
Kyiv authorities are thinking, what their plans are.
Maybe they had a part in drawing up those plans, and
that was why they talked about what was going on so
calmly. Perhaps that should not be so surprising after
all, because, as we know, every visit to Kyiv by senior
American officials has resulted in events reaching
new levels of confrontation, and a more violent turn
of events. In that regard, it is not surprising that the
United States, as I said in my statement, did not want
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) to do as it was supposed to under the
Vienna Document, that is, to bring about dialogue and
organize a round table with representative of different
regions and the Kyiv Government. Why did the United
States not want the OSCE to do that?
Throughout the crisis, Russia several times has
suggested different formats for the organization of such
dialogue between the Government and opposition forces
and regions. The Government did not want to or could
not do it themselves. We suggested a constitutional
assembly be convened. They said they were not ready
to do so.
When the meeting of 17 April was organized, we
suggested that representatives of the regions should
be included, and that the four parties — the European
Union, the United States and Russia and the acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine — could start
those talks. But that proposal was rejected. The OSCE
was then given the mandate, which it tried to carry out
only then to be told it should not. Instead, tanks were
brought out to Sloviansk and other cities in the east of
the country.
Regarding what one colleague said, that Russia is
refusing to implement the 17 April Geneva statement,
I would repeat that Russia would never refuse to
implement any useful document agreed upon during
the crisis, including the 21 February agreement.

14-3193917/19

S/PV.7167

Ukraine

Actually listening to my statement today, one would
notice that the political components were quotations
from the 17 April document. If we are truly intent on
finding a political solution to the crisis in spite of the
dramatic events of recent days, then perhaps we might
ask the President, the Permanent Representative of
Korea, to make a statement following this meeting,
stating that the Security Council, in keeping with the
17 April Geneva statement, calls for a swift halt to the
violence, including, of course, the use of force in eastern
Ukraine, and appeals for the swift and comprehensive
implementation of the Geneva statement. If other
members would be ready to support such action, then
we would too.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would just
like to offer a couple of points in response.
First, for the Russians to blame Ukraine for
Ukraine’s actions in defence of its own people on its
own territory really is starting to remind me of the
story of the schoolboy who returned home with his nose
bloody and his shirt torn and, asked by his mother how
the fight started, he said “it started when the other boy
hit me back”. We have to be clear about cause and effect
here, and many Council members, including me, have
already gone through the facts that have brought us to
this point.
My second point is to debunk yet another of the
lies that have been told in this Chamber, because it
relates to my country, the United States. People in this
Chamber have heard many times, including just now,
that the United States and other countries never called
oon protesters in the Maidan to leave buildings or
avoid violence. The implication is that we are holding
Russian separatists to a different standard. That is a
claim that has been made in almost every meeting we
have had. I would just like to correct the record. On
15 January, we condemned the actions of rioters outside
a Kyiv court building on 10 January. On 22 January,
the aggressive actions of members of the extreme-right
group Pravy Sektor were unacceptable, enflaming
conditions on the streets and undermining the efforts
of peaceful protesters. We condemned the targeted
attacks against journalists and unofficial groups such
as Titushky. On 24 January, when protesters occupied
some regional administration buildings, we reiterated

18/19

02/05/2014

our call for all protesters and Government forces to
refrain from violence and the destruction of property.
On 27 January, we made clear that we condemned the
use of violence to seize Government buildings, such
as the takeover of a Ministry of Justice building that
took place over the past cople of days and of a public
exhibition hall that weekend, and continued to reiterate
our call for all protesters and Government forces to
refrain from violence and the destruction of property.
Those are just a few of the statements that we made, but
if we could just take that particular lie of the table, it
would be helpful and a little more constructive.
What is more important now is where we go
from here. What I would ask my Russian colleague
is whether Russia will make public statements and
work privately behind the scenes to urge Russian
separatists to negotiate peacefully their departure
from public buildings. Where does Russia assess that
Russian separatists who claim loyalty to the Russian
Government and who wear uniforms just like those of
Russian soldiers obtained weapons and training capable
of shooting down Ukrainian helicopters?
Finally, Russia repeatedly takes aim at the socalled illegitimate Government in Kyiv but refuses
to acknowledge ever, in any meeting, that it did not
embrace the 21 February agreement when it was
negotiated. We have a golden opportunity on 25 May for
the people of eastern Ukraine to have their voices heard,
for them to choose their own leaders and for us to get to
a universally legitimate Government that is respected
and chosen by all of the people of Ukraine. Yet Russia
will not come out in support of the elections and work
with us to ensure that they take place — which would
be the best way of ensuring rights, representativeness
and greater autonomy for the people of eastern Ukraine.
The President: I would like to ask the representative
of the Russian Federation whether his idea regarding
a presidential statement in support of the Geneva
statement is a formal proposal or just an idea.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not want to say that a lie cannot only be
a distortion of facts, but also a selective interpretation
of one’s own position. That is what we have just heard
from my American colleague. What we have heard
from Washington, D.C., and the way it was heard
clearly demonstrated to all — including to those in
Kyiv, which is most important — that the United States
looked favourably on the forceful change of power,

14-31939

02/05/2014

Ukraine

which did not ultimately serve the interests of the
Ukrainian people.
Regarding my proposal, I do think it would be good
to conclude this meeting with such a statement, not
asking every delegation what it is going to declare but
rather make a joint statement calling for a swift halt to
all violence, including the use of military force in the
east of the country, and for seriously taking up the full
implementation of the Geneva document.

S/PV.7167

The President: I will ask our coordinators to
consider the proposal made by the representative of the
Russian Federation and to work on it.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

14-3193919/19
