A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/153
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/605)]
49/153.

Towards full integration of persons with disabilities
in society: implementation of the Standard Rules on
the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with
Disabilities, and of the Long-Term Strategy to
Implement the World Programme of Action concerning
Disabled Persons to the Year 2000 and Beyond

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/96 of 20 December 1993, by which it adopted
the Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with
Disabilities,
Recalling also its resolution 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by which it
adopted the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 1/
Recalling further all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions
37/53 of 3 December 1982, 46/96 of 16 December 1991, 47/88 of 16 December 1992
and 48/95 and 48/99 of 20 December 1993,
Welcoming the unreserved reaffirmation in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25
June 1993, 2/ of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with
disabilities, and the recognition in the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development 3/ of a pressing
need, among others, for the realization of the goals of full participation and
equality for persons with disabilities,

1/
A/37/351/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex, sect. VIII,
recommendation 1 (IV).
2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

95-76549

/...

A/RES/49/153
Page 2
Reaffirming the continuing validity and value of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons, which provides a firm and innovative
framework for disability-related issues,
Reiterating the responsibility of Governments for removing or
facilitating the removal of barriers and obstacles to the full integration and
participation of persons with disabilities into society, and supporting their
efforts to develop national policies to reach specific objectives,
Recognizing the contribution of non-governmental organizations,
especially organizations of persons with disabilities, in the global effort to
bring about full participation and equality for persons with disabilities,
Aware of the major obstacles to the implementation of the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, foremost among these being an
inadequate allocation of resources,
Having due regard to the preconditions set out under section I of the
Standard Rules for equal participation, including national action to raise
awareness in society about persons with disabilities, their rights, their
needs, their potential and the need to realize these, and their contributions,
to provide effective medical care, including mental health care, to ensure
rehabilitative services, to establish and maintain support services, including
devices to assist persons with disabilities and to help them to increase their
level of independence in their daily living and to exercise their rights,
I
Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities
for Persons with Disabilities
1.
Urges all Governments to implement, with the cooperation and
assistance of organizations, the Standard Rules on the Equalization of
Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities, set out in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 48/96;
2.
Invites Member States, in cooperation with organizations of
persons with disabilities or their representatives, to develop disability
programmes, both on a national and local level, for the implementation of the
Standard Rules and to include disability components in all planning, policy
and development programmes;
3.
Also invites Member States, in developing disability programmes,
to set time limits for the accomplishment of specific goals or targets, where
appropriate;
4.
Encourages Governments to take legal and administrative measures,
as appropriate, to implement fully the Standard Rules;
5.
Encourages the consideration during major forthcoming events,
including the 1995 World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World
Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace, of
disability issues relevant to the subject-matter of those events;
6.
Welcomes the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on Disability to
monitor the implementation of the Standard Rules and to submit reports to the
Commission for Social Development at its thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth
sessions;
7.
Welcomes also the establishment of a panel of experts as referred
to in section IV, paragraph 3, of the Standard Rules;
/...

A/RES/49/153
Page 3
8.
Encourages the Secretary-General and the United Nations agencies
concerned to finalize, in consultation with Member States, the development of
a global disability indicator, and also encourages the Special Rapporteur to
make use of it, where appropriate, in his future work;
9.
Notes with appreciation that a number of Member States have made,
or have indicated their intention to make, contributions to support the work
of the Special Rapporteur;
10.
Invites Governments and the private sector to provide meaningful
assistance to the United Nations Voluntary Fund on Disability, with a view to
providing additional support to the implementation of the Standard Rules,
within the context of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to support the effective monitoring
by the Special Rapporteur of the Standard Rules, and invites voluntary
contributions to fund the Special Rapporteur’s work in this regard;
12.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution;
II
Long-term Strategy to Implement the World Programme of Action
concerning Disabled Persons to the Year 2000 and Beyond
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons; 4/
2.
Calls upon Governments, when implementing the World Programme of
Action, to take into account the elements suggested in the Long-term Strategy
to Implement the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons to the
Year 2000 and Beyond, as set out in the annex to the above-mentioned report of
the Secretary-General;
3.
Notes with interest the various activities and contributions made
by United Nations programmes and agencies in the disability field;
4.
Requests the regional commissions and other regional organizations
to facilitate the adaptation and transfer of global approaches, standards and
disability-related technology to the specific needs of the region;
5.

Urges international organizations to support regional and national

plans;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure appropriate support for
the effective functioning of the Long-term Strategy;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the Long-term
Strategy.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

4/

A/49/435.
