S/PV.9079*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9079th meeting

Tuesday, 28 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Gasri
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Syed
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 21 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/499)

*Reissued for technical reasons 7 July 2022.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40398 (E)
*2240398*

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 21 June 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Albania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/499)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Austria,
Bahrain, the Central African Republic, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Germany,
Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Pakistan,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Thailand to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Loraine
Sievers, Director, Security Council Procedure and
co-author of The Procedure of the UN Security Council;
and Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director, Security
Council Report.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/499, which contains the text of a letter
dated 21 June 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of Albania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sievers.
Ms. Sievers: I appreciate the invitation to
participate in today’s open debate.
As pointed out in the concept note (S/2022/499,
annex), this meeting is taking place at a time when
geopolitical challenges have led to heightened levels
of fragmentation within the Security Council. Those
2/35

28/06/2022

challenges have placed the Council under intense
scrutiny within the Organization, but also among the
media, academic circles, civil society groups and the
wider public. And that scrutiny has extended not only to
the Council’s substantive work, but to its methodologies
and tools as well.
In particular, the Russian invasion of Ukraine
has led large numbers of people to open the Charter
of the United Nations and read what the powers of the
Security Council actually are. That is, of course, a
positive development. All of us should read the Charter
more often, and more closely, than we do. But some
of the resulting proposals highlight the fact that the
Security Council of today faces two different problems
of transparency.
The first is the one with which we are all acquainted.
It is the issue of how much of its proceedings the
Council conducts in a visible, public way and how
much of its work is conducted in private. And it is the
present Council members who have full control over
how to strike that balance between public and private.
But the second problem of transparency is not
of the 2022 Security Council’s making. Rather, it is
an inherited problem. It stems from the fact that the
Security Council, over its 76-year history, has developed
a highly complex body of precedent and interpretation
with regard to applicable Charter articles and procedure.
There are now, for example, six International Court of
Justice advisory opinions with direct bearing on how
the Council operates. In addition, as the concept note
for this debate indicates, since 2017 the Council has
adopted 14 presidential notes on working methods,
which together comprise 168 operative paragraphs.
And then there are the countless modalities, such as
putting a draft resolution into blue, which have never
been put into writing.
That complicated context within which the Council
functions is largely unknown. And that can mean that,
even when the Council is conducting its business in
plain view, how it works is often not fully understood.
So today I would like to comment on four Council tools
that I believe could be beneficially expanded to address
this situation.
First, I consider it a very positive development
that the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions — chaired this year
by Albania — has decided to begin issuing annual
reports, as is done by the Council’s other thematic
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

working groups. At present, the IWG is mainly known
for negotiating presidential notes on working methods,
but its contribution is far broader. It also considers
significant working-method issues that do not result
in presidential notes and monitors implementation of
existing notes. The IWG annual reports will therefore be
useful in bringing into public view this wider scope of
Council members’ efforts to improve working methods.
I would suggest that Council members consider
also including in the IWG reports an indication of any
important procedural matters that occur over the year
in the Security Council itself, such as procedural votes
or formulation of new agenda items. During General
Assembly debates on the Council’s annual report, some
States have called for procedural developments to be
covered in the report’s introduction. But because that
suggestion has appeared to be impractical, the IWG
report might provide a viable alternative.
Secondly, I wish to voice support for proposals to
make the Council’s monthly programme of work fully
comprehensive. In its early years, the calendar indicated
only Council activities published in the Journal of the
United Nations, that is, formal meetings and closed
consultations. But that criterion has eroded over
time, with the calendar now including such unofficial
activities as political coordinator meetings. I therefore
believe that it is now justified to include in the calendar
informal interactive dialogues, especially since these
are a Council event chaired by the president.
It is understood that Arria Formula meetings are not
Council events, because they are convened by individual
Council members without needing the support of the
Council as a whole. But Arria Formula meetings have
become an important part of how Council members
interact with the wider United Nations membership,
civil society and each other. And they are tracked
on the Security Council website. Including Arria
Formula metings on the calendar — with a suitable
explanation — would give a more accurate picture
of how members overall address matters relevant to
the Council. I am aware that some Council members
oppose including these other meetings in the calendar.
But when those following the Council perceive that the
information that it publishes on its own work programme
is incomplete, they turn instead to other sources, and I
believe this undercuts the Council’s credibility.
A third way to throw more light on the Council’s
working methods would be for each Council member

S/PV.9079

to accord them greater coverage during their end-ofpresidency wrap-up session.
Finally, matters of procedure could be given
more detailed attention in each monthly presidency
assessment. And while on the subject of the assessments,
I would like to offer an important clarification. These
assessments were launched in 1997 by presidential
note S/1997/451. The note states that the assessments
are prepared by Council members “under their own
responsibility” and “should not be considered as
representing the views of the Council”.
That the assessments are published in national
capacity was clearly understood during the first
18 years of implementing this note. With only two
exceptions, there was a 100 per cent publication rate.
But the situation changed dramatically in 2015 when
some Council members, apparently unaware of the
presidential note, contended that assessments must
be agreed by consensus. With the advent of this
misunderstanding, the fulfilment rate plummeted.
Only 3 out of 12 assessments were published in 2016,
and it has been a struggle ever since. Today I appeal to
all present Council members to return to the letter and
spirit of the 1997 presidential note, so that publication
can return to 100 per cent.
I realize battle lines can be drawn within the Council
even over such relatively small measures. But taking
steps such as these can represent an acknowledgment
that the Council’s working methods do make this
body hard to follow and can also signal a willingness
to address this problem. Why is this important? The
Security Council cannot succeed on its own. As we
pointed out in the “Concluding reflections” chapter
of our book, it is important to keep in mind that the
end goal of the Council is to adopt effective decisions
that are effectively implemented. And, effective
implementation requires not merely the acquiescence of
States Members of the United Nations, but their active
engagement. Although many factors determine the
level of Member States’ support for Council decisions,
when opacity seems to surround how the Council
works, this can add to a sense of mistrust, and even
illegitimacy. On the other hand, even in divisive times
such as these, if the Council is seen as making a good
faith effort to give clarity to its working methods, this
can help foster a more cooperative partnership with the
wider membership.
The President: I thank Ms. Sievers for her briefing.

22-403983/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting Security Council Report (SCR) to address
the Security Council in its open debate on working
methods for the fifth year. Our appreciation goes to
Albania and Ambassador Ferit Hoxha as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and to all the elected Council
members that have energetically fulfilled that role in
decades past.
In 2022, the Security Council may be the object of
greater critical global focus than ever in living memory.
Tough questions about the Council nonetheless reflect
expectations that its members will act effectively to
defend the Charter of the United Nations and to prevent
and respond to violations. Such questions also go to the
heart of SCR’s mission as an independent, impartial
think tank seeking to help to advance the transparency,
accountability and effectiveness of the Security
Council. I thank Council members, other Member
States, colleagues within the United Nations and our
counterparts in civil society, without whom SCR could
not work as it does. In this regard, SCR acknowledges
with deep gratitude Ms. Hasmik Egian, newly retired
after six years as the Director of the Security Council
Affairs Division of the United Nations Secretariat
(SCAD), and we add our appreciation to all SCAD
colleagues for their dedicated work. I also acknowledge
Ms. Loraine Sievers for her work in this field.
As the founders of the United Nations knew, peace
is to be made among adversaries, not among friends.
Working methods may offer some bridging elements
in today’s difficult context when used in ways that
boost trust, build knowledge and broaden ownership.
Broadening ownership of the Security Council’s work
can also enhance the Council’s legitimacy.
In the past year, the Council has grappled with
crises that include the war in Ukraine and upheaval
in Afghanistan, Haiti and a number of countries
in Africa, and there have been significant steps
towards broadening Member States’ ownership of and
engagement with international peace and security.
Resolution 2623 (2022), referring the situation in
Ukraine to the General Assembly, the Council’s first
“uniting for peace” resolution in four decades, was
followed by General Assembly resolution 76/262,
stipulating that it will meet following any veto that is
cast in the Council. These initiatives recognize the role
4/35

28/06/2022

of ownership by the wider United Nations membership
in situations where the Council is deadlocked and also
respond to a 2005 World Summit recommendation that
the Council continue to adapt its working methods so
as to increase the involvement of States that are not
members of the Council in its work.
It is too early to predict how this initiative will
evolve, but how best to broaden ownership leads me
to reflections on Council penholding, a term that does
not fully convey its demanding nature of drafting,
convening discussions and negotiating outcomes.
Elected members share the pen on Afghanistan and
the Syria humanitarian file, among others. But there
was a real breakthrough in 2019 through co-penholding
between a permanent member and an elected member,
when Germany and the United Kingdom shared the
pen on Darfur and on Libya sanctions — particularly
significant as Germany also chaired the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya. Germany and the United
Kingdom set an important precedent. Today the United
States shares the pen with Mexico on Haiti and with
Albania on Ukraine.
Pen-sharing among permanent and elected
members broadens ownership, builds knowledge and
can contribute to more coherent Council strategies
for peace, particularly when the co-pen is the chair
of a relevant subsidiary body or otherwise brings
in an added perspective such as regional expertise.
But currently there is no shared penholding with any
sanctions committee chair — individuals who follow
developments in their country situations closely and
are likely to have valuable insights to contribute to
Council penholding.
In respect of boosting trust, Council visiting
missions offer a chance for members to engage with one
another less formally, as well as to be exposed, together,
to facts on the ground. Pre-coronavirus disease, the
Council undertook four or five visiting missions a year.
With travel again becoming more feasible, it is worth
recalling the impact of visiting missions.
Security Council Report witnessed and reported
on Council members’ reactions during their visit to
the Lake Chad basin in March 2017, which produced
resolution 2349 (2017) addressing the negative security,
humanitarian and environmental dimensions of the Boko
Haram crisis in the region. Council visiting missions
to Colombia in May 2017 and July 2019 signalled the
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council’s political support for the implementation of
the 2016 Final Peace Agreement.
With a growing focus on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in addressing ongoing or
emerging conflict within their regions, the Council
might also prioritize visits to engage with them on
conflict prevention in particular.
There are other ways of stepping up engagement
with the field: virtually, such as Council members’
recent encounters with Colombia and Yemen via virtual
reality headsets, a modality still in its infancy and with
considerable scope for development, and mini-missions,
which at an earlier time gave the Council flexibility for
speedy and direct engagement when needed.
A practical suggestion here would be that the
Council adopt a more systematic way of deciding on
visiting missions. One possibility would be to have the
Informal Working Group, at the start of the year, consult
and select three possible situations that could benefit
from a Council visit, which could then be supplemented
by other trips.
A systematic approach to Council travel should
build in field trips by subsidiary body Chairs as a
way of enhancing joined-up strategies at a time when
sanctions have become such a contested instrument
despite being one of the rare concrete means that the
Council uses to influence State actions that violate the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Council continues to show that it has a range
of tools. While those will never compensate for the
political will needed to respect the Charter, working
methods are a day-to-day way for every Council
member — and potentially every Member State — to
see this institution performing as best it can in response
to a dangerous, inequitable and fast-changing world.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for
her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.

S/PV.9079

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank
the briefers, Ms. Karin Landgren and Ms. Loraine
Sievers, for their thorough briefings. We also thank
Mr. Ferit Hoxha for his leadership of the work of
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
for having organized today’s events. We are confident
that this will help enrich the work of the Group with
new ideas — of course, with the understanding that the
working methods themselves and any steps to modify
them are the preserve of the Council itself.
The Russian Federation has consistently supported
the Security Council discussing this subject in the
open format with the participation of all interested
States Members of the United Nations. We see this now
years-old discussion as an opportunity to increase the
Security Council’s coordination with a broad number of
Member States.
Many of the ideas that were expressed during these
discussions were later included in presidential note
S/2017/507, which is vitally important as a compendium
of the Security Council’s working practice and which is
actively used by non-permanent members as a serious
primary source of information. At the same time, we
believe that any reforms must be focused on a genuine
increase in the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Council’s implementation of its primary functions of
maintaining international peace and security.
Restrictions caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic had an impact on the Security Council’s
work. However, despite those difficulties, the Security
Council was able to rapidly adapt to new realities.
Special temporary measures allowed it to carry out
its work without interruption. Yet the situation once
again convinced us that there can be no alternative to
in-person discussions and personal interaction among
Security Council members, and we ae pleased to have
returned to our normal way of working.
I should like to take this opportunity to once again
underscore the fact that we do not see any need to
institutionalize those temporary measures. If such a
crisis is repeated, we have a way of acting that is laid
out in letters of Security Council Presidents, which can
always be turned to.
The traditional discussion of the Security Council’s
working methods cannot be divorced from the
substantive problems that exist in the Council’s action,

22-403985/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

which are particularly evident of late. Therefore, we
cannot avoid a comprehensive and complex discussion
here, just as cosmetic adjustments will not be enough.
The practice of individual members using the
Council to serve their narrow national interests or
to expand the Council’s agenda through domestic,
political, human rights, climate or other questions has
recently increased from a trickle to a flood. Yet that
absolutely ignores the fact that not only is the Security
Council, under the Charter of the United Nations, not
supposed to deal with those subjects, but also that it
cannot help with the resolution of those problems. It is
unfortunately glaringly obvious that the main aim of
those efforts is to put pressure on disfavoured countries.
Often the real reasons that led to the emergence of a
particular conflict are intentionally hushed up and
swept under the carpet.
United Nations missions, including peacekeeping
operations, are given functions that are not appropriate
for them and that they cannot effectively implement.
That leads to an increase in mistrust regarding their
impartiality and effectiveness. We are also seeing
attempts to shift responsibility for crises that emerge
onto someone else. A clear example is the Council’s
consideration of the situation in Afghanistan, when
the consideration of a complex problem is intentionally
narrowed down to simply a discussion of human rights.
Yet the economic collapse and humanitarian disaster
provoked by the United States of America and its allies
is hypocritically left out of the discussion.
We note the approach of Western colleagues to
shift discussions onto a different track if the question
does not correspond to their interests. A clear example
is the discussion on reviewing and lifting sanctions
from countries where restrictive measures no longer
correspond to the current situation. Despite the fact that
the reasons for which the sanctions were introduced
are no longer present, new reasons are being found
again and again to keep those sanctions in force. And
instead of a presumption of innocence, Governments
are forced time and again to prove that the accusations
made against them are baseless. It is no longer possible
to hide the fact that, in the case of the Central African
Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan, sanctions are
being extended with the sole purpose of maintaining
external pressure on them.
We note with regret the Council’s increasing
lack of ability to engage in constructive debate and
6/35

28/06/2022

negotiation. Instead of finding solutions to complex
problems, which, indeed, takes both time and a
willingness to compromise, Western countries often
take the easiest path. They encourage the use of the
veto or abstentions on documents. Recent examples
include the North Korean dossier, when the decoupling
that we proposed with our Chinese colleagues, which
would have allowed a consensus Council document to
be adopted, was rejected.
I note that the issue of the veto does not fall under
the category of working methods, but it is the linchpin
of the entire Security Council architecture and the key
to achieving balanced outcomes in the Council. But
that does not negate the need for working methods and
approaches that are conducive to compromise. It is
necessary to strive to negotiate, listen to and hear other
fellow colleagues.
On the contrary, indirect accusations, sabotage,
diktats and manipulation are used. In some cases, for
example, regarding Ukraine, it has even reached the
point of absurdity. The Security Council has become
an arena for Western countries to articulate fakes
and propagandistic rhetoric. Moreover, the opinion of
the West is presented in absolutes as the only correct
one. Such a destructive trend only further divides the
members of the Council.
Against that backdrop, the issue of informal
penholdership on certain dossiers is becoming
increasingly critical. Currently, only three delegations
act as penholders on most issues. Despite their longlost national status, they consider themselves regional
experts and patronize other States or even regions. The
views of the host country, regional actors, which are
often more familiar with the situation on the ground,
and sometimes even representatives of the United
Nations Secretariat are completely ignored.
A clear example of misuse of the penholder role is the
procedure for negotiating Security Council resolutions.
The work is often carried out within an impossible
time frame that does not allow for a comprehensive
expert review of the documents. At the same time,
countries that disagree with such an approach are
subjected to unprecedented pressure. As a result, we
have crude documents that do not take the concerns of
the Security Council members into account and provide
the Secretariat with unclear mandates. That approach
is not conducive to the effective resolution of conflicts.
In that regard, we would particularly like to highlight
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

the delegation of the United Kingdom and its clearly
biased handling of the Yemen and Libya dossiers. In
particular, we note that the draft presidential statement
prepared by Russia outlining the common position
of the Security Council members in support of the
stability and sustainability of the political transition in
Libya caused an inexplicable outburst of anger among
the British informal penholders.
We have consistently advocated expanding the pool
of stakeholders, primarily by including non-permanent
members. We are guided by the premise enshrined
in the note by the President of the Security Council
S/2017/507 that any member of the Council may be a
penholder and more than one Council member may
act as co-penholders. Revisiting the issue of informal
penholdership would help to improve the effectiveness
of the Security Council. We will continue to raise this
issue in the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
We continue to draw attention to the backlog
of the Council’s documentation flow. The Security
Council produces several hundred documents each
year. Unfortunately, the value added of some of them
is questionable. The excessive micromanagement of
draft resolutions often observed is not helpful either.
We are convinced that the final products of the Security
Council should be concise, clear, understandable and,
most important, action-oriented.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I did not mention
the frequently raised issue of the number of open and
closed meetings of the Security Council. Russia has
consistently advocated maintaining a balance between
the two. In that context, we can see that some Council
members, while ostensibly advocating maximum
transparency in the discussion of individual countryspecific issues, in fact use them purely for propaganda
shows, preferring to consider sensitive or awkward
topics behind closed doors.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland is pleased
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 elected
members of the Security Council (E10).
I want to begin by thanking Albania, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, for organizing this important
debate. I also want to thank our briefers, Ms. Loraine
Sievers and Ms. Karin Landgren, for their valuable and
important insights and recommendations.

S/PV.9079

Working methods are not an end in themselves. As
elected members, we seek to improve the way in which
the Council operates because we share a common
goal — a more effective Security Council. We want the
Council to be more efficient in tackling the complex
and interconnected threats to peace and security that
we collectively face.
As elected members, we understand and respect our
responsibilities and obligations, entrusted to us through
our election by the General Assembly. We therefore
want the Council to operate in a way that maximizes
its legitimacy. That means making it as representative,
inclusive, transparent, effective and accountable as
possible, in accordance with its mandate. Let us be clear:
a more accountable and transparent Council would be
better placed to meet its core tasks of preventing and
resolving conflicts. It is with that in mind that we, the
10 elected members of the Security Council, approach
the issue of working methods.
To achieve that goal, the E10 would like to make
several points and suggestions.
First, we believe that the Council should strengthen
its engagement with the wider United Nations
membership. That means more transparency in how
we operate. It also means more opportunities for the
members of the General Assembly, on behalf of whom
the Security Council acts, to interact with the work
of the Council, while preserving the various tools
at the command of the Security Council to ensure
its effectiveness.
We believe that the coordination, cooperation
and interaction between the Security Council and
the principal organs of the United Nations can be
improved. That is especially true for the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can offer valuable advice and
cross-cutting perspectives in support of the Security
Council’s work. Its Chairs should be invited to brief the
Council whenever possible.
The monthly presidency also has an important
role to play in that engagement. The organization of
briefings on the programme of work to Member States,
the media and civil society are useful tools. We also
encourage the holding of interactive monthly wrap-up
sessions, and we welcome that that has become standard
practice across Council presidencies.
Monthly assessments, prepared under the authority
of each presidency, constitute useful records of the

22-403987/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council’s action and sometimes, regrettably, inaction.
Those assessments should be timely, and they should
be frank. They should analyse and assess our work.
Member States, civil society and academia should
be able to consult such documents and find accurate
reflections of the realities of the Security Council,
rather than lists of meetings.
Monthly working methods commitments have
been published by 10 members of the Council in the
past year. We see that growing practice as a step in the
right direction — a step towards the implementation
of the note by the President of the Security Council
S/2017/507 and the 13 presidential notes adopted since
the latest iteration of presidential note S/2017/507 and
a step towards greater transparency and accountability.
We call on all future Council presidencies to
formulate, circulate and implement monthly working
methods commitments.
Elected members bring fresh perspectives and ideas
to the work of the Council. In recent years, the E10 has
actively sought to innovate and improve the Council’s
working methods. For example, the joint working
methods commitments of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
in 2021 provided a useful blueprint and paved the way
for subsequent joint working methods commitments,
such as those adopted by the European Union Council
members last year. We will continue to innovate, and
we call on all members, both current and incoming, to
do the same.
A transparent Council should not come at the
expense of an efficient and effective Council. This is
not a zero-sum game. The Council needs to strike a
healthy balance between public and private meetings in
order to enhance the transparency and visibility of its
work and encourage more interactivity of discussions
and consensus-building.
We also believe that the transparency and
accountability of the Council can be enhanced with
regard to the documentation addressed to it by Member
States. Related to that is the need for the improved
provision of information and Council documentation,
both past and current, to E10 members.
An effective Council is an agile Council that
learns from past experiences and prepares for future
disruptions. We underline the importance of recording
the best practices and lessons learned from the
8/35

28/06/2022

working methods instituted by the Council during the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Secondly, we believe that it is critical that a gender
lens be integrated across the working methods of the
Security Council. We are happy to note that we have
seen important progress over the past year, including,
but not limited to, the shared women and peace and
security commitments adopted by some Council
members. Together, we have ensured a continuous and
necessary focus on gender equality throughout the
work of the Council.
We cannot compromise on the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in the work of the
Council. In that regard, we encourage all presidencies
to strive for gender balance and diversity when
selecting briefers. We must ensure that women are at
the table and their voices are heard and heeded. The
E10 is also actively engaging in discussions in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, under the leadership of Albania,
on a draft presidential note on the issue.
Thirdly, targeted sanctions by the Security Council
are an important tool to address threats to international
peace and security. They are therefore critical to the
execution of its mandate. The E10 underscores the
importance of accountability and transparency in
the work of sanctions committees. Their working
methods should be aligned with international due
process standards.
We strongly believe in the need to increase
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions by
strengthening fair and clear procedures in United
Nations sanctions regimes, including by creating review
mechanisms similar to that of the Ombudsperson for
the sanctions regime of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
The Council should strive to ensure that its
resolutions are clear and focused. As conflicts evolve,
so too should our collective responses. The Council
should take into account the efficacy of sanctions
through the evolving phases of conflicts. In doing so,
it should also ensure that sanctions do not have adverse
humanitarian consequences for civilian populations or
adversely affect humanitarian activities carried out by
humanitarian organizations.
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We also believe that the chairs of sanctions
committees should be more involved in the
initial consultations on sanctions renewals led by
the penholders.
With respect to the working methods of subsidiary
bodies, including sanctions committees, a transparent,
open and evidence-based methodology needs to be
followed. Any agenda item being introduced for
consideration and any holds placed on listing requests
or other matters of the Committees’ business need to be
supported in writing. They should be accompanied with
the necessary justification by the requesting member
of the Committee concerned in order to promote
transparency and accountability and ensure efficient
record-keeping. That would help ensure the credibility
of the work of the Committees and, in turn, the Council.
In addition, listing and delisting individuals
and entities under United Nations sanctions regimes
should be objective and evidence-based. The
E10 members underscore the critical and urgent need
for comprehensive Security Council reform so that
the Council reflects contemporary realities. While
the Council needs to be more efficient, representative,
transparent, accountable and democratic, it continues
to lack a truly representative composition.
Since the last working methods debate (see
S/PV.8798), the Council has failed to adopt three draft
resolutions owing to the use of the veto. The use or threat
of use of the veto may prevent the Council from acting
on vital topics. The E10 calls for restraint on the use
of the veto, especially on actions aimed at preventing
the most serious crimes of international concern — the
very heart of the Council’s mandate.
The E10 represents two thirds of the membership
of the Council, and our united view is clear: the
ideals of transparency, accountability, inclusivity
and effectiveness would be better realized if the
Council’s workload were more equally shared among
all its members. That goes for the penholdership and
co-penholdership arrangements, as well as the selection
and chairing of subsidiary bodies.
We call for the full implementation of presidential
note S/2017/507 and subsequently adopted notes on the
selection of the chairs of subsidiary bodies. The process
should begin as soon as possible after the election of
incoming Council members. The views of the incoming
members concerning that allocation should not only be

S/PV.9079

taken into account; they should be the determining and
decisive factors.
The expertise of elected members in certain areas
should also be considered. Importantly, any consensus
proposal by elected members should be respected. It is
vital that the process be completed in a timely manner.
That allows incoming members to better understand
and closely monitor the work of the subsidiary bodies
during the observation period beginning on 1 October.
We regret that timeline has not been met in the past
two years.
In conclusion, earlier this month five new members
of the Council were elected. The continued process of
renewal, embodied by the 10 elected members of the
Council, should provide the opportunity to reflect and
improve the way in which we operate. The Charter of
the United Nations is binding upon us all. Every State,
including permanent members, must comply with
its obligations.
Our position is simple: if we are to live up the
ideals of the Charter, even a Charter that does not
change, the working methods of the Security Council
need to evolve. In order to achieve that, and with the
inputs of the broader membership, we need a renewed
sense of urgency and shared purpose, individually and
collectively, around this table.
We, the 10 elected members of the Security Council,
speak with one voice to reaffirm our commitment
today to live up to the responsibility bestowed upon
us through our election by the States Members of
the United Nations to do just that: to work together
towards a more effective, transparent, inclusive and
representative Council for all.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this important annual debate.
We express our appreciation to you for leading the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We also thank today’s briefers.
We express our appreciation to Ms. Landgren for the
Security Council Report, which is a valuable resource
for watchers of the Security Council, and to Ms. Sievers,
who literally wrote the book on the Security Council’s
procedure, which continues to be a vital resource for all
of us. We greatly appreciate and value the work of the
Informal Working Group.
We appreciate your focus, Sir, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group, on the implementation of

22-403989/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

presidential note S/2017/507, the essential guide to and
codification of the practice of the Security Council.
Note 507 and related notes subsequently adopted by
the Council were the product of years of practice and
negotiations. By and large, most of the tools to improve
the Council’s working methods are already included in
note 507. It is simply a question of our collective will
and dedication to implement its provisions.
We have been pleased by the progress made by the
Council in including more civil society briefers in its
work. It is also particularly noteworthy that the Council
has improved the gender balance of its civil society
briefers. In order to ensure that the Security Council
takes full account of all perspectives when deliberating
on the situations before it, it is vital that all voices be
brought to the Security Council table.
In response to the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the Council has been able to fulfil its mandate under
Article 28 of the Charter of the Nations and function
continuously. Despite the inability to convene in-person
meetings, the Council adopted its draft resolutions
through a virtual correspondence process. The United
States continues to believe that the virtual gatherings
held by the Council should be deemed formal meetings
of the Security Council, under the provisional rules
of procedure, so that it can adopt draft resolutions at
virtual meetings.
As the pandemic wanes, we believe that it would
be useful for the Security Council to develop a
preparedness plan for how to proceed in the event of
future emergencies. It is generally better to be prepared
for the future through a well-considered deliberative
process, rather than to have to scramble in reaction to a
crisis at short notice.
We recognize the great responsibility that the United
States bears as a permanent member of the Security
Council. We do not take that status for granted. As a
permanent member, the perspective of the United States
on the working methods of the Council is based on more
than 76 years of experience. We have the vantage point
of a long view. Each time there is a proposal to adjust
the Council’s working methods, we are in a position to
evaluate its long-term institutional implications.
We balance the clarity of hard-and-fast rules
with the need for flexibility and adaptability to the
circumstances. We are aware that there is always
room for improvement and that the Council can ever
strive towards greater effectiveness, efficiency and
10/35

28/06/2022

transparency, while taking into account that many of its
working methods have stood the test of time and are in
place for good reason. We commit to continuing to roll
up our sleeves and working to improve the Council’s
working methods through the Informal Working Group.
On the subject of the veto, the General Assembly
recently adopted resolution 76/262, which mandates the
convening of a General Assembly meeting every time a
veto is cast in the Security Council. The United States
was proud to co-sponsor that innovative resolution.
The General Assembly recently held its first meeting
pursuant to that resolution after the double veto of the
draft resolution that the United States had proposed
in response to the ballistic missiles launched by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
While the United States was deeply disappointed
that vetoes prevented that draft resolution from being
adopted, it was pleased to see the smooth implementation
of resolution 76/262. The Council was able to reach
consensus on a fact-based special report to the General
Assembly at the General Assembly’s invitation. The
General Assembly meeting provided an opportunity
for those casting a veto to explain themselves and for
the States Members of the United Nations to react to
the veto.
We noted that almost 80 Member States
participated in the debate. We also observed that the
convening of a General Assembly meeting does not
necessarily mean that the General Assembly needs to
adopt a resolution on the subject of the vetoed draft
resolution. All in all, resolution 76/262 demonstrated a
healthy balance between the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
I wish to conclude my statement by recognizing
some unsung heroes. We deeply value the behindthe-scenes work of the Security Council Affairs
Division (SCAD), which provides the institutional
memory and operational legwork of the Security
Council. It is through SCAD’s unseen work that the
transition from presidency to presidency, month after
month, goes so smoothly and seamlessly.
I do not want to neglect to mention the rest of the
Secretariat staff, such as the interpreters, who are
right now interpreting these very words into the other
five official languages of the United Nations, and the
Conference Services staff, who ensure that we are able
to physically meet in the Chamber today. Each Security
Council meeting is the outcome of a collective effort
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

by many people, from permanent representatives to
political coordinators to Secretariat staff, all working
in solidarity towards a common end — the maintenance
of international peace and security. Ultimately , that is
what the working methods of the Council are all about.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Albania, as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, for
its excellent stewardship of this important topic. I also
thank our briefers for their reflections on the Security
Council’s working methods.
As we emerge from the virtual working methods
introduced in response to the coronavirus disease
pandemic, it is welcome that we are back to full
participation in open debates, such this one today, in
order to remain connected with the wider United Nations
membership. I agree with my Russian colleague, my
colleague of the United States and others, who say
that we truly value in-person meetings, although we
managed well through the period of virtual working
methods. Still, we have more to do to ensure that the
Council stays effective and efficient.
Our vision remains that the Council should be
able to solve problems through interactive debate,
consensus-building, responsible penholdership and
decision-making that has real impact on the ground.
Sometimes that means discussion in private, not
in public. We look forward to a full return to the
Consultations Room.
With regard to penholding, there is a long-standing
convention of penholding to support consistency.
However, as we have seen and heard and as Ms. Sievers
said, it is a flexible practice that we, the United
Kingdom, have shared with Germany on the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan and now share with Gabon on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa.
It means being responsive to prevent conflict or
deter escalation and discussing issues even if that is
uncomfortable for some. All Council members have
a responsibility to uphold the Charter of the United
Nations. General Assembly resolution 76/262, on
the veto, which we co-sponsored, is a welcome step
towards ensuring transparency and accountability
when a member of the Council blocks action to maintain
international peace and security, for example, as we
heard and saw with respect to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

S/PV.9079

We also need to do more to ensure that we use the
Council’s time efficiently. That means respecting the
Council’s mandate and not using it as a platform for
propaganda and misinformation. Sadly, Russia has
done just that consistently since its illegal invasion
of Ukraine. It still denies there is a war, even as its
missiles continue to rain down on civilian targets.
With respect to the Russian Federation’s allegations
about our penholding on Libya, I made clear in the
Council yesterday (see S/PV.9078) our national position,
which is shared by many others, that the withdrawal of
the Wagner Group mercenaries is an essential part of
making progress in Libya.
With regard to Yemen, I simply note that it is one
file on which we have made progress since the start
of the year. Thanks to the work of the members of the
Council, the countries of the region and the United
Nations, the hard-won truce is holding.
If we are discussing procedure today, we should
look at the founding rules of the United Nations.
Regrettably, the real challenge for the functioning of
the Council is that a permanent member has torn up
the United Nations Charter and invaded a sovereign
neighbour. The global impacts are profound and affect
many of the issues of which the Council is seized. I am
sure we will hear from Member States today about their
concerns about divisions in the Council. It will not be
adjusted working methods that resolve them, but an end
to Russia’s illegal war.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): It is my privilege to
deliver this statement on behalf of India and Brazil
at today’s open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council.
First, we would like to thank the representative
of Ireland for the statement she delivered on behalf of
the 10 elected members of the Security Council (E10),
which we fully endorse and support.
We would also like to thank Albania for organizing
today’s important debate. This is an issue of interest
and importance to the entire membership of the United
Nations, particularly during the current extraordinary
circumstances, when the world looks to the Security
Council for solutions and leadership.
I also thank the briefers for their useful insights
into the topic.

22-4039811/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The statement made on behalf of the E10 summarizes
our main concerns on the need to strengthen the working
methods of the Security Council. We underscore the
need for the fair distribution of responsibilities between
elected and permanent members. The selection of
Chairs of subsidiary bodies and the distribution of
penholderships must be open, transparent, based on
exhaustive consultations and informed by a more
integrated perspective. That is one of the best ways to
enhance the decision-making process.
There are items on the agenda of the Security
Council on which discussion has not been held since
the creation of the United Nations. There is a case for
beginning a discussion into the review of items on
the list of matters of which the Council is seized in a
realistic and forward-looking manner and presidential
note S/2017/507 provides ample guidance on that.
While there have been some important
improvements on working methods, Brazil and India
take this opportunity to reiterate that the problems
afflicting the Security Council go much deeper than
just its working methods. Improving the working
methods of the Council will never be enough to correct
its fundamental problem, which stems from its lack
of representativeness. It is our firm belief, therefore,
that any debate on the working methods of the Security
Council must have the issue of Security Council reform
as its overarching framework. There is an urgent need
for comprehensive reforms of the Council, including its
size and composition. It is a political goal of the highest
order, as evidenced in the statements delivered by our
own leaders, year after year, during the high-level week
of the General Assembly. How can we sit here ignoring
those calls?
A more representative, effective and legitimate
Security Council is a pivotal component of a reformed
multilateral system. We need a Security Council that
better reflects the geographical and developmental
diversity of the United Nations today, where the voices
of developing countries and underrepresented regions,
including Africa, Latin America and the vast majority
of Asia and the Pacific, find their due place at the table.
For that, an expansion of the Council in both categories
of membership is absolutely essential. That is the only
way in which to bring the Council’s composition and
decision-making dynamics in line with contemporary
geopolitical realities.
12/35

28/06/2022

We can no longer hide behind the smokescreen
of the intergovernmental negotiations in the General
Assembly and pay lip service to the much larger and
pressing issue of Council reform. If countries are truly
interested in making the Council more accountable
and more credible, we call on them to come out openly
and support a clear pathway to achieve that reform, in
a time-bound manner, through the only established
process at the United Nations, namely, by engaging
in text-based negotiations, not speaking at or past one
other as we have done for the past three decades.
As the threats to international peace and security
evolve, so must the Council. We ask those blocking
progress on this vital issue to heed the calls for genuine
reform and contribute to making the Council truly fit
for purpose for the twenty-first century.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Executive Director of Security Council
Report, Ms. Karin Landgren, and the Director of
Security Council Procedure, Ms. Loraine Sievers, for
their briefings. I also thank those non-Council members
present for their interest and active participation in
this meeting.
Working methods are vital to the effective discharge
of the Council’s duties. They are highly political and have
never been — and never will be — mere technicalities.
Given the rapidly shifting international political
landscape and evolving security risks, as well as all
scientific and technological advances and improving
conditions in the physical world, it is imperative that the
Council improve its working methods in order to keep
up with changing circumstances, enhance its capacity
and efficiency and better fulfil its mandate.
At the centre of the Council’s myriad working
methods lies the core principle of solidarity and unity.
Members of the Council must always bear in mind that
our sole agenda is the common agenda of international
peace and security, to which there is no alternative.
However multifarious and complicated the challenges
confronting us, standing together in solidarity and
unity for the maintenance of international peace and
security is always our primary responsibility.
The Council must remain committed to promoting
the political resolution of hotspot issues while working
more strenuously at the diplomatic level for good
offices and mediation to actively push for negotiations
and dialogue and to dissolve tensions. Council members
should demonstrate mutual respect, consult one another
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

fully and accommodate one another’s concerns as far as
possible while refraining from deliberately intensifying
tensions and divergences, not to mention artificially
creating division and confrontation.
The Security Council belongs to all Member States.
It should listen to wide-ranging views in the course of
its work, taking the concerns of States and regional
organizations seriously and striving to work in greater
coordination and synergy with the President of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
In recent years, the Security Council has been
actively exploring ways to improve its working
methods and enhance its efficiency, with many positive
outcomes. It is worth mentioning in particular that,
at the height of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the Council made timely adjustments in its working
methods to ensure its normal functioning.
With regard some of the more salient issues that
persist in the Council’s work, China wishes to make the
following points so that we can discuss them here in
the Chamber.
First, the Council has seen a steady increase
in the number of emerging issues and a continuous
proliferation of cross-cutting issues, some of which
are clearly beyond its core mandate. The Council
should focus on the major pressing issues that threaten
international peace and security and avoid taking on
new topics without due consideration, which does not
produce the desired effects while taking up too much
of its resources.
On cross-cutting issues, there should be a reasonable
division of labour with other bodies to avoid overlapping
and redundancy. The issues on the Council’s agenda
and arrangements for deliberations should be adjusted
as and when the situation on the ground changes. For
example, the Council currently meets on the Syrian
dossier three times a month, which is unnecessary in
the light of the reality on the ground. We propose either
reducing the frequency of deliberations or combining
the different tracks, which would help us approach the
Syrian dossier from a more holistic perspective and
render the Council’s work more efficient.
Secondly, there is a need for better management
of Arria Formula meetings. The original purpose of
the Arria Formula was to provide Council members
with an opportunity to learn more about the issues on

S/PV.9079

its agenda and exchange views thereon in an informal
setting so as to enhance and broaden consensus.
In recent years, however, the pattern of Arria
Formula meetings has deviated from that original
intent. A total of 32 Arria Formula meetings took place
last year. As well as hogging many delegations’ finite
resources, those meetings, due to the way in which
they were organized, barely achieved the purpose of
enhancing information-sharing and promoting mutual
understanding. Some meetings are merely a breeding
ground for quarrels. We call on all members to exercise
restraint and encourage the Council presidency to
demonstrate good leadership in steering Arria Formula
arrangements onto a more rational track.
Thirdly, with regard to the penholders or
co-penholders for each agenda item, we wish to stress
that penholderships are an informal arrangement that is
supposed to reflect shared responsibility and collective
engagement. In practice, however, the penholderships
on various issues have long been held by certain
permanent members. On occasion, some penholders
have placed their national positions above our collective
organ, resulting in mounting controversies.
We therefore advocate a systematic restructuring of
the penholder arrangement. As a general principle, there
should be two or three co-penholders per topic, to be
shared between permanent and non-permanent members.
The chairs of the subsidiary bodies should be invited to
act as penholders for their mandated issues. Penholders
should engage closely with the countries concerned,
Council members and the competent departments of
the Secretariat in order to maximize consensus, reduce
differences and avert confrontation.
Fourthly, it is important to strike a balance
between increased transparency and credible
confidentiality. In practice, it is not uncommon for
the media or non-Council members to have access
to draft documents even before Council members. In
addition, when some members brief the media on the
proceedings of closed consultations, they distort the
positions of other members by quoting them out of
context. While that is done to reflect transparency,
in practice it seriously undermines Security Council
consultations and affects their outcomes. It also
erodes unity among Council members. We hope that
all members will take that more seriously, because our
work in the Security Council should be carried out in a
serious and professional manner.

22-4039813/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We support the Security Council in inviting civil
society representatives to participate in its meetings, and
we hope that the monthly presidencies will strengthen
the screening of invited representatives to ensure that
they are genuinely well informed about the topics under
consideration and that their positions are objective and
impartial in order to facilitate the Security Council’s
discussions and search for solutions.
Fifthly, it is important to take a sensible approach
to the question of Council sanctions. Sanctions are an
important tool of the Security Council. However, they
are only the means of achieving a political settlement.
The Security Council must exercise restraint and
control its impulse to resort to sanctions too readily. It
should be prudent in terms of the intensity and scope of
the sanctions it applies. To minimize collateral damage,
sanctions measures should also be reviewed in a timely
manner in order to adjust those that need to be adjusted
and eliminate those that should be eliminated.
Some Council members have referred in their
statements to the issue of the veto power. I would like to
point out that the exercise of the veto is a consequence
of the inequitable composition of the Security Council
and the division of Council members into camps. The
unbalanced composition of this body inevitably leads to
unfair decision-making.
Many members of the Security Council belong to
one particular political bloc. They pursue identical or
very similar foreign policies and have great influence
in political, economic, military and other spheres. To
some extent, they even control the media. They exploit
their numerical advantage to dominate the setting of
the agenda of the Security Council, the designation of
penholders and the drafting of documents. More often
than not, they try to push through draft resolutions
while avoiding the holding of full consultations, which
results in the exercise of the veto.

28/06/2022

every single Council member. I hope that the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions will play an important role in
comprehensively sorting out all the proposals put
forward at this meeting and actively push for follow-up
work on their further development and implementation.
China stands ready to effectively fulfil its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security
Council and to work with all parties to draw on our
experience and improve the working methods of the
Security Council on an ongoing basis so that it can play
a more effective role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Albania for organizing this open debate and for your
effective presidency, Mr. President, of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. I also thank Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren for their analyses and recommendations.
The Security Council and the entire multilateral
system are facing major challenges, in particular the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the consequences of
the Russian aggression against Ukraine. To respond to
those challenges, we need a Security Council that is
focused on action and results.
An effective Security Council means, above
all, a reformed Council that is more authoritative
and representative. France’s position on that issue is
well known, and I will not go into detail. We remain
mobilized with all our partners on that subject.

To address those problems, it is important to work
on the root causes and allow more developing countries
and countries that pursue independent policies to
participate in the work of the Security Council. I would
like to stress that independent countries must be brought
into the Council in order for a decisive solution to be
found to the Security Council’s lack of compositional
equity and balance.

Secondly, we must find the best balance between
public diplomacy and work behind closed doors. Over
the past few years, considerable progress has been made
in terms of transparency. I welcome, for example, the
publication and submission to the General Assembly
on time of the annual report on the activities of the
Security Council in 2021. That report shows that the
Council held 240 public meetings and 124 consultations
last year. Public meetings are useful because they allow
for greater inclusivity by giving a voice to relevant
Member States, as well as to civil society. The voices of
women and young persons are also increasingly heard
at those meetings, although there is still much to be
done to achieve parity.

Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is a long-term process that must start now
on the basis of specific measures and must involve

However, we must ensure that there is sufficient
space for confidential discussions and negotiations
among Council members, as they allow us to adjust

14/35

22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

our positions and reach compromise. We need to spend
less time reiterating our often-well-known positions
and more time negotiating. Juxtaposing 15 national
positions is not the objective. The current balance is
not the one we need. The Security Council needs to
regain the ability to make decisions. That is its role and
the mandate assigned to it by the Charter of the United
Nations. It is primarily an executive body, not a forum
for discussion.
Similarly, informal Arria Formula meetings are
essential, but today there are too many of them and
they are sometimes misused. No fewer than five Arria
Formula meetings have been scheduled for July. We
must find a way to limit the number of meetings in that
format and ensure that they are genuinely inclusive by
systematically ensuring that interpretation is provided.
Thirdly, the Council must be able to assume
its responsibilities and address situations that may
constitute threats to international peace and security.
Regional organizations have an important role to play.
That is defined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. But that does not mean that the Council
should be relieved of its responsibilities. The Security
Council has a wide variety of meeting formats and tools
that enable it to make an irreplaceable contribution to the
settlement of conflicts by taking into account regional
specificities. It must therefore act whenever necessary.
Finally, even the best working methods will never
replace the spirit of responsibility and compromise
that remains essential to finding solutions to crises.
In that regard, the Security Council has been used on
several occasions in recent months as a platform for
disinformation. That misuse of the Council dangerously
weakens its authority, and it must end.
Responsibility also means respecting the
prerogatives of the Secretary-General and not blocking
the Secretary-General’s appointment proposals without
good reason. That also applies in particular to the
panels of experts of the sanctions committees.
Responsibility also means that the permanent
members must use the veto sensibly. The threat of using
the veto at any time as a negotiating tool is not acceptable.
All or nothing leads to paralysis and collective failure.
In this respect, France, together with Mexico, is leading
an initiative that proposes the voluntary and collective
suspension of the use of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities. It is already has the support of 106 Member

S/PV.9079

States. We call on all Member States and in particular
the permanent members to join it.
Finally, together with Mexico, we are co-penholders
on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. We will
continue to seek results on this and other issues in
the Council.
In conclusion, Mr. President, you can count on
France to work towards a modern, inclusive and
action-oriented Security Council.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security
Council Report, and Loraine Sievers, co-author of
The Procedure of the UN Security Council for their
briefings. I also acknowledge their contribution,
analysis and development of tools to enhance the
effectiveness of Council member delegations.
I align myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the 26 members of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, and congratulate
Ireland on its statement on behalf of the 10 elected
members of the Security Council, whose special
contribution to the improvement of working methods is
always commendable.
As we meet in this Chamber after the full
participation in this annual debate was restricted
in 2020 and 2021 by exceptional health measures, I
acknowledge the Council’s efforts aimed at ensuring
the continuity of work in an inclusive manner, in
accordance with rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure. The subject of today’s debate encompasses
one of the central issues of the United Nations, given
that having effective working methods not only favours
the vitality of the Security Council, but also the vitality
of the United Nations as whole, and that depends, not
on Charter reform, but on Charter implementation.
Formulas for modernizing working methods should
consider not only the flow of internal procedures and
communications between Council members and the
Council and its subsidiary bodies, but also between

22-4039815/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

the Council and the other organs of the United Nations
system and between its permanent and elected members
and the rest of the Member States of the Organization.
I insist on the need to deepen the relationship
between the Security Council and the General Assembly.
With regard to the annual report to be submitted by the
Security Council to the Assembly, I would reiterate
all the recommendations that we made at the 9 June
meeting, both in our national capacity and on behalf
of the ACT group. The revitalization of the Security
Council’s working methods will be reflected in a body
capable of more effectively fulfilling its obligations to
ensure international peace and security. We support the
full implementation of presidential note S/2017/507 and
all existing arrangements in this area, as well as their
ongoing development and modernization.
Discussions and meetings should be able to rely
on a prior and solid base of information, including
real statistics, projections and proposals for solutions,
not just the general information provided in concept
notes, which are certainly very useful, but also broad
information that leads to operational results and avoids
being limited to theoretical discussions. Without
ignoring the fact that certain sensitive issues may
require discretion and prudent reserve, that cannot be
a pretext for institutionalizing secret diplomacy. The
Security Council acts on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations pursuant to Article 24 of the
United Nations Charter, but the counterpart of that
representation is the obligation to ensure prompt and
effective action by the United Nations.

28/06/2022

Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Slovenia, Sweden, Uruguay
and Switzerland.
The ACT group remains convinced of the need
to consolidate the strengths of Security Council
working methods, address fundamental flaws and
build on innovations made. We commend the efforts
deployed by Albania in its capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We welcome the opportunity to
contribute to this debate, and we thank the briefers for
their important contributions.
The Security Council’s ability to deliver on its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security is put to the test by disrespect of the
United Nations Charter and lack of compliance with
international law. Prompt and decisive action by the
Security Council is needed to prevent and respond to
the devastating consequences of armed conflict for
civilians across the globe.
By adopting resolution 76/262, the General
Assembly underscored the Council’s duty to apply the
United Nations Charter to its best effect to prevent and
resolve conflict. This new accountability mechanism
mobilizes the broader United Nations membership
whenever the Council is unable to fulfil its duties
because of the use of the veto by a permanent member.
We welcome the timely transmission of a special report
by the Council to the General Assembly in line with
Article 24 of the Charter in the first application of this
resolution (A/76/853, annex), and if the veto is used
in future.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

The ACT group would like to highlight three areas
to strengthen Council working methods. First, we
call for a number of innovations to be continued and
institutionalized. We recognize the contribution made
by elected members to strengthen Council working
methods. The ACT group hopes to see the comprehensive
digital programme of work promoted by Norway and
others, which made the Council’s work more accessible
for the wider United Nations membership, become a
permanent feature.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I am pleased to
deliver this statement on behalf of 26 members of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea,

Shared thematic commitments on women, peace
and security, which build on the initiative by Ireland,
Kenya and Mexico and joined by a growing number
of presidencies, have made a tangible contribution to
implementation across the Council’s agenda. Letters
on working-methods commitments by successive
presidencies offer a way to promote agility and

In conclusion, I stress the relevance of the Security
Council’s working methods and corresponding
notes in guiding and facilitating the preparatory
work for delegations which, like mine, will occupy a
non-permanent seat as of 1 January 2023, on the basis of
which I pledge my delegation’s fullest support to making
progress in the efforts promoted by today’s debate.

16/35

22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

institutionalize
commitments
towards
greater
effectiveness and transparency. We encourage the
continued exploration and use of virtual briefings,
including data-based presentations, use of visual aids
and/or augmented reality.
We reiterate our call to continue the codification of
best practices adopted during the coronavirus disease
pandemic, with a view to future-proofing the Council
against the risks of other crises or major disruptions.
Secondly, we underline the need for inclusiveness,
which is critical for the Council’s effectiveness.
The ACT group welcomes the return to in-person
participation by the wider membership in Council
meetings and remains ready to engage with Council
members in exploring creative ways to ensure that
open debates are both effective and inclusive. We also
hope that the Council will return to a more inclusive
approach on the acceptance of rule 37 requests.
The possibility for briefers, including civil society
representatives, to brief the Council through videoteleconferencing is positive. Member States directly
affected by Council decisions should be able to engage
in a timely manner and through adequate channels. We
commend the regular holding of interactive sessions by
the presidency to discuss priorities and to wrap up the
month by reflecting on achievements and challenges
with the wider membership.
Visiting missions by the Council are an important
means to gather the views of a broad range of
stakeholders and to gain first-hand understanding of
dynamics on the ground. We encourage the Council
to continue this practice and to debrief the wider
membership upon return. We reiterate our call to the
Council to make better use of the annual report to
provide a more complete, substantive and analytical
account of its work to the General Assembly.
Thirdly, we urge Council members to use all
available formats to forge consensus and to enable action
in situations of which the Council is seized as well as in
response to emerging threats. Recalling that Members
of the United Nations have conferred on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the ACT Group calls
upon the members of the Council to fulfil all obligations
to enable the Council to discharge its responsibilities,
to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and to act in the collective interests
of maintaining international peace and security.

S/PV.9079

We recall that Article 27 limits the participation
of Members that are directly involved in a dispute in
decisions relating to the peaceful settlement thereof. We
deem it crucial to continue investing in creative ways to
restore and expand space for dialogue among Council
members. We call on all Member States to join the
ACT code of conduct and to support Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Accountability, coherence and transparency are
mutually reinforcing principles that must continue to
guide improvements in the working methods of the
Security Council. The ACT group is committed to doing
its part and to actively contributing and supporting any
initiative towards that end.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the three Benelux
countries — Belgium, the Netherlands and my own
country, Luxembourg.
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council, and we commend the efforts of Albania as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We also sincerely thank
Ms. Loraine Sievers and Ms. Karin Landgren for their
briefings and their recommendations.
Today more than ever it is vital that the Security
Council be able to fulfil its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
as entrusted to it by Member States. We deplore the
impasse in which the Council finds itself, as it is
currently not able to fully discharge its mandate and
consequently not fully able to uphold the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, notably owing to the
use of the veto.
Lack of respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and international law has devastating consequences for
civilians in many regions of the world, including in
Syria, the occupied Palestinian territories, Ukraine and
Afghanistan. In the light of the many challenges that
we face, it is crucial that cooperation be strengthened
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
as well as with the Peacebuilding Commission and
regional organizations. The transparency of the
Council’s work must be ensured, and its responsibility

22-4039817/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

vis-à-vis all the States Members of the United Nations
must be strengthened.
Recent efforts in that direction are welcome, in
particular thanks to the initiative on the veto. The new
mechanism created by General Assembly resolution
76/262 was implemented for the first time at the
beginning of this month. In that context, we welcome
the submission in good time by the Security Council
of a special report on the use of the veto and the
participation of a large number of Member States in the
General Assembly debate (see A/76/PV.77 and A/76/
PV.78).
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council remains an imperative. We strongly encourage
the Council to ensure as much as possible that all Member
States and all relevant stakeholders are involved, with a
particular focus on the participation of representatives
of civil society in Council meetings. The in-person
participation of Member States and observer States in
open meetings of the Council is particularly important
in that context.
We also encourage the Council to resume its
practice of field visits, which allow for discussions with
a broad range of actors and allow the Council to get a
direct understanding of dynamics on the ground and
then to debrief all Member States upon their return.
In order to ensure effective United Nations action
and prevent conflicts, we call upon all Member States
to join the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes, which was elaborated within the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which is now supported by more than 120 Member
States, and to support the political declaration on the
suspension of the veto in the case of mass atrocities
submitted by France and Mexico. The Benelux countries
fully support those two initiatives.
I would like to conclude by commending the
heightened commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda initiated by the trio of the presidencies
of Ireland, Kenya and Mexico in 2021. That commitment
is supported by a growing number of presidencies of the
Security Council, which has allowed it to considerably
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda within the Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
18/35

28/06/2022

Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful to Albania for having
convened this open debate on the Council’s working
methods. We also thank Ms. Loraine Sievers and
Ms. Karin Landgren for their briefings.
We trust that our deliberations will not only be
a chance to renew the commitment to continue to
improve the efficiency, transparency and interactivity
of the Security Council, but also prove to be a solid
foundation for an effective update of presidential note
S/2017/507.
We recognize the progress made on some processes
and the strengthening of other measures contained
in note 507 thanks to the commendable work of
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
However, as a former non-permanent member of the
Security Council, in 2012-2013, we believe that there is
still room for improvement and wish to make three few
relevant points in that regard.
First, the quest for awareness and understanding of
the work of the Council remains vital and legitimate.
Although there has been an increase in the number
of open meetings of the Council, the continuation of
the practice of open debates is conducive to greater
participation of those who are not members of the
Council, and, in recent years, the holding of many
Arria Formula meetings has led us to believe that it
is necessary to hold more frequent meetings with the
Peacebuilding Commission, an intergovernmental
advisory body that plays an important role in preventing
the recurrence of conflicts, and the Chairs of the
configurations in charge of specific countries, as well
as other United Nations organs.
Secondly, the Council has in the past taken decisions
on the appointment of Chairs of the subsidiary bodies
in a balanced, transparent and inclusive manner, which
ushered in a change, since there is now an impression
that consultations are held regarding the process,
especially among members recently elected to the
Council. My delegation hopes that that practice and
trend will strengthen in future.
It is also necessary to ensure that procedures for
selecting and appointing various groups of experts will
be more transparent and balanced, so that there can be
as much geographic representation as possible.
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We therefore also attach priority to the ongoing
efforts to enhance interaction between subsidiary
bodies and all Member States, and we welcome
initiatives such as the formal open consultations of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) on the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
on non-proliferation, held in May, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), held in February.
I should like to refer to the critical practice of holding
frequent consultations between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, inasmuch as that helps improve the Council’s
capacity to take appropriate and effective decisions and
thus fulfil its responsibilities. Guatemala is honoured
to be a troop-contributing country as part of the United
Nations peacekeeping effort and reiterates its readiness
to stand ready to help in that noble endeavour.
We have seen, through the issuance of presidential
note 507, the strengthening of many previous efforts
and decisions on the working methods of the Council.
Our delegation trusts that the content of the note will
continue to provide practical guidance for the work of
the Security Council to improve. In that context, we
urge the Security Council and the Secretariat to include
in the records of the meetings, whenever one of the
permanent members exercises the veto in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 76/262, entitled
“Standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council”.
In conclusion, the Security Council’s working
methods are closely linked to accountability to the
entire membership of the Organization. Past practice
indicates that elected members, which are accountable
to regional groups and to all States Members of the
United Nations, are the most likely to improve its
working methods.
The best way to enhance the Council’s representative
and democratic nature is to strengthen standards
of accountability and transparency. In addition to
cooperation with the permanent members, that would
lead to greater synergy in the Council around the
common goal of improving its working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

S/PV.9079

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Increasing the Security Council’s efficiency and
effectiveness must always be viewed as a work in
progress because the nature and scope of the challenges
related to international peace and security are
constantly evolving.
That requires the Security Council to commit
to continually improving the effectiveness and
transparency of its work, as well as its interaction and
communication with non-Council members. To that
end, reforming and evolving the Council into a fully
transparent, rules-based and, above all, accountable
body is the most efficient method to ensure its
transparency, efficiency and effectiveness.
We commend the significant efforts and measures
that have been undertaken in recent years to improve
the Council’s working methods. Nonetheless, those
efforts have fallen short of what United Nations
Members expected because they have been few and
slow. Therefore, in accordance with the discussions on
the subject within the intergovernmental negotiations,
efforts to advance in that area must be increased,
especially within the Council itself.
Against that backdrop, I would like to address the
following points.
First, the Security Council must adhere to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations in all
its decision-making procedures. Full compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations will enable
the Council to refrain from adopting ultra vires
decisions that contravene the Charter or considering
circumstances that do not pose a threat to international
peace and security, as well as issues pertaining to the
domestic affairs of States. That will assist the Council
in preventing the abuse or overuse of its Chapter VII
functions and, instead, in carrying out its obligations
hereunder appropriately and responsibly.
Secondly, the Security Council must assess the
effectiveness of sanctions and their humanitarian
repercussions at the various stages of a conflict and
suspend or lift them, as needed. Sanctions, as is well
acknowledged, have serious humanitarian consequences,
as we have all witnessed during the coronavirus disease
pandemic, putting civilian populations’ health and
lives in grave jeopardy. Furthermore, working in an
environment where sanctions are prevalent is often
difficult for humanitarian actors.

22-4039819/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Thirdly, the United Nations system is built on
multilateralism. In the face of serious and increasingly
complex global challenges, the Council must practise
and uphold true multilateralism, which necessitates
resolving international issues through collaboration.
A candid review of the Security Council’s practices
reveals that the Council’s authority and powers have
been repeatedly abused by certain States, which, in
pursuit of their short-sighted political objectives,
particularly against developing countries, regard this
organ as their preferred tool to exert pressure on other
countries. Such conduct not only breaches the United
Nations Charter and the fundamental principles of
international law, but also demonstrates disrespect for
the Council’s authority and powers.
Fourthly, the number of issues discussed in the
Council has steadily increased in recent years. The
Council should exercise caution when introducing new
topics for consideration and maintain consistency in its
priorities. To avoid duplicating efforts and encroaching
on the General Assembly’s mandate, the Council
should improve communication and cooperation with
the General Assembly and other United Nations organs
on cross-cutting issues.
Finally, the annual reports of the Security Council
should contribute to the much-needed transparency
and accountability of decisions and measures taken by
the Security Council. During the recent discussions in
the General Assembly on this issue, the vast majority
of Member States renewed their call on the Security
Council to present an annual report that goes beyond a
simple compilation of its activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): Let me begin by
thanking Albania, both as current President of the
Security Council and as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, for convening this open debate. Let me also
extend our thanks and appreciation to the briefers for
their very insightful remarks.
I deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions — Austria,
Belgium, Chile, Costa Rica, Finland, Germany, Ireland,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland and my own country, Denmark.
20/35

28/06/2022

Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness
in the work of the Security Council includes the
strengthening of fair and clear procedures and due
process for United Nations sanctions regimes. Security
Council targeted sanctions are an important tool to
address threats to international peace and security.
However, the Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted
Sanctions considers that due process standards must be
improved. The issue of due process is twofold. Not only
is it about safeguarding the human rights of the targeted
individuals, but it is also fundamental to Member States’
ability to implement the sanctions, and is therefore a
key component to ensure their effectiveness.
The Office of the Ombudsperson is mandated to
review only cases on the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Yet there
are 13 other sanctions committees, for which there is
no independent system to review delisting requests.
As we are all aware, national and regional courts
are increasingly considering cases in relation to the
United Nations sanctions regimes without access to
an Ombudsperson mechanism. Avoiding any gap in
Member States’ abilities to implement United Nations
sanctions is a critical element to ensure the legitimacy
of the sanctions.
The issue of improving due process for missions
formed the basis of rich discussions at a workshop
convened at Greentree on 27 and 28 April this year,
involving the Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted
Sanctions and co-hosted by Switzerland, Norway,
Ireland and the Graduate Institute in Geneva. The
event brought together Security Council members,
other States Members of the United Nations, United
Nations senior officials, members of United Nations
panels of experts and leading international scholars in
order to review ongoing challenges and explore new
approaches. We are aware of, and, as the Group, have
reflected on, various options, such as extending the
mandate of the Ombudsperson to all sanctions regimes,
creating context-sensitive review mechanisms or the
enhancement of the Focal Point for Delisting into an
actual independent review mechanism.
The time has now come for the Security Council
to address such concerns in an agile and innovative
manner, and we urge the Council to be open-minded
when presented with possible suggestions for
improvements. We also encourage incoming members
to adopt a favourable approach to due process reforms.
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The Group would also like to warmly welcome
the appointment of Mr. Richard Malanjum, who
assumed his official functions as Ombudsperson on
14 February. The Group reiterates that the Office of the
Ombudsperson should be able to carry out its mandate
in an independent, impartial and effective manner,
as set out in resolution 2368 (2017). However, the
Group remains concerned that the independence of the
Office is being undermined by the current contractual
status and institutional arrangement of the Office of
the Ombudsperson within the Secretariat. The Group
urges the Security Council and the Secretary-General
to continue their efforts to improve the Council’s
working methods in that area. We all have an interest in
ensuring that United Nations targeted sanctions respect
international due process standards.
We must continue to improve the mechanisms in
order to safeguard the integrity of the Security Council
decisions and ensure that the effective and universal
implementation of United Nations sanctions regimes
is not disrupted. The Group stands ready to support
such efforts, and we welcome this opportunity of the
open debate to discuss with so many distinguished and
influential participants the various ways in which the
Security Council’s working methods and due process
can be improved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes the timely holding of this open debate
and commends Albania’s leadership as President of the
Security Council and Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
The experience of the Council’s innovative
adaptation during the pandemic presents us with a
unique opportunity to look critically at how the Council
has been doing its work. Building on the lessons
learned, we need to continue to explore how to further
improve the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness
of the Council’s work.
Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, the Council needs to pay greater attention to
the growing calls from the international community for
limiting the right of the veto. The use or threat of use of

S/PV.9079

the veto continues to pose impediments to the Council’s
ability to carry out its responsibilities.
With that in mind, Korea welcomed the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 76/262, on the veto
initiative, in April, as well as the successful holding of
the first General Assembly meeting under the process
(see A/76/PV.77) earlier this month. We reiterate our
support for all other initiatives aimed at limiting the use
of the veto and making the Council more accountable to
the whole United Nations membership.
Secondly, we would like to underline that all
members of the Council should have more opportunities
to shoulder its work equally. While commending the
positive steps taken for the early inclusion of newly
elected members, we believe that more needs to be done
to help them better prepare for the Council’s intense
workload ahead of assuming their membership.
We also support a more equitable division of labour
and greater burden-sharing among all 15 members,
including more active roles for elected members in the
drafting and consultation processes. That will enable
the Council to benefit to a greater degree from the
insights of all members.
Thirdly, we support the continued efforts of the
Council to make strides towards finding the right
balance between efficiency and transparency. While
retaining efficiency and effectiveness, the Council
needs to increase transparency by holding more openformat meetings and informative briefings.
The enhancement of inclusivity and meaningful
participation should also be encouraged, along with
the sustained engagement of the wider membership,
in particular the States concerned, as well as civil
society actors, including women and young people.
We encourage the continued utilization of virtual
participation to attract a wider spectrum of briefers
and allow members to be able to listen to key voices on
the ground.
Fourthly, we encourage the Council to continue
to strengthen its interaction and engagement with
other United Nations organs and bodies, including the
General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Human Rights Council. The contribution
of the PBC in particular is essential given its unique
ability to provide cross-cutting perspectives. The role
of the PBC should be further utilized by the Council in

22-4039821/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

order to enrich its discussion on thematic and regional
issues, as well as on mandate renewals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Sakowicz (Poland): I thank today’s briefers for
their insightful and valuable presentations.
I would like to begin by expressing my sincere
appreciation to the delegation of Albania for its
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month, as well as its effective chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. The proceedings and
deliberations of the latter are particularly significant
with regard to today’s discussion on the Security
Council’s working methods.
Unfortunately, we continue to see how the rulesbased international order is being brutally attacked
these days. The Security Council is often stuck in a
deadlock, making it unable to properly carry out its
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. The unprovoked aggression against
Ukraine is the most recent example in that regard.
That is why we need a Security Council that is
worthy of the name. It has to be flexible, fit for purpose
and able to swiftly respond to global crises. That is
essential for ensuring a stable and secure international
environment, based on the principles of international
law and solidarity. Poland supports the efforts to
improve the Councils’ working methods.
We welcome the adoption of consecutive notes
by the President of the Security Council, including
comprehensive presidential note S/2017/507, which
marks an important step in the steady development of
the Council’s working methods. We acknowledge the
positive developments in that regard, namely, ensuring
more timely Security Council elections and providing
incoming members of the Council with more time to
observe its proceedings. We note the advantages of the
penholdership system, with special emphasis on the
effectiveness of the work of the Council.
All Council members, including the elected
members, should be able to engage in the drafting
process and contribute to issues that concern them. In
that context, we call for further change of the relevant
arrangements to allow the possibility of a more equal
division of the penholder responsibility. We are also
convinced that the elected members (E10) can play a
22/35

28/06/2022

key role in the Council’s decision-making. With their
active engagement, the organ is more transparent and
effective. In that regard, we continuously advocate for
strengthening the position of the E10 in the Council.
As I already mentioned, we need a Security
Council that is able to take swift and decisive actions.
Therefore, we remain concerned about the increase
of the use of veto. Too often, it has incapacitated the
Council. Not only do vetoes hamper the efficiency of
the United Nations system but they also undermine its
credibility in the eyes of international public opinion.
Therefore, Poland welcomed the establishment of
the new practice of convening a General Assembly
plenary meeting following the use of the veto in the
Security Council. We believe that will contribute to
improving the United Nations system and will translate
into strengthening international peace and stability.
We cannot afford to have a Security Council that
is unable to live up to its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations. Instead, we need a body that is
efficient, transparent, representative and accountable.
We believe that the further development of the Council’s
working methods can bring us closer to achieving that
goal. The Council can count on Poland’s full support in
that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my deep appreciation to the Albanian presidency for
organizing this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council, to which Japan has consistently
been deeply committed.
I am pleased that, for the first time in three years,
non-Council members are able to participate in this
debate in person. Many things have happened during
that period with regard to the way the Council works.
The physical constraints owing to the pandemic were
one important factor, but growing divisions among the
members was another. The latter led to the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 76/262, on the veto
initiative, which we welcomed.
Japan highly commends the flexibility and
ingenuity of the Council in developing new tools and
practices under the unprecedented circumstances of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. They can serve as a good
basis for improving its working methods, especially
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

in order to be better prepared for any contingency in
the future.
Japan is honoured that it will serve once again
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
beginning in 2023. Having served as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions three times and contributed to
the adoption of presidential note S/2006/507 and its
revisions, we recognize the need to update it in the
light of the presidential notes issued during the Kuwait
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines chairmanships
of the Informal Working Group. We also acknowledge
initiatives on utilizing new technologies, such as visual
aids, which are similarly significant developments in
the Council’s working methods.
Japan intends to actively engage in efforts to further
improve the working methods under the current Albanian
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group, in close
cooperation with other Council members, including
both the permanent five members and the elected 10
members, while heeding the views of the wider United
Nations membership in good faith. I look forward to
contributing to the deepening of the discussions on the
important theme of working methods, as a member of
the Security Council beginning in January 2023.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The past year
has seen the Security Council return from many of its
coronavirus disease-affected working methods, while
searching for ways to bridge the increasing divisions
among its members on key files. While we continue to
be concerned about the Council’s overall effectiveness,
working methods continue to be an area of steady, albeit
slow, progress. We hope that submissions to today’s
debate will inform discussions in the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, which you, Mr. President, so ably chair.
We will continue to support efforts through the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
with whose statement we align ourselves. That includes
improvements to the system of co-penholdership, in
particular to ensure fair burden-sharing among the 10
elected members of the Security Council and the five
permanent members.
The Council should continue to bear in mind the
lessons learned from the pandemic, including the use

S/PV.9079

of video-teleconferencing technology, where useful
and appropriate, to improve its inclusiveness. It should
also prioritize in-person access for all States, as well as
civil society. Member States should be able to access
the Chamber for the Council’s public deliberations,
and there should be timely and regular opportunities to
address the Council under rule 37.
Historic meetings were held in the Chamber in
connection with the aggression against Ukraine, which
were in theory not open to all members. We were not
given access when we tried to attend meetings in the
Chamber. That should not happen again in the future.
Representatives of civil society should also be able
to attend Council meetings and regularly inform the
Council’s consideration of the situations before it.
We are pleased to see that the wrap-up session
has become part and parcel of the Council’s working
methods. That is an important platform for exchanges
between the Council and its membership. In that
respect, we encourage Council members to ensure that
their discussion be of an interactive nature and that all
Member States attend and contribute.
The aggression against Ukraine has seen a
deadlock in the Council in the face of an ongoing
assault on international order. However, we commend
the Council’s decision to trigger the Uniting for Peace
formula for the first time in 40 years, and the strong
action taken by the General Assembly as a result.
We thank those States that have mentioned the veto
initiative today and are pleased to see that the Council
has been able to follow up the working methods’
implications of resolution 76/262. After it was first
triggered last month, the Council was swiftly able to
agree on a special report (A/76/853), at the invitation
of the General Assembly, which was an important and
rare occurrence given that no such report had been
produced in 46 years.
Going forward, that need not be limited to
situations in which a veto is cast. We would prefer a
more substantive analysis of the reasons for each veto,
but our top priority is the practice of automatic and
swift follow-up and engagement, in line with the terms
of the General Assembly resolution. It is also essential
to have records of relevant Council meetings produced
as expeditiously as possible in the future in order to
ensure maximum flexibility for the scheduling of a
General Assembly meeting.

22-4039823/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We highly appreciate the Arria Formula — a lasting
innovation from the 1990s that can bring the attention
of the Council to topics and voices that it has otherwise
not heard. If used as intended, the format can do a great
deal to enhance the Council’s inclusivity and relevance.
We hope to see the Arria Formula used consistently in
accordance with its original intent and purpose.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks Albania for organizing
today’s open debate.
There is an undeniable connection between the
working methods of Security Council and conflict
prevention. If the Security Council acts solely in crisis
mode, responding and reacting to events instead of
preventing them, it will never be able to predict when
events will occur, intervene early enough to prevent
them from happening and save lives. In that regard,
allow me to raise the following points.
The hegemonic structure of penholding prevents
the elected members of the Security Council from
participating in the drafting of important resolutions.
That practice marginalizes the elected members,
thereby enabling only a few members to frame issues
and determine courses of action. The current practice of
penholding restricts the likelihood of elected members
being able to make greater contributions, thereby
hindering all voices and views from being heard.
Costa Rica urges penholding responsibilities to be
shared among all Council members so that outcome
documents can be representative of the plethora of
views held by Council members. Similarly, fair burdensharing among the subsidiary bodies can no longer
be postponed. The current structure of the Security
Council limits the scope of its elected members,
assigning them the responsibility for sanctions
committees and other specialized roles, while curbing
their public contributions, such as advocating for
unrestricted humanitarian access on behalf of the
victims of conflicts that the Council has been unable to
prevent or resolve with expediency.
It is frustrating to witness the initiatives and often
the voices of high-profile elected members being
suppressed by the obstinacy and political games of the
permanent members. Such suppression is most obvious
in the case of the smallest States, which have also made
24/35

28/06/2022

their way into the Council. Therefore, the equitable
allocation of work among all elected members not only
ensures equitable, fair burden-sharing but also ensures
an accurate representation of the needs and aspirations
of all Council members.
Costa Rica also calls for more transparency in
the work of subsidiary bodies and the selection and
independence of groups of experts. Similarly, we call
for more inclusive processes for selecting the Chairs of
those bodies and for a continued push towards greater
transparency in preparing the annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly.
We know that improving the working methods of the
Security Council will take time and energy. However,
given the challenges and expectations of today’s world,
genuine and substantial change is needed in the way the
Council functions if it is to shoulder its responsibilities.
That is what Costa Rica calls for today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s timely open
debate, as well as for your work as Chair of the
informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We also thank the briefers for
their insights and constructive contributions.
This debate, together with the General Assembly’s
debate (see A/76/PV.77) on the special report of the
Security Council (A/76/853) held earlier this month,
reinforces the dialogue between the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the general membership
with a view to supporting the effective workings of the
Council. We hope that the views and concerns expressed
in today’s debate will help further enhance the work
of the Council in implementing its mandate, while
complementing the United Nations whole-of-system
approach to international peace and security, as well
as promoting the comprehensive reform of the Council.
Thailand welcomes the efforts made by the Security
Council to implement the measures contained in the
annex to presidential note S/2017/507, including during
the pandemic. The Security Council is conferred with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and to act on behalf
of the entire United Nations membership. To that end,
we trust that the Council can further strengthen its
working methods in five areas.
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

First, inclusive and timely information-sharing
on the work of the Council remains key. While
we appreciate the need for a balance between
confidentiality and transparency, the Council’s
actions — or otherwise — have great impact. Not only
do they establish the collective response of the United
Nations to conflict situations, but they also shape
the direction and tone of the public’s discourse and
perception on the issues. It is therefore essential for the
wider membership, in particular the States affected and
the region concerned, to receive timely information on
the matter under consideration. After all, they are the
direct stakeholders.
Unfortunately, Member States often encounter
delays in being notified of the Council’s most recent
developments, emergency meetings and concept notes
of open debates. Member States should therefore be
involved in the process and be informed of the Council’s
work and related developments as much and as soon as
possible. Such engagement contributes constructively
to the Council’s work.
Secondly, the viewpoints and perspectives of
developing countries should be a high priority for the
Council’s consideration. As the majority of the Council’s
agenda involves situations in developing countries that
are impacted most by such conflicts, their views should
be taken into account.
Within the Council, we note the increasing number
of non-permanent members from developing countries
entrusted with chairing the respective Committees of
the Council. My delegation supports exploring ways
in which non-permanent members can make greater
contributions in penholdership and other roles.
Thirdly, partnerships with countries in affected
regions and regional organizations are crucial for
promoting sustainable peace and stability. While
the Council is engaged with the global ramifications
of the issues on its agenda, attention should not be
diverted away from concerns at the regional level
and the possible effect on the paths to recovery from
the pandemic and longer-term development of the
countries in the affected region. In this increasingly
interdependent world, no one region’s situation is more
or less important than another’s.
Fourthly, given the strong interlinkages between
the various global crises affecting humankind and
the inherent peace-development-governance nexus
in most conflict situations, it is more important than

S/PV.9079

ever that the Council work in increased coordination,
cooperation and interaction with other United
Nations organs and bodies, in particular the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Such interaction can be
mutually reinforcing and complementary and should be
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Fifthly and finally, while the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure allow the Council flexibility in its
work, adopting permanent rules of procedure would
bring about greater predictability and transparency.
With various amendments and a number of documents
supplementing its working methods, the Council could
better function with standing rules in place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group.
At the outset, let me thank Albania for its very
successful presidency and the briefers, Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren, for their insightful remarks.
Today’s debate could not be timelier. In recent
weeks, many United Nations States Members have
referred to the Security Council’s responsibility for
upholding international peace and security. The Russian
aggression against Ukraine has clearly highlighted
the need to keep improving the Council’s working
methods. In a situation that constitutes a blatant breach
of international law, the Council should not remain
blocked by one Member State. We therefore highly
welcome the General Assembly stepping up in order to
fill the gap when the Council is blocked due to the use
of the veto by a permanent member.
Moreover, I would like to take this opportunity
to invite all Member States to join the ACT code of
conduct and support Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. As
a medium-sized country, Austria relies heavily on the
implementation of international law and adherence to
the Charter of the United Nations by all. I would like to
take this opportunity to urge all colleagues not to see
attempts to make use of the Charter’s full toolbox — such
as Article 27 or Article 99 — as a threat to the powers
of the Security Council, but rather as additional means

22-4039825/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

to find solutions to international crises. That aim lies at
the heart of the Council’s responsibility.
In order to better prepare the Council for future
crises, continuously adapting its working methods
remains vital. Let me therefore touch upon the following
three issues.
Inclusivity is one of the core issues that the
ACT group focuses upon. While we understand that
some Council members at times refer to the merit of
holding closed meetings as opposed to open meetings,
entering into a dialogue with the wider membership
strengthens the accountability of the Council. We
therefore recommend keeping a balance between open
and closed meetings and ensuring the regular inclusion
of non-members in Council deliberations.
My second point is closely linked to the first. We
commend the Council for regularly organizing wrapup meetings at the end of the month. More and more
Council members resort to organizing so-called wrapin meetings at the start of their presidencies as well. We
value those opportunities to engage in current issues on
the Council’s agenda.
However, we also see room for improvement.
Those meetings should be more interactive. To that
end, the ACT group presented a non-paper on the issue
this time last year. We hope that Council members also
consider those meetings as an opportunity to further
shape public opinion at the United Nations in order to
render them more substantial.
Finally, I would like to commend those Council
members that continue to improve the Council’s working
methods by proposing innovative ideas. Specifically,
let me highlight Norway’s digital programme of work,
which made the Council’s work more accessible and
transparent for the wider membership.

28/06/2022

Mr. Seah (Singapore): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this discussion, as well as Ms. Sievers and
Ms. Landgren for their briefings.
Since we last debated working methods in June
2021 (see S/PV.8798), the geopolitical climate has
darkened, and the Security Council has yet to exercise
its mandate to maintain international peace and security
in response. That has made the need to improve the
Council’s working methods even more pressing.
My first point concerns accountability. There
must be greater accountability each time a veto is cast.
Singapore was pleased to be an early sponsor of General
Assembly resolution 76/262. We also reiterate that the
Security Council Affairs Division should produce a
special report as soon as possible. We have long called
for permanent members to explain their use of the veto
and the consistency of such decisions with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
Accountability also implies restraint. Singapore
calls on all permanent members to support the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
initiative and the Franco-Mexican initiative to not
use the veto to shield violations of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Secondly, with regard to transparency we call on
the Council to improve the focus and interactivity of
open debates, in line with presidential note S/2017/507,
on the Council’s working methods. We also call on
the Council to circulate summary records of closed
consultations for the benefit of the wider United
Nations membership.
Thirdly, we echo calls for greater inclusivity in
penholderships and for Council members to show
flexibility so that the chairs of subsidiary bodies can be
appointed on time.

While the Council bears the responsibility for
upholding international peace and security, the wider
United Nations membership bears the responsibility
for enabling the conduct of effective multilateralism,
including compliance with international law and
adherence to the rule of law. Austria stands ready to
promote those rules and values, including as a candidate
for the Security Council during the 2027 to 2028 period.

In conclusion, Singapore welcomes Albania’s
proposals to introduce a tracking mechanism on the
implementation of note 507 and an annual report of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We look forward to good
outcomes under Albania’s leadership.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.

Mr. Khan (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the working methods

26/35

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of the Security Council. We also thank the briefers for
their presentations earlier today.
There is wide agreement within the world
community that, in order to be able to respond
effectively to the increasingly complex and overlapping
challenges to global peace and security, the Security
Council must become more transparent, accountable,
inclusive and democratic. We hope that consensus
will be reached in the near future through the General
Assembly’s intergovernmental negotiations process
on a comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
Meanwhile, it is essential that the Council improve its
working methods.
Allow me to make a few observations about the
working methods of the Security Council.
First, much of the Council’s real work increasingly
takes place behind closed doors in so-called informal
meetings, which have no records and therefore do
not assign responsibility. Explanations for most of
the decisions that are taken are not provided by the
Security Council.
Secondly, that has not always been the case. During
the early decades following the creation of the United
Nations, meetings of the Council were held in an open
setting. They were convened urgently at the request of
a Member State or in the face of visible threats to peace
and security and were open to the active participation
of States non-members of the Council, which could
intervene freely on issues of concern to them. That open
culture of the Council’s work has been progressively
eroded by the even more frequent closed meetings,
especially since the end of the Cold War.
In our view, enhanced engagement by the Council
with the wider United Nations membership is critical.
We all have an equal stake in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The number and
proportion of open meetings of the Council must
therefore be increased, and closed meetings must be
restricted to a minimum.
It is no secret that there is widespread dissatisfaction
with what is seen as an exclusivist and elitist culture
of the Council, with outcomes mostly determined by
its permanent members. There is also frustration about
the use of the veto, which is exercised in the Council
not only through negative votes by the permanent
members but also through the Council’s informal and
often unacknowledged processes. It is that reality that

S/PV.9079

reinforces the belief of Pakistan and the Uniting for
Consensus group that we cannot achieve reform and
improve the effectiveness of the Security Council by
adding permanent members to it. Its representation,
openness, inclusiveness and decision-making should be
improved through the expansion and empowerment of
additional elected, non-permanent seats.
The Security Council’s relationships with the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council should also be brought into conformity with
the letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations. The improved timeline in the submission
of the report of the Security Council (A/76/2) to the
General Assembly is encouraging, but the same cannot
be said about the contents of the report itself. The report
provides a compendium of the Council’s deliberations
on various issues, which is a useful reference, but it
does not throw any light on how the Council considers
specific situations and the ways in which it reaches
its decisions.
The disregard of the Security Council’s relationship
under the Charter with the Economic and Social
Council is even greater. Article 65 of the Charter
provides that the Economic and Social Council “may
furnish information to the Security Council and shall
assist the Security Council upon its request.” But it is
rare that the Economic and Social Council has been
requested to play that role, and apart from creating the
Peacebuilding Commission, there has been no serious
effort to develop a practice of inviting the Economic
and Social Council to work with the Security Council
in areas and on issues where their mandates overlap.
It is also increasingly evident that fundamental
changes are needed in the global counter-terrorism
architecture and the Security Council sanctions
regime, especially to ensure, first, a new process and
effective remedies in the implementation of sanctions
regimes; secondly, the strengthening of the Office of
the Ombudsperson to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities with a view to
enhancing transparency in Security Council sanctions;
and thirdly, halting and reversing the mistaken practice
of transforming soft law standards and practices
into arbitrary obligations for all States through the
Security Council.

22-4039827/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Finally, nothing undermines the credibility
of the Security Council more than the selective
implementation and non-implementation of its
resolutions. The Council should seriously consider how
it can improve that implementation, especially on longstanding issues such as the Jammu and Kashmir dispute
and the question of Palestine. The failure to enforce its
own resolutions undermines the Council’s credibility
and erodes the commitment of States and peoples to the
principles of the Charter and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Albania, as this month’s
President, for organizing this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
outstanding work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions under
your presidency, Sir.
The Charter of the United Nations has invested
the Security Council with important powers that
can be exercised only through an approach based on
effectiveness. Its role must be dedicated to guaranteeing
international peace and security on behalf of all States
Members of the United Nations in order to improve
and harmonize the activities of the Security Council.
The Council was forced to consider and adopt a new
way of working to ensure the continuity of its activities
during the difficult period of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Morocco supports the considerable efforts
made to adapt the Council’s working methods to the
circumstances in order to ensure its proper functioning.
We note that the Security Council has continued to
meet without interruption, both in person and by
video-teleconference, in order to negotiate and adopt
resolutions to ensure the timely renewal of mandates
and to continue its dialogue with other United
Nations organs and with the wider membership of the
Organization, including through monthly briefings on
the programme of work, as well as wrap-up meetings.
Those new practices helped increase the transparency
and the quality of the Council’s work and also enabled
it to benefit from the diverse positions and views
of Member States. We should keep in mind that the
process of improving the Council’s working methods is
constant and evolving.
28/35

28/06/2022

Presidential note S/2017/507 is therefore a major
achievement in the quest for transparency and efficiency
and the work of strengthening the Council’s authority.
In that regard, and in order to ensure effective, efficient
and transparent functioning in both ordinary and
extraordinary circumstances, it will be important to
continue to apply all of the note’s provisions, as well as
all subsequent notes on the subject, and to ensure that
they are updated.
Morocco welcomes the many positive developments
in recent years aimed at improving the functioning of
the Council and strengthening its effectiveness and
inclusivity. We call for continuing efforts in the same
spirit to improve the Council’s working methods, for
example by increasing the number of public meetings
and briefings where possible. At the same time,
consultations are essential both to discussing sensitive
issues or reaching compromise on contentious issues
where discretion is vital. In that context, I would like
to pay tribute to the Security Council Affairs Division,
which contributes to the improvement of the Council’s
working methods through its reports, analyses and
accessibility to Member States.
I would also like to stress the importance of this
debate and its close link with the thorny issue of the
veto, which is an integral part of the working methods
of the Security Council. My delegation was among the
sponsors of resolution 76/262, on a standing mandate
for a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in
the Security Council. Morocco also supports the code
of conduct of 14 December 2015 developed within
the framework of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group with regard to the Security
Council’s action on genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. My country also supports the initiative
of France and Mexico on voluntarily and collectively
committing to refraining from the use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity.
As a troop-contributing country, Morocco is well
placed to understand the lasting impact of the Security
Council’s efforts in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, particularly
in Africa. In that context, the consultations among
Security Council members and troop-contributing
countries, as well as the triangular meetings between
them and the Secretariat, are a fundamental tool for
the implementation of the mandates of peacekeeping
missions and an effective way to strengthen
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

transparency, cooperation and interaction between the
Council and Member States.
Morocco also attaches great importance to the
development of preventive diplomacy, which goes
hand in hand with the need for swift and effective
action to maintain international peace and security and
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes, and for
the international community to support the measures
taken by the Security Council. It goes without saying
that improving the Council’s working methods through
shared and inclusive reflection on the part of all Member
States and the political will of its members will help it
to achieve its objectives.
Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that
the debates on improving the working methods of the
Security Council are part of an overall vision of the new
United Nations architecture, as also envisioned by the
Secretary-General with his reform proposals, including
in his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to express our thanks
and appreciation to Albania for its presidency of the
Security Council this month and for holding this open
debate on the Council’s working methods.
I would also like to express my thanks for the
concept note (S/2022/499, annex) prepared for this
important meeting, and our gratitude to Ms. Sievers
and Ms. Landgren for their valuable briefings. We also
welcome the holding of today’s annual open debate on
this important topic in accordance with paragraph 100
of the note by the President (S/2017/507).
Today’s open debate is being held at a time when
the world is starting to recover from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. This unprecedented global health
crisis has had a significant impact on the performance
and work of the United Nations, including the Security
Council. In that context, we welcomed the provisional
measure adopted by the Council to adapt to the
exceptional health circumstances while maintaining
its work pursuant to Article 28 of the United Nations
Charter. We have seen a great deal of creativity and
flexibility, which is a positive example of what we
can achieve whenever the Council members work
constructively and in unison with a view to ensuring
that its work remains ongoing and efficient. In that

S/PV.9079

regard, we welcome the fact that all meetings in 2022
have been held in person, following the improvement of
the health situation in New York.
Developing and improving the working methods
of the Security Council constitutes a critical factor in
its ability to assume its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Over the last two
decades, we have seen many improvements in the
working methods of the Council. We must acknowledge
these improvements, which have come principally
from non-permanent members. There have also been
relevant initiatives launched by States and groups
outside the Council.
In that context, I would like to note certain
innovative initiatives that the State of Kuwait has joined.
Kuwait is a signatory of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct, under
which Member States of the Council are committed
to refraining from objecting to draft resolutions that
address crimes against humanity, genocide and war
crimes. We have also joined the Franco-Mexican
initiative on the voluntary restriction on the use of
the veto in situations of mass atrocities. Furthermore,
together with a group of States, the State of Kuwait
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 76/262 on
the veto, which was adopted by consensus and stipulates
the holding of a General Assembly meeting within 10
working days of the casting of a veto in the Security
Council. We believe that this historic resolution will
promote the role of the General Assembly and enable
it to strengthen transparency and effectiveness in its
relationship with the Security Council.
Pursuant to the provisions of the concept note
circulated by the presidency of the Council (S/2022/499,
annex), I wish to make the following suggestions and
observations. First, there has been an improvement
in the health situation, so the meetings of the Council
are being regularly held in person. Nevertheless, we
believe that the Council can continue to use certain new
practices that were developed during the pandemic to
make its work more flexible and effective, including
allowing briefers to participate in its meetings
remotely, instead of in person, and allowing Member
States to present written statements in the Council’s
open debates.
Secondly, presidential note S/2017/507 must be
fully implemented, as should all eight related notes
agreed upon in December 2019, during the Kuwaiti

22-4039829/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as well
as the five notes agreed upon during the chairmanship
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Those notes
included suggestions and improvements on many issues
and topics, with the aim of increasing the transparency
and efficiency of the Council.
Thirdly, we continue to stress the importance
of penholderships and the need to develop fair
distribution of responsibilities among permanent and
non-permanent Council members. There is still a lot to
be done to ensure the active and fair participation of
all Council members in the decision-making process,
including looking into the fact that the five permanent
members perennially chair certain committees and
subsidiary organs of the Council.
Fourthly, in order to improve the preparedness
of newly elected members, we suggest allowing
newly elected Member States to attend and monitor
meetings of the Council starting 1 August, that is, five
months before their terms as members of the Security
Council begin.
Fifthly, in order to promote transparency, we
suggest including informal Arria Formula meetings
in the Journal of the United Nations. In addition, we
are pleased to see joint statements delivered on behalf
of groups of States, including today’s joint statement
delivered on behalf of the 10 elected members of
the Council.
Sixthly, we are pleased to see that the Council is
making efforts to be timely in presenting its annual
report to the General Assembly. We encourage Council
members to make the report more analytical and
more detailed.
As a member of the Security Council in 2018
and 2019, the State of Kuwait notes the concrete and
effective changes that have been made in the working
methods of the Council. That could happen only
through cooperation and a genuine desire among all
its members. In that context, we hope to see more
flexibility and innovation with a view to continuing
to pursue greater Council effectiveness, efficiency
and transparency.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
support to a Security Council that is more transparent,
efficient and accountable, including in the context of
the work undertaken by the Informal Working Group.
30/35

28/06/2022

We emphasize that we are fully ready to support those
efforts in any way possible.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Portugal.
Mr. Da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal):
Mr. President, this new opportunity to address the
Security Council’s working methods is evidence of
your diligence in your roles both as President of the
Council and Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, and we would like to add the following remarks.
We welcome the timely use of digital technologies
during the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and reiterate our call to continue the codification of
best practices and lessons learned, so as to prepare for
future contingencies and enhance the effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work.
Through the veto initiative, adopted in General
Assembly resolution 76/262, which Portugal
co-sponsored, the Assembly made use of a mechanism
that seeks to strengthen the United Nations system and
ensure accountability between the Council and the
General Assembly. We would like to encourage Council
members to enclose a special report in its next annual
report, together with a summary of the debate in the
General Assembly. We also encourage other Member
States to consider joining public commitments to
exercising restraint in the use of the veto, including the
ACT code of conduct and the Political Declaration on
Suspension of Veto Powers in Cases of Mass Atrocity.
On transparency, we welcome the regular holding
of interactive sessions by the presidency to discuss
priorities and to wrap up the month. We also encourage
the Council to provide a more complete, substantive
and analytical account of its work in its annual report
to the General Assembly.
We would also like to echo the suggestions made
to strengthen the inclusiveness of the Council. In
that regard, we would highlight the importance of its
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Alongside the PBC’s advisory role, other concrete
steps could be foreseen, such as the inclusion of the
PBC Chair — and the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, where applicable — on the Security
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV.9079

Council’s field visits. In our view, this would allow
for a more holistic approach to the whole of the peace
continuum, and it could be useful even if the country
or countries visited have not yet engaged with the
Commission. Greater Council inclusiveness would also
result from continued engagement with a broad range
of actors, including civil society, regional organizations
and international financial institutions — all to the
Council’s benefit.

non-Council members the opportunity the opportunity
to participate in such discussions. On the other hand,
closed consultations serve an important purpose,
particularly when dealing with more sensitive and
polarized issues. Such meetings should be frank and
interactive and aimed at finding mutually acceptable
solutions. They should not be just another forum in
which members deliver written statements and reiterate
well-known positions.

Finally, we advocate early involvement of
incoming elected members in the work of the Council,
as the representative from Kuwait just mentioned.
Furthermore, particularly key is ensuring equitable
access of all Council members to chairing subsidiary
bodies, as well as a fairer distribution of penholderships.

To stay relevant in the contemporary world, the
Security Council must be nimble and vigilant. The
Council has a responsibility to recognize new and
emerging threats and act in a timely manner to address
the root causes of conflict. The Council must fully
embody the values of dialogue and multilateralism. It
must listen to the concerns of the wider membership
and enhance channels of communication.

In conclusion, we trust that, during the coming
months and under Ambassador Hoxha’s able
stewardship, the Informal Working Group will make
further progress in its discussions and adopt the draft
presidential notes on specific working methods of
the Security Council. This will certainly contribute
to further enhancing the inclusiveness as well as the
effectiveness of the Council’s work.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Malta.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank the President for
organizing today’s open debate. We also thank him for
the valuable work he is carrying out in his capacity as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
We express our sincere appreciation for the briefings
by today’s briefers, who enriched the discussion with
their knowledge and experience.
As a member of the Uniting for Consensus group,
Malta has consistently advocated a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council to make it more democratic,
accountable, effective, efficient and transparent. As an
elected member for the term 2023-2024, we stand ready
to cooperate with all Council members to contribute to
that end.
Striking the right balance between effectiveness
and transparency is not easy. Open briefings allow
Security Council members to make their positions
known and give the opportunity to non-Council
members and the public to follow the discussions. Open
debates and Arria Formula meetings allow the Council
to consider issues from a specific angle and provide

The interaction between the Security Council and
the General Assembly should be strengthened wherever
possible. The Security Council cannot work in isolation.
In that regard, we very much appreciate the monthly
wrap-in and wrap-up sessions at the beginning and end
of every presidency.
Elected members are uniquely placed to bring a
fresh perspective to the Council. They can propose
solutions and help find common ground. In that respect,
we commend the Ireland, Kenya and Mexico trio for
using the consecutive presidencies to shine a spotlight
on the women and peace and security agenda last year.
Civil society and non-governmental organizations
also have a crucial role to play in providing a clear
and factual picture of the situation on the ground. The
Council must spare no effort to ensure that they are given
adequate space to make their voices heard. Women and
youth must also be at the heart of all discussions.
The use or threat of use of the veto does not
contribute to the smooth functioning of the Council.
Malta is honoured to have formed part of the crossregional core group, led by Liechtenstein, on the veto
initiative. That initiative strengthens the point that the
veto is not just a privilege but the responsibility of those
who hold it.
Malta is also a signatory to the French-Mexican
initiative, which calls for the suspension of the veto
during cases of mass atrocity, and we also support the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
code of conduct, which calls upon all Security Council

22-4039831/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

members not to vote against any draft resolution
intended to prevent or halt mass atrocities.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): The Security Council is the
embodiment of multilateralism in the maintenance of
peace and security. It is therefore important to ensure
that its working methods and its decision-making
process uphold the true spirit of multilateralism. As
an important pillar of the United Nations, the Security
Council must ensure that its working methods are able
to adapt to and reflect today’s geopolitical realities.
Failing to do so will contribute to making not only
the Council irrelevant but also the United Nations as
a whole.
While we are happy to have this regular debate,
which offers an important opportunity for Members
to provide inputs on the Council’s working methods,
we hope that our discussions are truly taken into
consideration in the Council’s efforts to serve all
Member States. On that note, I would like to highlight
three points.
First, we must solidify the Council’s preparedness
to work during times of disruption. The adjustments
made to the Council’s working methods during the
pandemic should be made clearer in the context of its
terms of reference and regularly reviewed and updated.
That will help to ensure the continued readiness and
effectiveness of the Council in addressing peace and
security challenges during future disruptions.
Secondly, there is a need to enhance the process
of the renewal of peacekeeping mandates, which is one
of the most important responsibilities of the Council.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the Council
understands all the facts and conditions on the ground
as well as the challenges.
In that regard, the involvement of troop- and
police-contributing countries should be not merely a
formality but an important avenue for the Council to
hear their views. We have observed, however, that such
a process often takes place very close to the adoption
of a mandate. That hinders the proper consideration of
the troop- and police-contributing countries’ concerns
and inputs in the process of the drafting of the mandate.
Lastly, as conflict becomes more regionalized,
the Council needs to ensure the inclusion of regional
and subregional organizations in discussions related
32/35

28/06/2022

to their region. Regional organizations can often help
mend fractured relationships between United Nations
missions and their respective host countries by bridging
the two and constructively responding to the situation
on the ground. We need to develop that practice to
ensure the effective participation of such organizations
in Security Council meetings.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to the
permanent delegation of the Republic of Albania, as
President of the Security Council during this month and
Chair of the Security Council Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
for having convened this important annual meeting,
which is aimed at considering how to develop the
working methods of the Council in future so that it can
continue to shoulder its duties fully and under various
circumstances and in cases of emergency. I would also
like to thank the briefers for their valuable comments.
It is of vital importance that the Security Council’s
role as the main organ responsible for maintaining
international peace and security be pivotal and
concrete under all circumstances and at all times. That
requires us to attach great importance to developing its
working methods.
In that context, we value the efforts of the
succeeding Chairs of the Informal Working Group,
which have contributed to publishing many vitally
important notes on the working methods of the
Council with a view to promoting its effectiveness
and transparency and enhancing the manner in which
it addresses important matters, foremost among which
is the amended presidential note S/2017/507. We also
commend the efforts of the sisterly State of Kuwait
during its chairmanship of the Informal Working Group.
The coronavirus disease pandemic proved that
the international community at large and the Security
Council in particular need clear working methods that
take into consideration all the special circumstances
that might not allow for in-person meetings. In that
context, we would like to stress that the innovative
working methods adopted by the Council during the
pandemic provided various opportunities on which we
can build in future. They also contributed to ensuring
the continued role played by the Council during
remote work.
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We would also like to stress the importance of
the regular briefings held by the Chairs of subsidiary
bodies of the Council, including the Chairs of Sanctions
Committees, on their activities, as Member States
must implement many recommendations issued by
such bodies.
In conclusion, we look forward to continuing to
hold meetings on the working methods of the Council
regularly, since they are of importance to all Member
States, which aspire to seeing the Council work to the
best of its ability and want its working methods adapted
to continual changes. Such meetings would also make
it possible to review the progress and developments
made in that regard and to hear various views and
perspectives on such methods.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank Albania for the initiative of holding an
open debate on a topic that is essential to ensure greater
effectiveness, efficiency and transparency in the work
of the Security Council so that it can fulfil its mandate.
We are in the midst of a revitalization process of
the United Nations system — a process of improvement
and of optimizing our multilateral management,
whereby decisions must have a positive impact and
outcome. There are many challenges facing us as
Members of this Organization and many expectations
from our peoples, particularly given the seriousness of
the current international situation, which is testing the
effectiveness of the United Nations peace and security
architecture. The issue of the Council’s working
methods and procedures also becomes more critical if
we take into account the ongoing polarization facing
the United Nations, especially the Security Council.
In recent weeks, we adopted a resolution, which,
while it is true that it is not part of the Security Council’s
normal procedures, , is destined to change many of the
Council’s practices in a constructive way because of
its enormous importance. I am referring to General
Assembly resolution 76/262 of last April, adopted
by the Assembly, whose first application is already
showing positive results, since, for the first time in the
history of the Organization, two Member States have
substantiated why they resorted to the use of the veto.

S/PV.9079

That
is
the
path
that
we
must
follow — more transparency, more accountability and
a more democratic practice.
The procedures and practices of the Security Council
must be reformed and improved on an ongoing basis,
always applying the principles of legality, effectiveness,
timeliness, accountability and democratic openness to
the participation of all Member States.
Peru associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland in its capacity
as coordinator of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group. In line with the points raised
in the concept note (see S/2022/499, annex) prepared
by the Council presidency, Peru wishes to emphasize
the following.
Peru believes that the process of innovation and
application of digital technologies in the context of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has yielded
results and that those procedures need to be refined.
In that context, the most important aspect has been
the broadcasting of Council meetings on the United
Nations audio-visual system. That practice is a genuine
democratic opening, not only for civil society but also
for all the peoples of the world.
In the case of the Arria Formula mechanism, it
seems essential that its use should not be limited to
launching consultations, which, in themselves, are
already of great importance. It is necessary to provide
some kind of follow-up. Likewise, dialogue under the
Toledo format should continue to be conducted jointly
and interactively in the wrap-up sessions convened by
the Council presidencies on a monthly basis, with a
view to a more analytical exchange. Both mechanisms
will continue to enhance transparency and information
regarding the Council’s work.
The Security Council’s procedures and working
methods are not ends in themselves, but enabling tools
for the Council to fulfil its responsibilities. However,
they can become factors that hamper decision-making
processes or make them less transparent. Yet, at
the same time, they can be drivers in contributing
to effective, legitimate, lawful, transparent and
participatory decision-making by all Member States,
of course within the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. That is why they are important.
In that regard, Peru will always collaborate in, and
contribute to, our work. The Security Council must

22-4039833/35

S/PV.9079

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

be prepared for new challenges, such as those posed
by COVID-19, so that, in keeping with what it has
achieved, it can continue to discharge its functions and
dialogue can remain open, inclusive and transparent, in
accordance with Article 37.
There are circumstances in the life of institutions
where procedural issues, such as working methods and
procedures, tend to take on a unique significance and
represent substantive decisions. That usually happens
in times of major crises or in circumstances where the
reality poses major challenges. Today the world is in
a multidimensional crisis and the challenges are the
decisions that the international community must take
to restore peace throughout the world, particularly in
Ukraine, and to recover the right of peoples to fulfil
their own destiny, affirm their human rights and enjoy
a decent life without discrimination of any kind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate.
We reiterate our support for a comprehensive and
in-depth reform of the Security Council, including
its working methods, so as to make it a transparent,
democratic and representative organ. It is imperative
that the Security Council adopt its rules of procedures
in order to put an end to the provisional status that its
rules have had since the establishment of this organ.
That is essential for transparency and the necessary
accountability to all States Members of the United
Nations, on behalf of which the Council must act,
in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
It is essential that there be more transparency in the
Council’s work to ensure that it effectively discharges
its key responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. The additional restrictions on
the functioning of the Security Council during the
pandemic reaffirmed the importance of recognizing the
provisional nature of the applicable working methods
only in response to the exceptional circumstances of
the health contingency and not as a precedent for the
Council’s future work. In all circumstances, we should
ensure that the States directly involved or particularly
affected by an issue under the Council’s consideration
can participate in the deliberations and decision-making
on matters that affect them, as set out in Article 31 of
the United Nations Charter.
34/35

28/06/2022

Transparency in informal consultations should
also be guaranteed and records of the organ’s informal
consultations should be issued. Informal closed meetings
should be the exception and not the rule. The number
of open meetings of the Council has increased to some
extent over the past few years, including open debates
and briefings held by presidencies on the programme
of work at the beginning and end of each month.
However, we regret that there is a persistent trend in
the Security Council to work in closed formats, present
only basic descriptive information about its work to
the rest of the membership every year, take decisions
without addressing the concerns of States not members
of the organ and compel action on draft resolutions
when there are still considerable differences as to their
content and scope. We should also take into account the
concerns expressed by several delegations, including
ours, regarding the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 76/262, where for the first time we saw the
activation of the new mechanism on explanation of the
veto that was set up under that resolution. There should
be no restrictive or selective application of the Charter,
which hampers the achievement of an in-depth reform
of the Security Council and its working methods.
The lack of special reports on measures to maintain
international peace and security, as provided for in
Articles 15 and 24, is another gap to overcome. We
support the proposal by a number of Member States to
hold a debate in the General Assembly on the annual
reports of the Security Council at a date nearer to the
year-end. That would allow for a more contextualized
analysis of the organ’s work during the review period.
It would require an adjustment to the reporting cycle
for such reports, which should be comprehensive
and analytical.
There is a need to eliminate exclusive practices
and ensure a genuine participation in, and the
democratization of, the work of the Security Council,
including in its decision-making processes.
The expansion of the Security Council should be
in both permanent and non-permanent membership
categories in order to ensure that there is an adequate
representation of developing countries. The veto power
should be eliminated, but, until that is the case, the new
posts established in the permanent membership category
as a result of the comprehensive reform of the Council
must have the same privileges and rights as the current
ones, including the veto power. We reiterate that the
issue of the veto should not be treated separately from
the other issues being considered within the mandate of
22-40398

28/06/2022

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform, established pursuant to General Assembly
decision 62/557. Otherwise, we will not be able to
achieve a comprehensive and in-depth reform of the
Security Council, which we need urgently.
We once again call for the Security Council
to abide by its mandate and respect the functions
of other United Nations organs. The Council must
stop expanding the scope of its interpretation of
international peace and security and infringing on the
functions and responsibilities of the General Assembly.
It must also cease the selective manipulation of its
methods and practices to suit political and imperialist
agendas. Such strategies undermine the Council’s role
in maintaining international peace and security, further
exacerbate conflicts and divisions and undermine
the multilateralism, credibility and legitimacy of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Albanian presidency for organizing
this important and timely debate, and we thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group.
We commend the work of Albania as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and we welcome the progress
made in recent years in advancing the working methods
of the Council. We encourage further efforts towards
ensuring that the Council’s working methods are
conducive to greater transparency, effectiveness and
efficiency in its work, including in the implementation
of presidential note S/2017/507 and all subsequent
notes by the President. In that regard, we welcome the
practice of monthly working-methods commitments by
the Security Council presidencies. We see the use of
shared thematic commitments to the women and peace
and security agenda, initiated by Ireland, Kenya and
Mexico — three elected members of the Council — as
an important and innovative step towards promoting
its implementation. That approach could be considered
a useful way to advance other issues on the Security
Council’s agenda as well. We also welcome the efforts

S/PV.9079

to increase interaction and engagement with the United
Nations membership, with the resumption of in-person
participation in open debates by the wider membership
and engagement in the form of interactive presentations
of priorities and monthly wrap-up sessions by
the presidencies.
Our collective experience in recent years has shown
how important it is to be prepared for unexpected global
events during which the Council might not be able to
function normally. The pandemic facilitated innovative
solutions and adaptations so that the Security Council
was able to continue its work, and we join the call for
codifying those best practices.
The constant development of the working methods
and their implementation are a key part of ensuring that
the Council’s work is more effective and transparent.
However, the quality of working methods and their
implementation alone cannot offset the effects of
geopolitical realities on the Council’s ability to fulfil its
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
In that regard, Slovenia believes that reform of the
Security Council is long overdue. The Council should
be made more representative and reflective of realities
in the international community, as well as more
accountable. Slovenia supported and sponsored the
General Assembly’s recently adopted resolution 76/262,
entitled “Standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a veto is cast in the Security Council”, as
an important step towards more accountability.
We believe that the right of the veto represents
a power that should only be used with the greatest
responsibility, accountability and transparency,
as it affects the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Security Council’s action on behalf of the international
community. In that regard, Slovenia supports the
French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of veto
powers in cases of mass atrocity, as well as the use of
the ACT code of conduct. We call on Member States that
have not yet done so to join those important initiatives.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of
the Security Council, I intend to suspend the meeting
until later this afternoon. The open debate will resume
immediately upon the adjournment later this afternoon
of the 9080th meeting of the Council.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

22-4039835/35
