United Nations

S/PV.6257

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6257th meeting
Wednesday, 13 January 2010, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 4 January 2010 from the Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/9)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-20793 (E)

*1020793*

S/PV.6257

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Expression of sympathy concerning earthquake
in Haiti
The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I wish to express
my profound concern about the devastating earthquake
that took place yesterday in Haiti. Members of the
Council are deeply saddened by the reported loss of
life and injuries, including among United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian personnel. Members of the
Council convey their heartfelt condolences to the
Government and the people of Haiti. I now invite
members to stand and observe a minute of silence.
The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 4 January 2010 from
the Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2010/9)
The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Security Council, I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the
regional and subregional organizations participating in
today’s Security Council meeting. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
being discussed today.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to: His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Ramtame
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African
Union
Commission;
His
Excellency
Mr. Le Luong Minh, Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha,
Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization; Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the

2

European Union delegation to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Claudio Bisogniero, Deputy Secretary
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization;
Mr. Victor Rico Frontaura, Secretary for Political
Affairs of the Organization of American States; His
Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, Secretary
General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
His Excellency Mr. Oleksandr Pavlyuk, head of the
External Cooperation Department of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe; His
Excellency
Mr.
Gary
Quinlan,
Permanent
Representative of Australia, on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum; and His Excellency Mr. Muratbek
Sansyzbayevich Imanaliyev, Secretary-General of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
It is so decided.
I invite the aforementioned representatives to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/9, which contains the text of a letter
dated 4 January 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of China addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
In accordance with the United Nations Charter,
the Members of the United Nations confer on the
Security Council responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Member States expect
the Security Council to meet the challenges before it
and to play a bigger role in strengthening international
peace and security and in responding to global threats
and challenges. At the same time, members strive to
promote regional peace and development through the
strengthening of regional organizations.
In today’s world, regional organizations are
playing an increasingly important role in preventing
and resolving conflicts, deploying peacekeeping
operations, promoting post-conflict reconstruction and
easing humanitarian crises. It is of great significance
and relevance for the Security Council to hold this
thematic debate to explore ways to strengthen the

10-20793

S/PV.6257

cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
I now give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Before I begin, please
allow me to say a few words on the devastating
earthquake that occurred in Haiti. I thank the members
of the Council for their expression of sympathy,
condolences and solidarity at this time of need.
(spoke in French)
I am deeply grieved by the disaster that has just
struck Haiti. This is a tragedy for the people of Haiti
and for the United Nations. We are prepared to work
together with the international community in order to
provide the necessary assistance and aid to the people
of Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Information on the full extent of the damage
remains scant. Initial reconnaissance and aerial
assessments have been undertaken. It is clear, however,
that the earthquake has had a devastating impact on the
capital, Port-au-Prince, and on the western part of the
country. The remaining areas of Haiti appear to be
largely unaffected.
Buildings and infrastructure were heavily
damaged throughout the capital, and basic services
such as water and electricity have collapsed almost
entirely. The number of dead or injured among the
population has yet to be established, although the
figure is likely to be in the hundreds or even thousands.
There is no doubt that a major relief effort will be
required. I am grateful to those countries that are
sending emergency relief and rescue teams. I urge all
members of the international community to come to
Haiti’s aid in this hour of need.
Many of our United Nations colleagues on the
ground are, as yet, unaccounted for. The United
Nations headquarters at the Christopher Hotel
collapsed in the quake. Many people are still trapped
inside, including my Special Representative in Haiti,
Mr. Hédi Annabi.
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) troops have been working through the
night to reach those trapped under the rubble. So far,
several badly injured casualties have been retrieved

10-20793

and transported to the MINUSTAH logistics base,
which remains largely intact. I have been informed that
some of our staff have been confirmed alive and safe,
and that some of them have been transported to
hospital. I will dispatch Assistant Secretary-General
and former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to MINUSTAH, Mr. Edmond Mulet, to Haiti
as soon as possible.
MINUSTAH has around 3,000 troops and police
in and around Port-au-Prince to help maintain order
and assist in relief efforts. MINUSTAH engineers have
also begun clearing some of the main roads in Port-auPrince, which will allow assistance and rescuers to
reach those in need. We will immediately release
$10 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund.
The Secretariat is following the situation closely.
A more detailed briefing will be provided to the
Security Council at the earliest opportunity. Taking this
opportunity, I would like to express my sincere thanks
to all the countries that have expressed their
willingness and have already taken action to dispatch
rescue teams and relief materials.
Turning to the item on the Council’s agenda, I
thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative to hold a debate on a topic that is so
vital to international peace and security.
Hardly a crisis confronts us that does not require
actors to cooperate at multiple levels — local, national,
regional and global — in the search for solutions. That
is why the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations is so important. Those
organizations are part of a new landscape, one in which
the problems we face are so complex and interlinked
that no one can work in isolation and no one can afford
to do without the benefits of cooperation and burdensharing.
Around the table today are representatives of
many of the key partners of the United Nations. Over
the past two days, we had a very productive retreat. We
discussed ongoing operations and we explored due
avenues for cooperation. Throughout, there was a very
strong sense that we are only beginning to realize the
great potential of what we can do together.
As members know, the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security was written into the founding Charter of

3

S/PV.6257

our Organization. Chapter VIII foresaw a world in
which regional organizations and the United Nations
would work together on all continents, consistent with
the principles of the Charter, to prevent, manage and
resolve crises. By its actions over the years, the
Council has made ample use of its authority to engage
in global and regional partnerships, yet we can and
must go further still.
The United Nations continues to bolster its
capacity to prevent conflicts and mediate solutions. We
continue to improve our ability to deploy more
effective
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
humanitarian presences. These investments have
positioned us to be a better partner to our regional
counterparts.
In Africa, we are cooperating closely with the
African Union and the subregional economic
communities. We have worked hard to provide support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia and to assist
the Somali parties on the political and security fronts.
In the Sudan, we are engaged in joint mediation and
peacekeeping roles in Darfur, in improving the safety
and access of humanitarian workers, and in assisting in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. Our collective efforts also extend to the
crises in Guinea, Kenya and Mauritania, and to the
10-year capacity-building programme.
In Europe, we will continue to develop our
wide-ranging relationship with the European Union
and with such partners as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe in the Balkans and
elsewhere.
In the Americas, we have a strong history of
cooperation with regional and subregional bodies on
Haiti and Honduras, and more recently on climate
change and in combating organized crime.
In the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, we are
working together on issues as varied as Afghanistan,
Iraq, Fiji, disaster relief and drug trafficking, and on
building up the capacities of such regional partners as
the League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. Of course, in these agendas on all
these many fronts, our aim is to achieve greater
flexibility and to make the best possible use of each
partner’s comparative advantages.
This week’s retreat with the heads of
international and regional organizations has given us

4

both food for thought and specific ideas for
strengthening our cooperation. We identified areas in
which there is room for improvement, including
coordination and communication among our respective
intergovernmental bodies and secretariats. We talked
about the need for better clarity in mediation
arrangements.
We
agreed
that
peacekeeping
deployments need to strike the right balance between
flexibility and efficiency. We stressed the importance
of ensuring that humanitarian assistance reaches those
in need in a timely manner and in accordance with
existing principles. And we agreed to increase
cooperation on peacebuilding.
In all of these areas, the political will of Member
States will be crucial. Coordination is not an end in
itself. Our success will be measured not in terms of
process or mechanisms, but in real improvements in
the lives of those most in need. We are all accountable
for delivering on that responsibility.
I look forward to continuing to strengthen the ties
with regional, subregional and other organizations as a
crucial element in our work for a safer, better future for
all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind speakers to
limit their statements to no more than seven minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Amr
Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the
outset to express our deep condolences in the wake of
the tragedy in Haiti. We send our condolences to the
families of all victims. We also wish to praise the work
of the United Nations in that country and commend
those who have been killed performing humanitarian
work.
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We are certain that, with your Chinese wisdom
and expertise, you will ensure the success of the

10-20793

S/PV.6257

Council’s work. One demonstration of that is your
having convened this meeting and so judiciously
chosen the topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security.
I should also like to express my deep gratitude to
the Secretary-General, who led a high-level meeting on
11 and 12 January on multilateral cooperation in
addressing the crises that threaten peace and security
around the world.
I turn now to the issue that brings us here today.
First, the United Nations works with regional and
subregional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, but their cooperation is also determined by the
state of international and regional affairs and by huge
problems therein, requiring more effective cooperation
among the Organization’s organs, programmes, funds
and specialized agencies and the regional organizations
that make up the multilateral architecture.
Secondly, Chapter VIII, which governs this
cooperation, could benefit from more in-depth
interpretation based on experience in and lessons
learned from the cooperation that has already been
undertaken between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Such interpretation
should assist us in remedying shortfalls, because
certain provisions of Chapter VIII foresee just such
cooperation and because the role of regional
organizations has grown to unprecedented proportions.
The important point that I wish to stress is that
any decision to enhance the efficacy of cooperation
must allow regional and subregional organizations to
commit themselves, under Chapter VIII, to following
certain specific and agreed rules and procedures. We
must also accord due importance to continuous training
and heightened efficiency. The problem is that,
although we all work within a single structure, which is
the United Nations, we do not plan together. As a
result, we cannot face the future armed with considered
positions of shared responsibility that would ensure the
development of coherent policies in addressing crises. I
would therefore propose that we review and further
develop our interpretation of Chapter VIII.
Thirdly, the concepts governing international
action change as life changes. As a result, the Council
should address new issues that threaten not only the
stability of States, but the international community as a
whole. That includes climate change, in which the

10-20793

Council has an important role to play, although we
cannot fail to recognize the General Assembly’s central
role therein as well. We should always coordinate with
the General Assembly and support its efforts. I propose
that the Security Council add two items to its agendas,
one on the impact of climate change on the well-being
and stability of the international community, and the
other on an assessment of the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration and the impact of the failure to
implement certain programmes and goals. The Council,
in a spirit of solidarity in response to the needs
presented by such challenges, should focus on serious
factors that threaten humankind.
Fourthly, another issue worthy of review and
consideration is how crises are managed. Contenting
ourselves with managing crises instead of courageously
solving them gives rise to a great number of questions
as to how effective crisis management really can be. In
many instances on the ground, crises that are managed
in fact persist.
We should also focus on the role of the Security
Council, given the increasing number of issues related
to international peace. Attempts have been made to
prevent the Council from playing its central role. The
international multilateral system that we seek to
promote needs the Council’s leadership. The Council
can play the role of ensuring respect for the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international law.
If the Security Council wishes to restore its legal,
moral and political authority, it must extensively assess
situations in which violations of international law and
the challenges to the Charter are ignored. Multilateral
action should focus on resolving rather than on merely
managing crises.
It is time to be frank and more transparent with
regard to the parties involved in various crises. That
would be more acceptable and could lighten the load of
the regional and subregional organizations that are
forced to bear the burden of such crises. It would
enable regional and subregional organizations to focus
more on growth and sustainable development and on
building modern civil societies so that the world can
become more democratic, more balanced and more
tolerant.
Fifthly, multilateral action requires us to
recognize that such action affects the United Nations
and all organizations working in that vast domain,
including regional organizations. Thus, it is essential

5

S/PV.6257

that the various organizations involved in the different
crises that arise act in a joint and integrated manner.
Concerned parties should not be asked to participate in
isolation from one other. Regional organizations should
not be called on to work in one area yet be excluded by
narrow interests from working in others. I therefore
call for agreed working methods or a code of conduct
to govern relations between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.
Sixthly, the League of Arab States has effective
cooperation agreements with the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Common Market of the South, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The Arab League plays an important role in addressing
many of the major problems in the Near East and
Africa, such as in Yemen, the Sudan, Somalia, Iraq,
Mauritania and other countries, in addition to its role in
development, socio-economic matters and the
strengthening of democracy. We must not forget that
the basic document developing a balanced vision of
Israeli-Arab peace came from the Arab League.
In that regard, it must be stressed that the League
of Arab States has strengthened its cooperation with
the African Union. Similarly, the solution to the Darfur
crisis, which came from the African Union, is to be
implemented by League of Arab States. The
establishment by the Arab League of institutional
structures, such as the Arab Peace and Security
Council, to address issues concerning the maintenance
of regional peace and security also gave rise to
cooperation in all areas with the African Union so as to
further coordination between those emerging structures
and the African Peace and Security Council in the area
of peacekeeping.
Lastly, I would like to state that a cooperation and
coordination mechanism should be established among
the various multilateral bodies, under the auspices of
the Secretary-General, to address all these issues. In
that regard, I call for a group similar to the Group of
Twenty to be set up that would bring together the
United Nations and regional and other international
organizations so as to effectively relaunch multilateral
coordination.
I would also like to propose that such a
mechanism be presided over by the Secretary-General
and that its members be chosen from various United

6

Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and UNICEF, as well as
specialized agencies such as UNESCO, the World
Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the International Labour Organization.
This is important because the international agenda
comprises a wide variety of issues, including the
conflict of civilizations, the fight against epidemics
and the food, water and migration crises, all of which
require a fairly comprehensive mechanism.
Apart from those members, the mechanism
should include international political and security
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and regional and
subregional organizations, such as the European Union,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of American States. It should also include
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
World Trade Organization, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other bodies. Thus, such a
mechanism would have from 20 to 25 members. Apart
from providing ongoing coordination, an annual
official meeting of the group within the United
Nations, presided over by the Secretary-General, could
solve problems and effectively relaunch the
multilateral system and make it as useful as possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Moussa for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union Commission.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): I would like
first to associate the African Union with the words of
solidarity and sympathy that the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, expressed for the people and
Government of Haiti following the earthquake that has
cruelly struck that country. I would also like to express
our deepest sympathy to the families of all United
Nations colleagues on mission in that country.
I wish to express congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
and to thank you for having organized this debate, the
outcome of which should further promote the potential
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations in matters of peace and security.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

The African Union is all the more happy to
participate in this exercise as its special relationship
with the United Nations continues to increase in range,
effectiveness and ambition. This exercise is thus
important and timely. It should open new possibilities
for complementarities and synergies so as to maximize
the impact of action on the part of the various
international actors across the whole range of
activities, including conflict prevention, management
and resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.
It is particularly fortunate that this exercise is
taking place today as an extension of the two-day
retreat that the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
held with the leaders of regional organizations. The
retreat was particularly promising, and its success
paves the way for measures that will lay out plans for
cooperative work that have been opened by common
reflection.
The African Union has made peace and security
the first of four pillars on which its strategy and
programmes of action are based. The promotion of
peace and security is conceived and conducted on the
basis of developing doctrine, of operationalizing the
architecture and of action by all entities concerned in
order to promote the elimination of conflict throughout
the African continent. Those three areas of action have
all seen far-reaching, mutually reinforcing results that
also pave the way for further progress.
Building in that way on the successful
cooperation and complementarity between the African
Union and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, the African Union has developed
wide-ranging partnerships, such as that which Mr. Amr
Moussa, Secretary-General of the Arab League, has
just described to illustrate the level of coordination
between our two organizations. Such African Union
partnerships
also
extend
to
other
friendly
organizations, such as the European Union, which is
making significant contributions to the funding of a
number of our activities. Such consultations and
cooperation are also developing with the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Commonwealth,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Organization of American States, NATO,
and so forth.
The partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations has already produced considerable

10-20793

achievements in various situations and with various
operational methods. Ongoing consultations and
cooperation adapted to the demands of effectiveness
are being developed on the basis of the criterion of
comparative advantage and taking due account of all
relevant factors.
That strategic partnership has been realized in a
symbolic way in the first and only hybrid peacekeeping
operation — the AU-UN Hybrid Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID). It has also been demonstrated in an
equally significant way through the United Nations
logistical support unit to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). The partnership is also
manifested in the annual consultative meeting between
this Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as in the increasingly effective
coordination between the leadership of the United
Nations Secretariat and that of the African Union
Commission.
Cooperation between our organizations raises
issues of conception, organization, coordination,
harmonizing procedures, streamlining methods,
capacity-building and stable and predictable funding of
the peacebuilding operations conducted by regional
organizations. Some of these issues have been
considered in the Prodi report (see S/2008/813) and
other studies, whose recommendations we should now
begin to implement.
Beyond that, there exists a major challenge in the
need for the regional organizations and the universal
Organization that is the United Nations to meet on shared
values and to develop shared, adequate and effective
responses to events and situations about which they
sometimes take different positions. That is particularly the
case with regard to unconstitutional changes of
Government, religious extremism, terrorism — including
financing terrorism through ransom payments in cases of
hostage-taking — climate change and environmental
security, as well as in situations where the regional
consensus agenda and decisions made by organizations
such as the African Union are not universally
supported. That can lead to shortcomings and
weaknesses in what should be collective action
promoting the complementarities among various
international actors.
Beyond the modesty of its approach and the
prudence of its tone, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations has proved very flexible and adaptable

7

S/PV.6257

in dealing with new realities that nobody in 1945 could
have imagined. That creativity should be encouraged
and stimulated so that the United Nations and the
regional organizations can together make advantageous
and appreciable gains in effectiveness.

development. In such a world, there is a great need to
foster a stronger partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in responding to the
challenges arising from both traditional and
non-traditional security issues.

The African Union, which has proclaimed 2010
the Year of Peace and Security, will continue to work
with regional economic communities throughout the
continent, as with all our partners, to ensure that
today’s discussions honour their promises and have the
outcomes they deserve, in the concerted multilateral
approaches that will improve the international
community’s success in the conduct of its civilizational
work of building a universally shared peace.

At the 2005 World Summit, heads of State and
Government expressed their resolve to expand
consultation and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations through formalized
agreements and, as appropriate, the involvement of
regional organizations in the work of the Security
Council.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lamamra for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Le
Luong Minh, Permanent Representative of Viet Nam,
who will speak on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
Mr. Le Luong Minh: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) — Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam — on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security.
We congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for January 2010. We thank
you, Mr. President, and the Chinese delegation for
taking the initiative of convening the Council’s open
debate today on this very important issue.
As they are suffering from the consequences of
the tragic earthquake, our hearts go out to the people of
Haiti and to all United Nations and other international
staff serving in the country, including those with the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We wish
them a speedy recovery.
In our ever more complex and interconnected
world, marked by an unprecedented level of
interdependence and where peace and cooperation for
development remain the dominant trend, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is crucial and beneficial not
only to safeguarding peace and security but also to

8

In October 2005, the Council adopted its first
resolution on regional organizations, expressing its
determination to take appropriate steps to promote
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Since then, the Council
has engaged in activities aimed at stepping up such
cooperation, culminating in the adoption of resolution
1809 (2008) which, while focusing on specific
measures to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, expresses its
determination to take effective measures to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the Organization.
ASEAN shares belief that there is a need to take
stock of all the discussions and activities in this respect
with a view to carefully considering the development
of an effective mechanism that facilitates the fullest
contribution of regional organizations to the work of
the United Nations, including the appropriate capacitybuilding assistance to regional organizations in the
performance of their roles.
To further strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, ASEAN is
convinced of the following.
First, cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security should take advantage
of the complementary capacities and comparative
advantages of all organizations, making full use of
their experience, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and the statutes of regional organizations.
Indeed, regional organizations can play an important
role in promoting and maintaining peace and security
in their respective regions, through, inter alia, regional
dispute settlement mechanisms. Within ASEAN, for
example, we have the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation

10-20793

S/PV.6257

in Southeast Asia as such a framework. Such regional
dispute
settlement
arrangements
should
be
complemented by political, financial and physical
support from the international community, as
appropriate.
Secondly, regional initiatives have flourished in
every part of the world, launched at different scales
and covering different fields, depending on their
regional particularities and needs. Such initiatives
encourage
dialogue
and
consultation,
reduce
misunderstanding and create channels for cooperative
projects. International organizations, including United
Nations agencies, should work with these initiatives,
strengthen their regional capacities and encourage
mutual learning.
Thirdly, enhancing information exchange,
delineating clear areas of responsibility, respecting
local ownership of any arrangement for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and ensuring their full implementation are also
important
conditions
for
fostering
effective
partnerships.
As an important mechanism for strengthening
peace, friendship and cooperation in South-East Asia,
ASEAN has attached great importance to fostering its
institutional framework. A historic milestone was
reached in the evolution of ASEAN when its charter
entered into force in December 2008. Besides giving
ASEAN a legal personality, the charter will enhance its
institutional accountability and decision-making
mechanism, and transform ASEAN into a more
effective, cohesive and rules-based organization.
ASEAN is striving to become, by 2015, a community
with three main pillars: political-security, economic
and sociocultural. At the ASEAN summit in early
2009, ASEAN leaders adopted a road map for an
ASEAN community 2009-2015, which consists of
blueprints for realizing goals and targets for all three
pillars.
The ASEAN Political-Security Community
(APSC) contributes to promoting peace and security in
the wider Asia-Pacific region. The APSC seeks to
enhance peace and security through an effective
conflict prevention and resolution mechanism and
peacekeeping activities. In this context, it is pertinent
to have systematic cooperation between ASEAN and
its member States and the United Nations system. In
the face of strategic gaps in international support to

10-20793

peacebuilding, enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional actors to draw on each
others’ comparative advantages is key.
ASEAN has worked actively to foster good
relationships with other countries and groupings by
developing dialogue partnerships with the latter. Within
the Asia-Pacific region, ASEAN is at the centre of
various important regional organizations, such as the
ASEAN+3 process, the East Asia Summit and the
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), all of which serve to
promote a region of peace and stability. In particular,
the ASEAN Regional Forum is the primary forum for
enhancing political and security dialogue and
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region. The recently
adopted ARF Vision Statement 2020 envisions the ARF
developing partnership and networks of cooperation
with various security organizations and forums and
with international organizations in order to create
synergies among them.
ASEAN was granted observer status in the
General Assembly on 4 December 2006. The two
organizations have also signed a memorandum of
understanding on cooperation, which provides an
important framework for further enhancing ASEANUnited Nations relations and cooperation and allowing
ASEAN to make greater contributions to the work of
the United Nations and to the promotion of peace,
stability and development in the world.
As proudly proclaimed in its charter, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations is a regional
organization committed to international cooperation for
peace, security, stability, justice and development. With
deep gratitude for all the assistance, partnership and
cooperation rendered to ASEAN over the years, all of
us in ASEAN share the determination to work with
each other, with other countries and with organizations
like the United Nations to solve the many problems
presently faced by the world and advance the cause of
international peace, security and development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Le
Luong Minh for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha,
Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
Mr. Bordyuzha (spoke in Russian): My first
words will be those of sympathy and solidarity
regarding the earthquake in Haiti.

9

S/PV.6257

Today’s meeting, at which we are considering the
very topical issue of cooperation between the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations, is
of major importance. The role of the United Nations in
developing cooperation is aligned with the needs and
interests of regional and subregional structures as they
respond to the challenges and threats before the
international community.
For our part, we support any initiative aimed at
strengthening international stability and improving the
security architecture, particularly in the Eurasian area,
and we are ready to take part in implementing United
Nations resolutions aimed at addressing these
problems. We view the development of cooperation
with the United Nations as particularly important,
which is why we are working towards the adoption of a
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) at the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.
The CSTO was set up in 2002 following an
upsurge in terrorism, and we are doing our utmost to
ensure lasting security in our area of responsibility. In
recent times, the leaders of our countries decided to set
up an effective anti-crisis capacity for the CSTO.
Higher echelons of our armed forces, law enforcement
agencies and ministries of emergency affairs have
established a collective operational response force to
end local and border wars and counteract organized
crime, including drug trafficking, and mitigate the
consequences of natural disasters.
We are currently implementing a collective CSTO
peacekeeping force, the intergovernmental agreements
on which have been ratified by an overwhelming
majority of member States and have entered into force.
In accordance with those documents, it has been
established that the CSTO can implement peacekeeping
operations both autonomously and as part of
peacekeeping operations under a Security Council
mandate.
For many years the CSTO has participated in the
high-level meetings organized annually by the United
Nations Secretary-General with heads of international
and regional organizations, during which issues of
coordinating efforts on urgent contemporary problems
are reviewed. We are part of the standing committee set
up to promote those links. Further work by that body
would be welcome by all organizations interested in

10

supporting the United Nations and improving the
coordination of activities.
Counter-terrorism activities, the fight against the
illegal production of and trafficking in drugs,
suppressing the illegal arms trade and organized crossborder crime and preventing and mitigating emergency
situations — that is far from being a full list of the
efforts to ensure regional and international security. We
believe coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations and cooperation among the
organizations themselves must be strengthened.
Among the success in the CSTO experience we
can mention our cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, which includes exchange
of information and participation in the CSTO
interdiction operation “Channel”, aimed at fighting the
drugs trade. In 2009 that operation brought together
antinarcotics bodies of CSTO member States and
representatives of law enforcement agencies of another
14 States, including Afghanistan, Bulgaria, China,
Germany, Venezuela, Poland, the United States, Turkey
and many other countries, in addition to a number of
international organizations, including the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and
divisions of the financial intelligence services of
member States of the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money Laundering and Financing Terrorism.
Coordinated actions by States allowed us to seize more
than one hundred tons of drugs in the course of two
stages of the operation. In all, through operation
Channel antinarcotics departments have seized 220
tons of drugs since 2003.
The Channel operation and assistance of CSTO
member States for transport of goods for the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
are examples of effective cooperation of CSTO
member States in the area of counteracting the threats
to security arising in the territory of Afghanistan. In
our view, the task of coordinating our approach and
developing and implementing agreed lines on
Afghanistan by all international players, who are not
indifferent to the future of that country, is a very urgent
matter.
Recognizing that need, in March 2009 at the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) conference
on Afghanistan, we suggested a special working
meeting with the participation of all interested parties:
Afghanistan, the main transit and consumer countries

10-20793

S/PV.6257

and specialized international agencies, including the
close partners of CSTO — the Commonwealth of
Independent States, SCO and OSCE. In that meeting
we could coordinate our efforts and develop a concrete
programme of joint efforts to create and strengthen an
antinarcotic and financial security zone around
Afghanistan.
The main activity of CSTO in the fight against
terrorism is the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The CSTO 2008-2012 plan for
collective measures by its member States to implement
that Strategy provides a range of organizational,
normative and practical measures aimed at increasing
the level of coordination of its member States’
activities in countering terrorism and political and
religious extremism. Clearly, it would be advisable to
hold a review conference to assess the status of
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy both by individual States and by
intergovernmental bodies.
Our participation in international efforts to reduce
tension is also shown by CSTO’s operation “Illegal
Alien”, which focused on coordinating methods to
identify criminal gangs involved in illegal migration
and human trafficking. Contacts on those issues with
the International Migration Organization, OSCE, the
European Union and the International Committee of
the Red Cross have made it possible to increase the
effectiveness of those measures.
In concluding I wish to point out that every day
we see that individual efforts cannot cope with the
tasks in the area of ensuring security. In that regard, we
advocate gradual development of equitable and
constructive cooperation among regional organizations
and intensification of their contacts with the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Bordyuzha for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting
Head of the European Union delegation to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano: This is a day of deep grief. On
behalf of the European Union (EU) I wish to convey
heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of
Haiti, to the Governments of the countries that have
suffered casualties and to all the families affected. The
European Union and its member States are already

10-20793

actively involved in rescue and relief efforts. We are
hopeful that our dear friend Hédi Annabi and members
of his staff will be rescued. I reiterate the full support
of the European Union for the Secretary-General in this
difficult moment.
Let me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for
inviting the European Union to this important debate. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
the retreat just completed, which allowed for very good
exchanges.
The
challenges
facing
the
international
community
—
poverty,
conflict,
terrorism,
non-proliferation, climate change — are closely
interlinked and of a magnitude that requires collective
action. This is why the United Nations is at the centre
of the European Union’s international engagement. It
was already recognized in the European Security
Strategy and is now enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty.
The close cooperation of the European Union and its
member States with and within the United Nations is a
powerful reality.
The European Union is working intensely with
the Secretary-General and with the Security Council to
support the maintenance of international peace and
security, in line with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter and relevant Security Council
decisions, including resolution 1631 (2005). Currently,
the European Union is conducting 11 crisis
management operations and is working together with
the United Nations in eight major crisis theatres in
Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Afghanistan. It
reports to the Security Council regularly on three of
those operations. It has succeeded United Nations
peacekeeping operations in a number of crisis areas
and is contributing to the final stabilization of the
Balkans after the terrible wars of the 1990s. Ultimately,
that will be achieved by the integration of that region
into the European Union, an objective to which the EU
remains firmly committed.
These European contributions have helped the
United Nations to concentrate its efforts in other areas,
particularly in Africa, but here as well the European
Union maintains a high level of engagement. In the
past, the European Union has deployed two military
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
support of the United Nations Organization Mission
there and is currently working with the United Nations
and the Congolese Government in the reform of its

11

S/PV.6257

security sector. The European Union has assisted the
African Union (AU) in Darfur and deployed an
operation in Chad at the request of the United Nations,
an operation now replaced by the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
The European Union is working very closely with
the United Nations and the African Union to contribute
to a peaceful solution to the Somali crisis. The
European Union is assisting in the fight against piracy
off the coast of Somalia with its naval Operation
Atalanta, cooperating with many naval forces of other
United Nations Member States. Atalanta is providing
escorts to United Nations chartered vessels that bring
to Mogadishu technical support and humanitarian aid.
Furthermore, the EU is assisting the Transitional
Federal Government in the development of its security
forces and is supporting the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
Besides its engagement on the ground, the
European Union is also ready to contribute to the
ongoing development of a forward-looking agenda for
United Nations peacekeeping that reflects the
perspectives of all stakeholders and, in view of that,
welcomes the New Horizon initiative launched by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support.
The
European
Union
has
15
special
representatives and envoys who work together with
their United Nations, AU and other international
counterparts in negotiation processes and conflict
prevention endeavours. The European Union is also
actively supporting State-building efforts, including in
the field of security sector reform, and broader efforts
to promote democracy, human rights, good governance
and the rule of law. Through European CommissionHumanitarian Aid — ECHO — it is a main provider of
humanitarian assistance. A network of 135 EU
delegations in third countries and at multilateral
organizations constitutes the institutional backbone of
all these efforts.
The European Union is working with partners
within the United Nations to protect civilians and
guarantee respect for human rights, to fight terrorism
more effectively and to ensure that the development of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy takes place in the best
safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.
The EU remains aware of the multidimensional
nature of security when dealing with other important

12

challenges. On climate change, the European Union
has set for itself ambitious targets, including in terms
of international assistance. The initial political
agreement reached in Copenhagen must now be
translated into firm obligations and followed by
effective implementation. We cannot afford to fail.
On development, the combined assistance of the
European Union and its member States amounts to
approximately 60 per cent of international aid. We will
examine later this year at the highest level progress
towards the Millennium Development Goals. We are
not on track. The European Union will engage
energetically with all United Nations Member States
and main actors, under the guidance of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, in order to ensure that this
opportunity to redouble our collective efforts is not
lost.
In this context, I wish to reaffirm the European
Union’s strong support for the regional integration
agenda as a favoured means to achieve economic
growth and peace. The European Union has developed
regional strategies in partnership with all world
regions, in full respect of the principle of ownership.
Regional organizations play a leading role in the
implementation of the substantial funds allocated by
the European Union in this context.
The Africa-EU Strategic Partnership adopted by
heads of State or Government in December 2007
deserves special mention. It covers all fields of
economic and political cooperation. It reveals an
untapped potential for developing further triangular
regional cooperation involving the United Nations. A
genuine trilateral relationship among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union is
already in the making.
The Lisbon Treaty has simplified the
international representation of the European Union and
given it continuity. The creation of an External Action
Service under the leadership of High Representative
Catherine Ashton will help to enhance the strategic
direction, coherence and effectiveness of the European
foreign policy. It will also help the EU improve its
cooperation with international partners, and in
particular the United Nations. We look forward to
working with United Nations Members and the United
Nations Secretariat to ensure that the new European
Union structures will work efficiently within the
United Nations.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Serrano for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Claudio Bisogniero, Deputy Secretary General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Mr. Bisogniero: Let me first of all express my
condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti, and to other affected nations and organizations,
on the tragic losses caused by yesterday’s devastating
earthquake.
It is a pleasure to address this distinguished
gathering on behalf of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to the President of the Security
Council, Ambassador Zhang Yesui of China, for his
invitation.
This meeting is another demonstration of a
fundamental change in the way we think about the role
of international organizations and institutions. In the
contemporary international security environment, we
are increasingly aware that institutions can no longer
work in isolation from one another and that the key to
meeting today’s security challenges lies in building
new ties among them. NATO is actively promoting
such closer ties, because it is our firm belief that
bringing military and civilian means closer together is
absolutely vital to preventing, addressing and resolving
crises and conflicts.
Afghanistan offers us a compelling example. In
that country, NATO is leading the United Nationsmandated International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) operation. But this is not a NATO operation
alone. It is set within a political framework that is
determined by the wider international community. And
in addition to the Alliance’s own 28 member States, all
of which are present in ISAF, we now have 16 troopcontributing nations that are not NATO members, some
of them located halfway around the world; they make
this a true joint commitment by the international
community.
ISAF’s military presence is indispensable. Yet we
are all acutely aware that there is no purely military
solution to the problems in Afghanistan. Ultimately, the
key to success will be increased interaction among
military efforts, civilian interventions and improved
governance. This will require the Alliance’s increased
cooperation with the United Nations, the World Bank,

10-20793

the European Union and other international actors, but
also with non-governmental organizations and even the
private sector. And this can be achieved only if all
actors actively coordinate their efforts. In that regard,
let me underline that we see the main coordinating role
of those international efforts lying clearly with the
United Nations.
NATO has made some encouraging progress in
contributing to such international coordination. Not
long ago, the Secretaries-General of the United Nations
and NATO signed a joint declaration, which sets out a
number of areas for closer cooperation. NATO and the
European Union are also working more closely
together, not just in the Balkans and in Afghanistan,
but also in their respective efforts to fight piracy off
the coast of Somalia. We have worked with the World
Bank on several projects in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Since 2005, NATO has also been cooperating with the
African Union (AU), at its request, both by providing
logistical support to AU-led operations and by
providing some technical assistance to the African
Standby Force concept and planning.
But we all need to do more. For instance, with a
few exceptions, the various international actors
engaged in peace operations still do not train together,
do not really plan together and are not really joined up
in the field. In short, our efforts are much too
fragmented. Ending this fragmentation will require a
profound cultural change from regional organizations
engaged in peace and security. What we need is what
we in NATO have come to label a comprehensive
approach, and what the United Nations calls an
integrated approach. But in the end, we all mean the
same thing: institutions complementing and reinforcing
one another’s efforts in order to prevent or resolve
crisis and conflict. And I can assure Council members
that, in our current work on NATO’s new Strategic
Concept, we are giving the comprehensive approach
the prominent place that it deserves.
If we are serious about implementing the
comprehensive approach, we must consider innovative
steps. NATO has been a strong proponent of mutual
liaison arrangements, especially with the United
Nations, to smooth our day-to-day cooperation. We
could also imagine a pool of liaison officers from
various international institutions here at United Nations
Headquarters — and if needed, on a case by case basis,
also at NATO Headquarters — to enable better crosscoordination.

13

S/PV.6257

We could also explore staff exchanges,
particularly of senior staff who will be working with
representatives from the other institution, either in the
field or at Headquarters. All of that is to say that there
are many practical ways to encourage more structured
and effective cooperation between us.
In the past, a lack of strategic dialogue has often
prevented us from examining common challenges and
formulating common responses, leaving this to the
working level to sort out. That is why today’s
discussion and yesterday’s United Nations retreat are
most welcome initiatives to pursue the strategic
dialogue that so far has been missing.
We all know that it will not be easy to end the
fragmentation between our institutions. We each have
different structures, procedures and working cultures.
But there is simply no alternative to much closer
cooperation. Our meeting here today clearly
demonstrates that the international community is rising
to the challenge. So let me conclude by once again
thanking the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for hosting today’s remarkable event.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Bisogniero for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Victor Rico Frontaura,
Secretary for Political Affairs of the Organization of
American States.
Mr. Frontaura (spoke in Spanish): Permit me at
the outset to express our deep condolences and concern
with respect to yesterday’s catastrophic earthquake in
the sister Republic of Haiti, a State member of the
Organization of American States (OAS). Yesterday,
OAS Secretary General José Miguel Insulza issued a
press release that conveyed his condolences to Haitian
families and of the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. It also expressed the
willingness of the Organization of American States to
immediately begin a cooperation and assistance effort
for that sisterly country. Indeed, the OAS Permanent
Council is meeting today in Washington, D.C., to
discuss the matter and determine the best way to help
in some way to alleviate the difficulties being
experienced by the Haitian members of our family.
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to express our gratitude for your initiative to hold

14

this dialogue between the Council and regional
organizations.
The possibilities for international cooperation to
prevent and manage crises — and, more broadly, for
the maintenance of peace and security — have grown
in recent years as the result of the conclusion of
agreements that allow for mediation and cooperation in
cases of conflicts between States as well as in matters
pertaining to internal situations in States. Those
agreements cover such areas as human rights, torture
and, as is the case in Europe and America, oversight of
the democratic system.
The distinction between inter- and intra-State
conflicts is crucial when we talk about peace and
security, the management of crises and the instruments
that make it possible for international bodies to act,
because the guiding norms and options for action are
different in each case. The principles of
non-intervention, the legal equality of States, the
peaceful resolution of disputes, collective self-defence
in cases of aggression, respect for fundamental human
rights and the promotion and strengthening of
representative democracy are enshrined in today’s
prevailing basic norms.
The main legal instruments at the disposal of the
Organization of American States in that regard are the
OAS Charter and the Inter-American Democratic
Charter. Our organization’s Charter enshrines the main
provisions that allow the organization to take action in
the event of conflicts between States. Although other
instruments also exist, such as the American
Convention on Human Rights and the Inter-American
Convention against Corruption, they deal with matters
already addressed by the OAS Charter. Nevertheless, it
is worth pointing out that the American Convention on
Human Rights set up the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, whose decisions are binding on
signatory States. Those instruments are in constant use.
An assessment of some recent problems allows us to
evaluate the potential and limitations of their
implementation.
When it comes to the norms governing inter-State
conflicts — except when it comes to cases of open
conflict or when a dispute is considered to threaten
peace on the continent — the prevailing norm in the
inter-American system is that bilateral matters can be
taken up by the organization only when they are
referred by the States involved in the conflict.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

Generally, States inform the organization of the
emergence of conflicts among them. However, that
information is insufficient to launch any mechanism.
Of the inter-State conflicts dealt with by the OAS, two
bear mentioning: the border dispute between Belize
and Guatemala and the crisis provoked by the bombing
by Colombian planes of a clandestine camp on
Ecuadorian territory of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia on 1 March 2008.
The first of those matters was submitted by both
countries for the mediation of the OAS Secretary
General, who almost two years ago suggested that the
border dispute be put before the International Court of
Justice. That suggestion, which was accepted by the
Governments of both countries, is currently being
approved in the context of the domestic legal
frameworks of the respective countries.
In the second matter, the crisis on Ecuadorian
territory broke out suddenly, illustrating the fact that
not all crises can be predicted. Despite the high level of
conflict in the border area, neither the Government of
Ecuador nor any other international body or specialist
foresaw that crisis. That international crisis, which
involved the use of armed force by one member State
against another, threatened international peace and
security. Faced with such a crisis situation, the
organization nevertheless had at its disposal the
necessary instruments to address it through the speedy
convening of a meeting at the ministerial level at which
an agreement was reached that made it possible for us
to at least ensure that no new action would be taken
and that the conflict would not escalate. At the same
time, our Secretary General was charged with carrying
out good offices, which ultimately led to the
re-establishment of relations between the two countries
at the level of chargés d’affaires and to the formulation
of a road map to fully restore trust between the two
States.
With regard to the issue of democracy, the OAS
has at its disposal the Inter-American Democratic
Charter. Here, I should like to highlight two cases that,
in a way, illustrate our organization’s capacity to act
and how we can expand cooperation between regional
organizations.
In the case of Honduras, to which SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon referred, the weeks preceding
the removal of President Zelaya enabled us take stock
of the great risk to that country’s institutional stability.

10-20793

Nevertheless, in line with its own provisions, the OAS
Charter could not be applied without the consent of the
Government concerned. It was only on Friday,
26 June — two days before the coup d’état — that the
Government made that request. As a result, the OAS
Permanent Council was convened, which decided to
deploy an urgent mission led by our Secretary General.
The mission was to travel on 29 June, but the coup
took place on Sunday, 28 June. It was therefore not
possible to prevent the use of force. It is still an open
question whether it could have been prevented had the
OAS mission reached Tegucigalpa on Saturday,
27 June, and had the request of the Government of
Honduras to postpone the mission’s arrival until
Monday, 29 June, not been sent.
In order to better illustrate these limitations, it is
useful to refer to other cases which, in contrast to that
of Honduras, were successfully prevented. First, in the
case of Nicaragua, it was possible to avert a
parliamentary decision to remove the President. In
accordance with articles 17 and 18 of the OAS Charter,
the Government of Nicaraguan President Bolaños
requested that a special OAS mission look into the
matter. The mission lasted for several months, during
which a crisis could have taken place at any time.
Although, unfortunately, we do not have sufficient
tools to prevent crises, in this case we were ultimately
successful. The Government served out its term and the
elections in Nicaragua took place successfully under
OAS observation.
A similar situation transpired in Bolivia, where
on several occasions the country has gone to the very
edge of confrontation owing to the profound political
and social changes taking place in that country.
Nevertheless, the Government of President of Evo
Morales opted to turn to the Democratic Charter.
Although few people are aware of it, the OAS missions
that have visited Bolivia have done so at the request of
the Government under the Inter-American Democratic
Charter, which provides that a Government can request
a special OAS mission when it believes that democracy
is under serious threat. We were there throughout the
entire process of drafting a new constitution, including
its adoption and enactment and the elections of last
December.
I believe that the experience gained over the
years provides various lessons that will surely be
considered by member States with a view to improving
the capacity of the OAS to act, both with regard to

15

S/PV.6257

conflicts between States and those that take place
within States as a result of problems of a political
nature.
It is not merely desirable, but absolutely
necessary that there be cooperation between
international, regional and subregional organizations in
order to achieve and strengthen international peace and
security. That cooperation should be based both on
comparative advantages and, in particular, on the
respective mandates of each organization. It is also
necessary that we take institutional capacity into
account, as well as knowledge of, and presence on, the
ground.
We have had fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations — in Haiti, as the Secretary-General has
mentioned, but also in other places, such as Honduras.
We are completely open to expanding and deepening
that cooperation. A dialogue such as today’s is of
course helpful to that end. We also believe that
dialogue both between Secretaries-General and at the
secondary and tertiary levels will contribute to making
that cooperation ever more effective while also
avoiding duplication of effort.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Frontaura for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, Secretary General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Mr. İhsanoğlu: Allow me first to express our
sympathy and condolences to the people of Haiti and
the affected United Nations staff. We hope that the
calls made here for international solidarity will help
those people.
At the outset, I would like, on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), to
express our gratitude to the Chinese delegation for
having taken the initiative of organizing this debate. I
think it is very timely and that the decision was a very
wise one.
I would also like to thank the United Nations
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
participation in our debate and to express our
appreciation to him for the pertinent and timely
initiative of organizing a retreat for the heads of
regional organizations, which was held over the past
two days. The retreat proved to be a good occasion for
participants to get acquainted with one another and

16

exchange views and ideas that enriched our knowledge
on many important issues. I can say that the potential
we have has been shown in a very important way. I am
glad to say that the OIC will increase its cooperation in
this framework.
The new OIC Charter, adopted in 2008, stresses
the importance of all member States adhering to the
principles of the maintenance of international peace
and security and of respecting the national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of other member
States. An OIC road map document entitled “Ten-Year
Programme of Action”, adopted in December 2005,
which parallels the Millennium Development Goals, is
a document that we consider to be a blueprint for
reform promoting moderation and modernization in the
Muslim world. It calls for strengthening OIC activities
in
conflict
prevention,
confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in cooperation with international and
regional organizations.
Many of the issues on the Security Council
agenda relate to the Islamic world, and the OIC is
naturally seized of them. This fact demonstrates the
importance of having strong links of cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and the OIC
in order to benefit from both global and local
approaches of addressing these issues. This is all the
more important when we consider the fact that some of
the top contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations are OIC member States. This experience is
an asset from which the OIC could benefit in
appropriate situations in the future.
While the OIC, with its 57 member countries and
five observer States, is so far not into peacekeeping
operations as such, a resolution adopted at its most
recent ministerial meeting, held in May 2009, opens
the door for possible activities in a number of related
areas. That resolution called for an intergovernmental
expert group to study a concept paper prepared by the
OIC secretariat on the future role of the OIC in the
maintenance of peace and security, peacekeeping and
conflict resolution.
The start of the ministerial and expert-level
debate on capacity-building for peace and security
aspects within the OIC has certainly enriched the new
OIC reform agenda, which already includes important
steps, such as the establishment of an independent
human rights commission and an international

10-20793

S/PV.6257

cooperation and humanitarian affairs department.
These steps also indicate our understanding of the
importance of socio-economic development, human
rights and humanitarian assistance in promoting peace
and security.

scheme and to reveal its deceitful purposes. This effort
has helped in alerting young people to the fallacy of
the claims of the extremists and has consequently dealt
a hard blow to their activities and greatly reduced their
heinous crimes.

The OIC has recently played an important role in
Iraq and succeeded in putting an end to the sectarian
strife between the Sunni and Shiite factions of Iraqi
society in 2006. This intervention has proven to be
instrumental in reducing the wave of killings that took
the lives of thousands of Iraqi people. Its success can
be measured by the fact that OIC intervention has
helped eliminate the religious factor from the conflict
in Iraq. Through our office in Baghdad, we intend to
follow up on our initiative.

This method of dealing with such a scourge has
proven that a global problem can be solved by local
remedies combined with coordination with the Security
Council. Past experience has shown that combating
terrorism through military means alone has not yielded
convincing results. Resorting to military measures
means attacking the symptom rather than curing the
disease. In retrospect, we should analyse in all
frankness what has been achieved by the war on terror
in recent years to see whether we made any progress in
curing the disease or if we caused a kind of
transformation and further spread of the virus.

From the point of view of a new vision and sense
of responsibility that require the OIC to assume wider
and more proactive roles in dealing with challenges
and crises affecting the Muslim world, we are in the
midst of devising similar approaches for Somalia and
Afghanistan, which would take into account the
potential, comparative advantages and cultural affinity
of the OIC. As a matter of fact, in the 1980s, the OIC
was called upon to address the crisis of civil war in
Afghanistan in the aftermath of the withdrawal of the
Soviet troops. Then, the OIC managed to mediate
among the warring Afghan factions and succeeded in
restoring peace and security there.
In Somalia, a founding member of the OIC, we
actively participated and contributed to the negotiation
process that led to the signing of the Djibouti
Agreement and formation of the Transitional
Government. I believe that the hosting of the most
recent meeting of the International Contact Group on
Somalia in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, at OIC headquarters
was quite significant in terms of exhibiting our sense
of responsibility in assuming a wider role in ensuring
peace and security in Somalia. Very soon, we will be
opening a humanitarian mission in Mogadishu, which
will in time be transformed into a full-fledged office.
Over the past decade, the OIC has focused its
activities on eradicating the root causes of the
terrorism that had plagued some areas of the Muslim
world. We had to use local methods to destroy the
doctrinal infrastructure of terrorism that was based on a
totally erroneous and falsely manipulated interpretation
of the teaching of Islam. The OIC Academy of
Jurisprudence has managed to expose this malignant

10-20793

In this context, I would like to emphasize that the
best way to tackle the terrorism phenomenon lies with
efforts to eliminate the root causes of terrorism. This
approach means starting with establishing channels of
communication with the influential and patriotic
representatives of a given society plagued by terrorism
with a view to gaining them to our side by offering
them appropriate incentives and to convincing them to
try to move from the extreme and periphery to the
middle ground. At the same time, the most radical and
hard core extremist elements, should be marginalized
and isolated. When this is achieved it will be easier to
gradually move to create new facts conducive to
bringing about lasting and durable peace and security.
This approach might prove particularly pertinent in the
parts of the Muslim world where radicalism is
considered to be on the rise.
Similarly, the OIC believes that tackling conflicts
solely from the angle of security cannot lead to lasting
and comprehensive solutions. Short-term solutions
must give way to mid- and long-term approaches
requiring a proper understanding of the root causes of
the conflicts, which often lie in political grievances,
backwardness, underdevelopment, a lack of good
governance and human rights, and concerns related to
the preservation of national, ethnic, cultural and
religious identities.
As a mark of its commitment to addressing
socio-economic problems that often serve as the root
causes of conflicts, the OIC has established a special
fund of $10 billion for poverty alleviation in member

17

S/PV.6257

States and a special programme for the development of
Africa. The forthcoming OIC donors conference on the
reconstruction and development of the Darfur region,
to be held in March, is a clear case in point.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the OIC will
continue to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in every way possible,
in cooperation with the United Nations and with other
regional and subregional organizations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ihsanoglu for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Oleksandr Pavlyuk, head of the External
Cooperation Department of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Pavlyuk: Let me join others in expressing
sincere condolences to and solidarity with the people
of Haiti at this tragic moment.
On behalf of the Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), I would like to thank the Chinese presidency
and all members of the Security Council for inviting
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to this important thematic debate. This is a
timely debate and a useful follow-up to the highly
stimulating retreat with heads of regional organizations
organized by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon over the
past two days.
With 56 participating States, the OSCE is the
most inclusive security organization in the EuroAtlantic and Eurasian region, recognized since 1993 as
a regional organization under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. Later this year, the OSCE will
mark the thirty-fifth anniversary of its founding
document, the Helsinki Final Act, and, with this, of its
signature concept of cooperative and comprehensive
security, which encompasses the politico-military,
economic, environmental and human dimensions.
As a regional organization, the OSCE has been a
long-standing partner of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
contributes to United Nations efforts in two important
ways. First, the OSCE actively promotes among its
own participating States the ratification of relevant
United Nations conventions and the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, such as those on
combating terrorism and the proliferation of weapons

18

of mass destruction, in particular resolution 1540
(2004); in some areas, the OSCE adopts additional
commitments complementary to those of the United
Nations. Secondly, the OSCE complements the work of
the United Nations in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation, in some
cases taking the lead in facilitating the settlement of
unresolved conflicts in its region, such as the NagornoKarabakh and Transnistrian conflicts.
Over the past two years, three issues in particular
have tested the OSCE-United Nations partnership in
maintaining international peace and security. In
Georgia, the OSCE and the United Nations worked
together for many years before August 2008 in seeking
to promote peaceful conflict resolution and long-term
stability. After August 2008, the two organizations
underwent in parallel the withdrawal of their field
presences. Since October of that year, the OSCE and
the United Nations, together with the European Union,
have co-chaired of the Geneva discussions. Despite
enduring challenges on the ground, we are making
progress, due in large part to our close cooperation.
In Kosovo, the OSCE mission has continued to
implement its mandate, based on Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It has helped to ensure stability
in Kosovo and the continuity of the international
presence there after its restructuring.
Beyond the borders of its participating States, the
OSCE has been contributing, within its mandate
defined by the 2007 Ministerial Council decision in
Madrid, to the United Nations-led international effort
in assisting Afghanistan. Last year, the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
deployed, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Electoral Assistance Division and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, an election support
team, following up on similar efforts in 2004 and 2005.
The OSCE has also focused on enhancing the capacity
of Afghanistan to manage its borders with its Central
Asian neighbours, including through the training of
Afghan personnel, at the OSCE Border Management
Staff College opened in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, in May.
In 2010, the OSCE will continue to work closely
with the United Nations on these and many other
common challenges, such as arms control and
confidenceand
security-building
measures;
transnational threats and challenges, including
combating terrorism; economic and environmental

10-20793

S/PV.6257

challenges, including energy security and the
protection of the Aral Sea; tolerance and
non-discrimination; and human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as democracy and the rule of law.
Tomorrow, Secretary of State and Foreign
Minister of Kazakhstan Kanat Saudabayev will address
the OSCE Permanent Council meeting in Vienna at
which he will formally inaugurate the 2010 OSCE
chairmanship of Kazakhstan. In three weeks from now,
on 5 February, he will address this body to outline the
priorities of the 2010 OSCE Kazakh chairmanship. I
believe that this established annual address by the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office is also of value to the
members of the Security Council, as it provides them
with first-hand information on the situation in the
OSCE area.
The year 2010 is particularly significant for
European security, for the OSCE, and for OSCE
cooperation with the United Nations. For the first time,
the OSCE is chaired by a Central Asian State. Central
Asia traditionally has been a region of close OSCEUnited Nations cooperation — from addressing the
conflict in Tajikistan in the early 1990s to assisting
States of the region in addressing their diverse needs
today.
This year, the OSCE will take forward the
renewed dialogue on the future of European security.
The so-called Corfu Process was given strong political
impetus by OSCE foreign ministers at the Ministerial
Council meeting in Athens in December. The ministers
also noted with interest the proposal by Kazakhstan to
hold an OSCE summit in 2010 and tasked the
Permanent Council to engage in exploratory
consultations to determine the extent of progress on the
OSCE agenda and to inform their decisions.
In line with the ministerial decision on furthering
the Corfu Process, the dialogue will also provide an
opportunity to review existing mechanisms of
cooperation and to examine possibilities for
strengthening further the OSCE’s relations with the
United Nations and other international, regional and
subregional organizations on the basis of the 1999
Platform for Cooperative Security. The OSCE remains
fully committed to strengthening cooperation with the
United Nations and to providing assistance to the
Security Council.
Maintaining international peace and security also
requires close cooperation and coordination among all

10-20793

organizations at the regional level, as well as the
exchange of information and experience between
regions. In this spirit, the OSCE maintains active
dialogue with its Mediterranean and Asian partners for
cooperation — including Japan, currently a member of
the Security Council — and last year was particularly
happy to welcome Australia as the twelfth partner for
cooperation, thereby bringing a new Asia-Pacific
perspective to our deliberations. In addition, the OSCE
has extensively exchanged experiences with regional
organizations in other parts of the world, many of
which are represented in this Chamber. Also in that
context, the OSCE strongly welcomes this thematic
debate.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Pavlyuk for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Permanent Representative of Australia, who
will speak on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Mr. Quinlan: At the outset, on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum member States, I would like to
extend our condolences to the Government and the
people of Haiti and to the families and colleagues of
those United Nations personnel who lost their lives in
this catastrophe. The Pacific region, of course, is only
too well aware of the devastating impacts wrought by
natural disasters and of the importance of a quick
coordinated response from Member States, regional
organizations and the United Nations, and I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the rapid response
of the United Nations. Pacific countries are ready to
help where we can, and my own country, Australia, has
already begun to respond.
I am speaking today on behalf of the member
States of the Pacific Islands Forum. The SecretaryGeneral of the Forum, The Honourable Mr. Tuiloma
Neroni Slade, is also present with me.
As members know, the Pacific is a very large,
dispersed geographical region that encompasses some
of the world’s smallest and most vulnerable nations.
The Pacific Islands Forum is the region’s pre-eminent
intergovernmental organization. It makes a powerful
contribution to the peace and security of its own
region, and, hence, we welcome this opportunity today
to contribute to the Council’s consideration of this
issue. We would particularly like to thank China for its
role in today’s initiative.

19

S/PV.6257

Mr. President, you rightly note in your concept
paper (S/2010/9) that while the United Nations Charter
places primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international security on the Security Council, it also
deliberately recognizes that regional organizations
may, in appropriate circumstances, take action to
maintain and support peace and security among their
member States. In fact, that has inevitably become an
important complementary part of the international
architecture for peace and security. Where Member
States are able to step up to solve their own problems,
they clearly should do so. The United Nations role is at
the apex, and it must be, but Member States and their
organizations clearly have a role in helping themselves
to prevent crises, just as much as in responding to
them. Better systems for early conflict resolution and
better early warning mechanisms on emerging crises
can often be more alert and more robust at a regional
level. A strong organic relationship with the United
Nations at the regional level and with New York is
therefore essential in our regional and global
architecture.
Since its formation in 1971, the Pacific Islands
Forum has worked to develop strong collective
responses to regional issues and to promote good
governance and democratic principles among its
members. In pursuit of those principles, the Forum has
developed a significant framework for addressing
violent conflict, civil unrest and political crises that
may threaten regional peace and security, including the
1997 Aitutaki Declaration and the 2000 Biketawa
Declaration.
In the Biketawa Declaration, Forum leaders
specifically committed their countries to promoting
good governance, individual freedoms and democratic
processes and institutions and recognized their
responsibility to assist their own member States in
times of crisis. They have accepted a clear collective
responsibility in doing this. Consistent with the
principles elaborated in those Declarations, the Forum
has developed an impressive record of taking action to
address threats to regional peace and security,
including in Bougainville, Solomon Islands and Fiji.
The Bougainville peace process was an
illustration of successful cooperation between the
United Nations and the Forum, with the Councilendorsed Peace Monitoring Group working alongside
the United Nations Observer Mission in partnership,
and with the Papua New Guinea Government and other

20

Governments in the region to bring peace and stability
to Bougainville following nearly 10 years of conflict.
The Forum’s Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands has played a critical role in
supporting the stabilization and reconstruction of
Solomon Islands after a very debilitating ethnic
conflict in the late 1990s and throughout the early
2000s. The mission remains in place today.
In Fiji, the Forum has been unwavering in its
commitment to the primacy of democratic principles
and has sought to work constructively with all parties
for the restoration of democratic institutions after the
coup. In that regard, the Forum particularly welcomes
the Security Council’s principled call for an early
return to democracy in Fiji.
Of course, the Forum has also begun to address
non-traditional security challenges, as it must. Climate
change represents an existential threat for a number of
Forum members. This is not threat for the future: it is a
threat to them today. On 3 June last year, the General
Assembly adopted by consensus its historic resolution
63/281, on the link between climate change and
security. That resolution invited all relevant organs of
the United Nations, including this one, to intensify our
efforts in considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications.
The subsequent report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/350) has further underlined the urgent need for
an effective global, regional and national effort to
mitigate and adapt to climate change as the best way to
minimize its impacts, including its serious securityrelated consequences. This remains a compelling
initiative. The Pacific islands and the Pacific Islands
Forum stand ready to work with the Security Council
to address all of these challenges.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Quinlan for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Muratbek
Sansyzbayevich Imanaliyev, Secretary-General of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Mr. Imanaliyev (spoke in Russian): At the outset,
on behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), I would like to express our solidarity and
empathy with the Government and the people of Haiti
with respect to the tragic and unprecedentedly severe
earthquake in that country.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
address this Security Council meeting. At the same
time, I have the pleasant task of thanking SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for the excellent meeting of
leaders of regional international organizations, which
successfully concluded yesterday. I am certain that
such forums should receive the universal support of
countries and multilateral communities. The list of
participants for future meetings could certainly be
expanded. I believe that it is clear to all that such
models for joint work can promote the building of the
intellectual and information capacities needed to
establish and implement joint projects and programmes
that are fruitful and beneficial to all.
Despite its brief historical and chronological
biography, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
clearly experiencing dynamic growth as an effective
international forum established in order to develop fair
and mutually beneficial cooperation among its member
States, which are also united by the desire to ensure
peace, stability and prosperity in the entire Eurasian
space.
The States members of our organization have
defined the following as their urgent core priorities:
ensuring regional security; fighting terrorism,
separatism, extremism, illegal drug and weapons
trafficking and other forms of transnational crime;
assisting in commercial, economic and other forms of
cooperation; and bringing peoples together and
establishing friendship among them.
In that context, today the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization is already playing a considerable role in
maintaining peace, security and stability in the region,
as well as in establishing the necessary favourable
conditions for the sustainable long-term socio-economic,
cultural and humanitarian development of the peoples of
our countries. At the same time it continues to steadily
expand and build on its relations with other
international organizations and agencies, including
those of the United Nations.
The SCO member States will unquestionably
strive to strengthen and develop their organization,
permanently enhancing its authority and significance in
the world, particularly in conditions under which have
emerged such global problems as the world economic
and financial crises, environmental issues, terrorism,
drug crime and others.

10-20793

Our contribution to normalizing the situation in
Afghanistan is being implemented through the ad hoc
SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group. We expressed our
deep concern over the threat of terrorism, illegal drug
trafficking and organized crime stemming from the
instability in Afghanistan at the special conference
organized in the framework of SCO last year in the
Russian capital, Moscow. Within the international
programme to aid Afghanistan, the SCO member States
are making effective bilateral contributions by
providing economic and humanitarian assistance to that
long-suffering nation, including building roads, energy
facilities, hospitals and schools.
The overall total of free aid provided by Shanghai
Cooperation
Organization
member
States
to
Afghanistan amounts to $220 million. It is also well
known that a number of SCO member States have
written off a considerable portion of the external debt
they are owed by Afghanistan.
Since the activities of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization are based on the principles of goodneighbourliness, mutual benefit, equality, respect for
diversity of cultures and a desire to bring about joint
development, as well as relations with other countries
and international organizations, the SCO is developing
in accordance with the principles of mutual trust,
non-aggression towards all, transparency and openness.
That also means that in the future the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization will be open to establishing
diverse contacts and relations, and subsequent mutually
beneficial cooperation with other interested countries
and international organizations that share our values.
In that context, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization gives importance to partnership with the
United Nations, based on the SCO’s recognition of the
vital role played by the United Nations in today’s
world, particularly in addressing the aforementioned
global challenges and problems. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization also believes there is a need
to do everything we can to strengthen this mission of
the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to note in particular
the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixtyfourth session of a resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and SCO (resolution 64/183). I can
assure the Council that the member States of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization will do their
utmost to ensure practical implementation of the

21

S/PV.6257

provisions of that resolution, to strengthen cooperation
with the United Nations in relevant areas, and to
maintain regional peace and stability in accordance
with the aims and principles of the United Nations
Charter.
I believe the adoption of that resolution
constitutes recognition of the growing role of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in maintaining
peace, strengthening security and stability in the region
and combating terrorism and extremism, as well as in
advancing regional cooperation in such areas as trade,
the economy, energy and transportation.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
invitation to take part in today’s discussion.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Imanaliyev for his statement.
I shall now call on members of the Council.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
conveying our heartfelt condolences and sympathy to
the Government and people of Haiti, as well as the
United Nations, on the tragic loss of life, casualties and
destruction following the devastating earthquake in
Haiti. Our prayers and solidarity go to the families of
the victims.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important and timely debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and to welcome
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Migiro, who is
with us in this debate. I also wish to thank the heads
and representatives of the regional and subregional
organizations for their statements.
This debate gives the Security Council and
participating regional and subregional organizations an
opportunity to exchange views and focus on how to
strengthen
their
cooperation
in
maintaining
international peace and security. The primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security is vested in the Security Council, but the
complexity of the threats to peace and security in
various regions of the world is increasing, and the
capacity of the United Nations is becoming
overstretched. It is therefore necessary to strengthen
the partnership in which the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations all have critical
roles to play in maintaining international peace and
security.

22

We are convinced that building an effective and
strategic relationship has immense benefits. Regional
and subregional organizations have a significant
contribution to make. They have advantages of local
knowledge, proximity and the capability to mobilize
and respond quickly. However, some need financial
resources and technical capacity to carry out that
mission.
The United Nations and other international
partners must provide effective, predictable and timely
support to regional organizations when they undertake
activities and operations mandated by the United
Nations, aimed at maintaining international peace and
security. The African Union, for instance, has shown its
resolve, commitment and capability in conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution on the continent.
It is working on the comprehensive peace and security
architecture, and has underscored the need for its
member States to adhere to constitutionalism,
democratic governance and the rule of law.
Conflict prevention, mediation and resolution, as
well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding, are essential
and indispensable tools in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The effectiveness of
these tools is enhanced through closer cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Uganda therefore considers this debate
as part of an ongoing process. We recall the
constructive debates on strengthening African UnionUnited Nations cooperation held in March and October
last year. It is essential that the Security Council
continue to engage and exchange views with regional
and subregional organizations on practical ways to
strengthen these useful partnerships. We also call for
enhancement of regular interaction, coordination and
consultation on matters of common interest between
the United Nations Secretariat and the respective
regional and subregional organizations’ secretariats and
commissions.
This
approach
will
enhance
complementarity and minimize the duplication of
efforts.
Finally, we thank the delegation of China for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda supports.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join the Secretary-General and others in
expressing the United Kingdom’s deep concern for the
people of Haiti, as well as for the United Nations staff

10-20793

S/PV.6257

who remain unaccounted for, including peacekeeping
troops. The world’s thoughts are with Haiti in the wake
of this devastating earthquake. My Prime Minister has
sent a message of sympathy and support to President
Préval. The United Kingdom is responding with
emergency rescue aid and equipment, and a team is en
route to assess the short- and longer-term humanitarian
needs. We stand ready to provide whatever further
support is needed to help the people of Haiti recover
from this tragic event.
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and all
of the representatives of regional organizations for
their briefings this morning. It has been a valuable
opportunity to hear about the deliberations at the
Secretary-General’s retreat earlier this week.
As we have heard this morning, the United
Nations and regional organizations share many
common goals. Close cooperation between them can
maximize impact, including in some of the most
challenging political and security environments in the
world today. The Security Council should retain its
pre-eminence in matters pertaining to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council’s
cooperation with regional organizations is already
good, but in our view there is much more that we can
do together in areas such as preventive diplomacy,
mediation and conflict resolution. I would like to
highlight five issues today.
The first is about the European Union (EU),
which is already making a major contribution to peace
and security around the world. The European Union
currently deploys over 3,000 military and over 4,000
civilian personnel in crisis management operations
ranging from the Balkans, to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to the Gulf of Aden. It is also, as
Ambassador Serrano pointed out earlier, working with
the United Nations in eight major crisis theatres. In
2009, the European Union provided over €400 million
in funding for stabilization activities and crisis
management missions. The changes introduced by the
Lisbon Treaty to the EU’s external representation will
further enhance its international contribution.
Secondly, NATO commands the United Nationsmandated
70,000-strong
International
Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), which is helping the Afghan
Government bring security to the region. We must
build on the NATO-United Nations memorandum of

10-20793

understanding of 2008 and further enhance cooperation
between ISAF and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. The United Nations should be
ready to accept NATO’s assistance. NATO should be
ready to provide it in areas such as security sector
reform, as well as military assistance where necessary.
NATO brings unrivalled political-military expertise
and military capabilities.
Thirdly, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is of vital
strategic importance. We have strongly supported the
Secretary-General’s efforts and those of the African
Union to enhance that partnership. Much of the
discussion so far has focused on peacekeeping, but in
our view it should broaden out to include the scope for
joint action to prevent conflict and focus more on
peacebuilding. We look forward to further advice from
the Secretary-General and to the ongoing work of the
AU-United Nations Task Force.
Fourthly, Somalia is an important example of the
African Union and the United Nations working
together, particularly in support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which continues to
play a crucial role in allowing space for the
Transitional Federal Government to become more
effective and broaden its political base. The EU is also
contributing significantly in Somalia, leading the AntiPiracy Task Force and providing €35.5 million of
funding for AMISOM.
Lastly, Afghanistan will be a key test for these
international partnerships, particularly in the coming
period. As I said in the Council last week, we hope that
the London Conference on 28 January will reinvigorate
international engagement in support of the Afghan
Government. The United Nations, NATO, the EU, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other regional organizations will all have important
roles to play.
The founding fathers of the United Nations
showed great foresight when, in Chapter VIII of the
Charter, they highlighted the role to be played by
regional organizations. But I suspect that even they
would be a little bewildered today by the scale and
variety of cooperation. Our responsibility in the
Council is to set the strategic direction for that
cooperation, focusing our efforts on the biggest
challenges, which include Afghanistan and Somalia,
but also looking to the future and to a more cohesive

23

S/PV.6257

view of international cooperation, covering the full
conflict cycle.
In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement that the delegation of China has put together.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Once
again, tragedy has struck Haiti. As we all know, that
unfortunate nation has suffered for many years, and it
has required the support of the international
community time and again in order to lay the
foundation for its development, as the Council noted
when it travelled to Haiti in March 2009. We extend
our sincere condolences to the Government and people
of Haiti and to all those Governments whose nationals
have been affected on the ground, personnel from the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, other
United Nations agencies and other organizations
present in the country.
The Government of President Calderón took
immediate decisions in coordination with the
Government of Haiti, and a group of experts and
consultants comprised of doctors specializing in
treating injuries caused by collapsed structures, search
and rescue specialists, experts in damage assessment
and emergency administration is travelling to Port-auPrince to determine, in support of the Government of
Haiti, specifically what kind of help will be needed.
The President and the Government of Mexico have also
been in contact with other Governments in order to
provide the necessary coordination of aid that will need
to be given to Haiti.
We welcome the decision taken by the Chinese
delegation to select such a relevant subject for this
thematic debate of the Security Council. Indeed, this
meeting follows up on discussion promoted by Mexico
in April 2003 during its previous membership as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. We
welcome the representatives of the regional and
subregional organizations who have joined us in this
meeting today. We welcome this opportunity to have an
exchange of views on the way in which we can define a
consistent format for cooperation between the United
Nations and various regional and subregional
organizations working in the area of peace and
security.
The founders of the United Nations had the vision
to identify the advantages of a close relationship
between the new Organization and the so-called
regional and subregional arrangements with regard

24

both to the pacific settlement of disputes and to the
implementation of coercive measures, according to the
cases and procedures provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations itself. It is important that we remember
that.
We should also remember that at that point in
time the countries of Latin America played a
significant role in promoting this vision, which had
emanated from the Chapultepec Conference in Mexico
that took place prior to the San Francisco Conference.
I would note that my delegation considers that,
despite recent significant developments, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
has yet to reach its full potential and should be
substantially strengthened.
Joint action by the United Nations and the
African Union in Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, along
with that carried out together with the European Union
in Chad, Congo and the Sudan and with the
Organization of American States in Haiti, provides
convincing evidence of the contribution of regional
organizations in the Security Council’s efforts to
maintain international peace and security. An important
component of cooperation between the United Nations
and those organizations may be seen in cases where we
need to ensure the maintenance of peace through joint
or hybrid missions such as the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). There, as in
other cases, the human and material resources that
regional organizations can provide, given the necessary
mandate and capacity, have proven to offer an
appropriate and effective option.
We must analyse these experiences and lessons
learned in order to promote greater coherence within
the Security Council, permitting due coordination and
the adoption of decisions jointly with regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. My
delegation considers that initiatives by regional and
subregional organizations in the early stages of a
conflict, making use of early warning and prevention
mechanisms, can be decisive in avoiding the need for
larger-scale action by the broader international
community. In particular, the ability of those
organizations to promote the peaceful settlement of

10-20793

S/PV.6257

disputes through mediation and other means has clearly
proven effective and importance.
The same can be said of the peacebuilding and
national reconstruction phase, when regional and
subregional organizations are called upon to play a
fundamental role in building stability and preventing a
new spiral of violence. Regional organizations’
in-depth knowledge of the underlying causes of local
conflicts and other security challenges gives them a
comparative advantage vis-à-vis actors from outside
the region. In all cases, the promotion of economic and
social development is an indispensable element in
addressing the structural causes of conflict and
ensuring peace and stability in the medium term, taking
account of the indissoluble link between security and
development.
We must take full advantage of each regional
organization’s particular experience in its own sphere
of competence and in the context of its own mandate.
That is why we welcome the emphasis in today’s
debate and in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later in the meeting on the prevention of
conflict and on peacebuilding. We consider that the
Security Council and the Secretary-General should
focus on both those areas.
Let me briefly note a number of areas in which
my delegation feels that the efforts of the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies can
complement the work of regional and subregional
organizations. I shall mention only the areas of
strengthening the rule of law, promoting human rights,
protecting civilians and combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.
On the latter matter, resolution 1631 (2005)
stresses the role of regional organizations in combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
including by facilitating the identification and tracing
of such weapons. We know that the illicit trade in these
arms fuels conflict. That is why a number of regional
and subregional organizations have gone to
considerable lengths to prevent that trade. An major
integrated focus on this, making it possible to repeat
past successes, would be of great value to the United
Nations. The same could be said of other regional
problems such as transboundary organized crime and
drug trafficking.
In conclusion, let me say that the regional and
subregional organizations represented here have

10-20793

diverse mandates and capacities. Hence, we cannot
have a single template for cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and all these
organizations. It is clear, however, that all have a
contribution to make in achieving the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. On the basis of the
principle of complementarity, we can make more
rational and effective use of the comparative
advantages of each organization.
We should therefore work together to develop
common principles that will enable us to make better
use of these relationships, in accordance with the
norms of international law. It is vital to establish
mechanisms for consultation between relevant regional
bodies and the Security Council, including periodic
interactive dialogues. We have already set our common
agenda; we need now to further define how we can
work together closely and to our mutual benefit, as
provided for in 1945.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
convey our sincere condolences on the loss of life, the
injuries and the destruction caused by the earthquake in
Haiti. Let me also express our deep concern for the
troops and staff of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti who are still missing. Our thoughts
and prayers go out to all those who have been affected,
and we stand ready to assist the people of Haiti.
The United States would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important and timely debate. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s initiative to convene, earlier this
week, a meeting of regional organizations to advance
dialogue and cooperation. We thank the representatives
of organizations present here today for their comments
and for their contributions to the maintenance of peace
and security.
We share the goals set forth in the draft
presidential statement prepared by China, namely, to
promote greater cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations.
While the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security remains with the Security
Council, regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. That role is clearly spelled out
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, and its
importance has been emphasized in various Council
resolutions and presidential statements.

25

S/PV.6257

With this in mind, I would like to make four
points. First, regional organizations have unique
perspectives and local understanding of conflicts,
cultural norms and security challenges within their
regions. This knowledge often gives them a
comparative advantage in the prevention or resolution
of conflicts. In many cases, they also have enormous
influence over parties to a dispute.
The United States is a proud member of three of
the organizations represented here today: the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Organization of American States (OAS). We
contribute to NATO operations that provide security
and stability in Afghanistan and Kosovo and that
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia. We also work
closely with the participating States of the OSCE, an
organization that strives to prevent, mediate and
resolve conflict situations in an area that stretches from
Vancouver to Vladivostok.
The OAS is the oldest regional organization,
predating the United Nations, and its leadership in the
western hemisphere is renowned. The leadership of the
OAS has been critical in supporting stability in Haiti
and in peacefully restoring the democratic
constitutional order in Honduras.
Let me say a word about the European Union
(EU), which is a critical partner in managing crises in
Europe and beyond. The United States congratulates
the European Union on the implementation of the
Lisbon Treaty, which will enable it to be an even
stronger partner.
My second point is that it is in the interest of the
United Nations to work with regional and subregional
organizations to prevent conflicts or to resolve them
once they occur. The United States welcomes the
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West
African States in managing the recent crisis in Guinea,
including the work of the United Nations Commission
of Inquiry.
We welcome the growing role of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in its region and
the steps it has taken to confront the challenge that
Burma poses to the organization and to the
international community. As Burma prepares for
elections this year — the first since 1990 — it will be
important for the United Nations and ASEAN to press

26

for internal political dialogue as a step towards
credible elections.
We also applaud the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, in particular the
AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the
Organization’s support for the AU’s peacekeeping
force in Somalia.
Thirdly, we support United Nations to strengthen
the capacity of regional organizations to maintain
peace and security, in particular in the area of
peacekeeping. In that respect, we will continue to
support efforts to enhance the African Union’s capacity
to plan, manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,
as well as efforts under way to enhance strategic ties
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. The United States will also remain a
major bilateral contributor to African peace operations
by training and equipping initiatives.
Finally, we encourage regional and subregional
organizations to help to ensure the effective
implementation of recent Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security, on children and
armed conflict and on the protection of civilians. We
also encourage them to play a greater role in
peacebuilding efforts.
Our discussion today highlights the existing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in addressing crises. The
United States welcomes further discussions and actions
to deepen that cooperation.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): It was with
profound and deep grief that Austria learned of the
terrible earthquake that struck Haiti last night. We are
deeply moved and shocked by the tragic losses, both
among the Haitian people and the United Nations
presence on the island. Let me extend my Government
and country’s deepest condolences to the Government
and people of Haiti and to the families of those who
have lost their lives in the service of the United
Nations and the international community on the island.
My country is actively engaged in emergency efforts
currently being undertaken by the European Union
(EU). We are also looking at possibilities to make the
best possible national contribution in this very difficult
and dramatic situation.
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
organizing today’s debate and for the draft presidential

10-20793

S/PV.6257

statement that is before us, which builds on the work
started with resolution 1631 (2005), nearly five years
ago. Let me equally thank the Secretary-General and
the representatives of the regional organizations for
their statements.
Austria aligns itself with the statement that was
made by the representative of the European Union to
the United Nations.
The Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In the
light of the challenges of our century, it is clear that the
United Nations cannot operate in isolation in
maintaining international peace and security, but that it
needs to be complemented by regional organizations,
with their understanding of conflicts and their root
causes and their capacity to respond. In very many
cases, regional ownership is key to the success of the
peacekeeping efforts of the international community
and the United Nations on the ground. Most often, that
regional ownership can best be provided through the
involvement of the relevant regional and subregional
organizations.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General, the
challenges for effective cooperation lie in ensuring a
clear division of labour and distribution of roles and
tasks between the United Nations and regional
organizations. With its Common Security and Defence
Policy, the European Union can make an important
contribution in the area of peace and security. It has
developed significant capacities for conflict prevention
and conflict resolution. The entry into force of the
Treaty of Lisbon last month and the creation of the
Office of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy will allow the European Union to
speak to its partners with an even stronger and more
unified voice.
The European Union’s commitment to supporting
the United Nations and the Security Council in their
responses to threats to international peace and security
is translated in the Union’s support to all current
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As the
example of the European Union military operation in
the Republic of Chad has shown, the European Union
can also play a useful bridging role in crisis theatres
until the United Nations and/or the respective regional
or subregional organizations are ready to take over.

10-20793

Let me also commend the important work carried
out by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), whose election observation and
field missions operative in participating States
cooperate closely with United Nations agencies and
missions. We are pleased that United Nations
representatives will be invited to address the OSCE
Permanent Council at Vienna in the course of this year.
We are also pleased with the personal interest that the
Secretary-General has continually shown in the work
of the OSCE, as well as with the cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations.
The joint declaration on EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management that was signed in
2003 established a joint consultative mechanism. It has
proven to be a useful instrument for enhancing the
partnership between the two organizations. Desk-todesk consultations on conflict prevention between the
United Nations and the European Union could be
increased and — as models of dialogue — expanded to
other organizations. In that context, we also welcome
the Council’s intention to hold informal interactive
dialogues with regional and subregional organizations.
The challenges of today’s United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including the ever increasing
demands for United Nations deployment, highlight the
need for increased cooperation with and capacitybuilding of regional organizations. Enhanced regional
capabilities for peacekeeping and conflict prevention
are a prerequisite for strengthening regional ownership
and responsibility for crisis management.
Austria fully supports a stronger role for regional
and subregional actors such as the African Union (AU),
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern Africa Development Community in
conflict prevention and resolution. Since 2003, the
European Union has made a significant contribution,
through the African Peace Facility, to the strengthening
of the AU’s ability to engage in peacekeeping
operations on the African continent. We welcome the
proposals contained in the Prodi report (see
S/2008/813) and in the subsequent report of the
Secretary-General on support to African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2009/470).
Stand-by arrangements are of particular relevance
in the area of peacebuilding. By linking or coordinating
United Nations rosters of experts with those of regional
organizations, such as the European Union, we can

27

S/PV.6257

increase the pool of available expertise. Furthermore,
close collaboration with regional and subregional
organizations is crucial to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, training
activities need to be intensified to meet the rising
demand for qualified civilian personnel in peace
operations. For several years, the Austrian Study
Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution has
conducted regular training programmes on civilian
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Many of its
participants are now serving in missions of regional
organizations, including the African Union and the
OSCE.
I would also like to point out the important role
that regional and subregional organizations are playing
and can play in implementing Security Council
resolutions of a thematic nature. Resolution 1894
(2009) on the protection of civilians explicitly stresses
the importance of consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
to improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Consultation and cooperation are also needed to
improve women’s participation in peace processes, to
ensure the protection of children affected by armed
conflict and to combat impunity, corruption, terrorism
and organized crime.
Finally, better exchange and sharing of best
practices and lessons learned on all of the issues
mentioned will be crucial, both between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations as
well as among regional organizations themselves. One
of the lessons learned from the European Union
civilian and military operations is that missions
become more effective through the mainstreaming of
human rights and gender aspects. Regional
organizations will also be in a position to make a
significant contribution to the successful preparations
for the tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) later this year.
Let me add that Austria fully supports the
presidential statement prepared by you, Mr. President,
and your delegation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to join in the
expressions of solidarity and condolences with respect
to the tragedy that has struck Haiti, the people of that
country and United Nations personnel there.

28

We welcome the representatives of a number of
leading regional organizations and have carefully
listened to their assessments of such a compelling
subject. The issues being discussed today are of key
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The global nature of today’s challenges
and threats and the formulation of collective
approaches necessary to address them effectively
require an enhancement of United Nations cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, above all
its Chapter VIII.
The United Nations and regional organizations
ought to harmoniously complement each other,
bringing to bear their objective comparative
advantages. For the United Nations, this is above all its
universal membership, the nature of its activities and
its universally recognized legitimacy. The regional
organizations, in turn, have a better awareness of
situations within their own areas of responsibility and
in many instances have targeted preventive and
peacekeeping mechanisms.
Given the growing need for the effective division
of labour between the United Nations and regional
organizations, the leading role of the Security Council,
as enshrined in the United Nations Charter, remains
inviolable in issues related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. This holds true above
all for the mandate authorization and oversight of
regional or coalition peacekeeping operations that
allow for the use of force.
We favour regular meetings between the
Secretary-General and the heads of regional
organizations. The United Nations cooperation agenda
with regional partners is growing in scope.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions have been
complemented by efforts to deal with the spread of
weapons of mass destruction and the illegal trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, to address other
destabilizing transboundary problems, and to counter
drug trafficking and organized crime.
There is great potential in the growing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). The
core areas of CSTO activities today were laid out by its
Secretary General, Mr. Bordyuzha. It is important that,
within the CSTO, intensive work is under way to
develop its own peacekeeping capacity, including for

10-20793

S/PV.6257

involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In addition, the CSTO is making
considerable contributions to international efforts for
the post-conflict rehabilitation of Afghanistan and
addressing the drug threat emanating from that country.
A serious contribution to ensuring stability and
security in the Eurasian region is being made by the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as reflected
specifically in the statement of its Secretary General,
Mr. Imanaliyev. Its members have made clear their
readiness to develop cooperation with the United
Nations in a number of key areas, including in
countering international terrorism and the illicit spread
of drugs and assisting in the post-conflict rebuilding of
Afghanistan.
We must continue to build upon the experience of
positive cooperation between the United Nations and
its Security Council with regional and subregional
partners in Africa, including the African Union. An
excellent example of such cooperation is the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
An important role in finding peaceful ways to
address the myriad problems of their respective regions
is also being played by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Organization of American States.
We would also like to see further development, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, of the cooperation between the United Nations
and such structures as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and
NATO.
We are certain that the growing cohesiveness
between regional partners and the United Nations will
continue. On the one hand, regional and subregional
organizations must more actively offer their help in
terms of providing resources and comparative
advantages. On the other hand, the United Nations
should give further attention to maximizing
coordination and interaction with these structures while
reasonably dividing the labour and maintaining the
prerogatives of this universal Organization and its
Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, and the entire Chinese delegation for
organizing this meeting and for preparing the excellent

10-20793

draft presidential statement that will be adopted today
with our full support.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I, too, would
like to express my deep shock and sorrow over the
serious devastation caused by the earthquake in Haiti. I
recall that, last year, one of the highlights of the
Council’s work was a visit to Haiti, and we were really
impressed by the leadership of Hédi Annabi and his
team as well as the Government and people of Haiti.
We therefore stand by the people and Government of
Haiti and United Nations staff and their families in this
most unprecedented difficulty. Japan is ready to extend
every possible measure of support.
I thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
important debate on this subject with the participation
of so many representatives of regional organizations.
We are grateful to our guests for their interesting and
valuable presentations. The Secretary-General kindly
laid out the framework and principle of cooperation
with regional organizations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is enshrined in Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. It constitutes an integral
part of the United Nations architecture for international
peace and security. Strengthening such cooperation is
therefore important in promoting the objectives of the
Charter. Regional organizations have first-hand
understanding of the local conditions and can make
best use of their expertise for peace and security in the
region.
At the same time, what I would like to emphasize
is that, as the statements of respective regional
organizations made clear this morning, every regional
organization has an inherent historical background,
distinct objectives and diverse membership. In
formulating strategies for cooperation, we need to fully
take into account the specific characteristics, situation
and capacity of each of them. We are also mindful of
the need to uphold international norms and standards.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should therefore be complementary and
not mutually exclusive.
The Charter provides in article 54 that the
Security Council shall be kept informed of the
activities of regional organizations. Today’s thematic
debate gives a timely opportunity to have such a
strategic
dialogue.
High-level
dialogue
and
information-sharing are the first and critical step for

29

S/PV.6257

better cooperation. The United Nations can share its
experience and lessons, which regional organizations
may draw on in addressing the issues.

the Great Lakes region. The United Nations taking the
regional perspective into account in appointing a joint
mediator can be a model case for other regions.

The consultation mechanism with the African
Union is more advanced than others. The regular
interaction and strategic dialogue initiated in 2007
between the African Union and United Nations should
therefore be emulated with other organizations.

The joint or parallel deployment of peacekeeping
and other field missions in the same area of operations
is also important. The hybrid arrangement of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is such an example, of course. This
type of complementary cooperation is most useful in
the area of peacebuilding, including in electoral
support, cross-border drug and small arms trafficking
control, mine action and security sector reform. Of
course, each region may be in a different situation, but
the sharing of experiences among regional
organizations may be useful.

In my view, the United Nations can promote four
types of cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.
First, the United Nations should encourage
regional organizations to prevent and resolve conflict
peacefully. Finding a regional solution to a regional
issue is frequently effective, and the United Nations
can complement and reinforce its efforts in compliance
with international standards.
The African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States are the best examples of this as
they undertake increasingly active peace initiatives in
many parts of Africa.
In Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is promoting the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia and principles for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. Many States of the
region, including Japan, have signed this Treaty, which
is a testimony to the fact that it is an effective measure
for confidence-building not only in the region, but also
beyond ASEAN.
We also acknowledge the important role of
organizations such as the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Organization of American States, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Pacific Islands Forum, among others,
which strive for the prevention and peaceful solution of
conflicts in their respective regions.
Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations may promote peace jointly or in parallel.
This type of complementary cooperation starts with
peace mediation. The most notable examples are,
obviously, the joint nomination by the United Nations
and the AU of the Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr.
Bassole, and the appointment of co-facilitators
President Obasanjo as United Nations Special
Representative and President Mkapa as AU envoy for

30

Cooperation between regional organizations and
the United Nations has been significantly enhanced by
the active support of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in the past few years. It may be worth
considering creating a subregion-specific rather than a
country-specific configuration of the PBC to discuss
the challenges common to the countries of the
subregion.
Thirdly, I refer to what might be called sequential
cooperation. This type of cooperation can be most
useful in the case of a peacekeeping operation in which
a regional organization has taken initiative in advance
and conditions have become mature enough to be taken
over eventually by the United Nations. The case in
point is, of course, Chad and the Central African
Republic, where the United Nations took over the
peacekeeping mission from the European Union. In the
Sudan, UNAMID succeeded the African Union
Mission in Sudan, which was initiated by the AU. The
AU Mission in Somalia, with logistical support from
the United Nations, is at the forefront of stabilizing the
country until the future status is decided by the
Security Council.
It is important to mobilize international support
for the efforts of regional organizations to strengthen
the capacity of peacekeeping personnel and assets to
meet United Nations standards. I would like to
emphasize that the United Nations and regional
organizations should work together to help Member
States through training and capacity-building.
Fourthly, regional organizations or countries may
provide security support that is essential to carrying
out the activities of United Nations missions. In some

10-20793

S/PV.6257

United Nations missions, situations may not be secure
and stable enough for the Organization to remain on
the ground without such assistance. Cooperation from
regional organizations is critical to the successful
implementation by United Nations missions of their
mandates. Such cooperation can obviously be found in
Afghanistan, where the International Security
Assistance Force supports security for the country and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
is charged with the political role. Similar essential
security supports were provided at the early stages of
the United Nations missions in East Timor, Kosovo and
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council should pay tribute to those who made
sacrifices in support of United Nations peace activities
in those places.

has been said, cooperation in matters of peace and
security between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Such cooperation also
aligns with the interests of the United Nations and the
regional organizations alike. On the one hand, the
operations of regional and subregional organizations
need the essential political and legal legitimacy that is
conferred by the Security Council’s mandates. On the
other hand, the United Nations can benefit from the
operational expertise and means of regional
organizations, particularly at a time when the gravity
and number of conflicts worldwide requires the
mobilization of all available resources. That is true at
every stage of crisis management and prevention, early
warning, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

In conclusion, it is very clear that all four types
of cooperation are indispensable if the Security
Council is to discharge its responsibilities under the
Charter effectively. We should therefore continue to
encourage and promote every possible type of
cooperation. Japan will do its best to support regional
organizations in strengthening their capacities in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In particular, we are interested in
supporting peacekeeping training centres in Africa and
Asia; in creating and training peacebuilding experts in
Asia and elsewhere through our centre in Hiroshima;
and in building national police capacity in many
countries, including Afghanistan, Chad and Somalia. I
hope that such assistance will contribute to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in promoting peace and security.

Among the regional organizations, the European
Union stands out by virtue of its highly developed
cooperation with the United Nations. It is well known
that the European Union has a security and defence
mandate to participate in peace and security initiatives
in Europe and beyond. We have operational capacities
that enable us to support the United Nations and to
participate in several concurrent operations in different
theatres. At the political level, members of the
European Union share a common commitment to the
United Nations Charter.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I join my
colleagues in offering my condolences to the people
and authorities of Haiti. We must now mobilize to
provide the Haitian people with all the help they need.
France has already done so from the French West
Indies and the metropolitan territory.
I also express my condolences to the SecretaryGeneral for the loss of the Secretariat personnel among
the victims of the earthquake, and to the troopcontributing countries for the soldiers of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti who remain
unaccounted for. I am aware that there are a number of
Chinese soldiers among them.
I should like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate on a subject of great importance to France. As

10-20793

It is hardly surprising, therefore, that today — as
the representative of the European Union noted — that
organization is one of the principal contributors to
world peace and security within the framework defined
by the United Nations Charter. On all continents, the
European Union demonstrates that the European
enterprise is not only in the interests of its citizens, but
that it is also a new way to express the values of our
continent throughout the world.
In addition to the central role of the European
Union, I should also like to emphasize the role of the
African Union in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa within the framework of United
Nations resolutions, be it in the context of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur or
of missions authorized by the Security Council, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia. At the bilateral
level, the European Union also supports the
strengthening of the capacities of the African Union
and subregional African organizations, particularly the
Economic Community of West African States, in the
field of peace and security. The European Union assists

31

S/PV.6257

African Union peacekeeping missions through its
African Peacekeeping Facility.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is therefore
growing. It fills a very obvious need. Because its
legitimacy is based on the United Nations Charter, such
cooperation under Security Council auspices
presupposes respect for the values of our Organization,
in particular international humanitarian law.
Naturally, we lend our full support to the draft
presidential statements before us on the subject of
today’s debate and on the situation in Haiti.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me begin by expressing
our profound grief at yesterday’s devastating
earthquake in Haiti. On behalf of the people and
Government of Brazil, I would like to convey our
heartfelt sympathies to the Haitian people and
Government and our concern about the United Nations
peacekeepers and staff members who have been
affected. Brazil is present in Haiti through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Our contingent, including an engineering company, is
assisting in the rescue efforts. We have also taken
measures to send humanitarian assistance, and the
Minister of Defence is in route to Haiti as we speak to
lead a needs-assessment mission and to oversee our
relief efforts. I am sure that, with the help and
solidarity of the international community, the Haitian
people, known for its resilience and courage, will
overcome that very difficult and tragic situation.
I wish to congratulate China’s delegation on
organizing this debate and for providing us with a
concept paper (S/2010/9) to guide it. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and I extend a
warm welcome to the representatives of regional and
subregional organizations, in particular Mr. Victor Rico
Frontaura, Secretary for Political Affairs of the
Organization of American States (OAS).
The United Nations Charter foresaw the
importance of cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It laid the foundations
for such cooperation, which is never an abdication by
the Security Council of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Rather, it is an effective means by which the Council
can discharge its responsibility.

32

The corpus of Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements recognizes the importance of
engaging regional and subregional organizations
throughout the cycle of conflict, from prevention to
reconstruction. We are pleased that the draft
presidential statement before us today adopts the
balanced approach that we favour, dedicating as much
attention to conflict prevention and post-conflict
peacebuilding as to peacekeeping.
Preventive diplomacy is an issue dear to my
delegation. It is the surest path to peace and should be
actively pursued by the Security Council and the
Secretariat. We support the efforts made by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon in that regard.
The active involvement of regional and
subregional organizations in preventing conflicts is
often a decisive factor for success. Some of their
unique advantages are a particularly rich network of
contacts with relevant actors, the ability to closely
follow events on the ground and to draw on an in-depth
knowledge of the conflict and political dynamics of the
region, and a lesser risk of being perceived as
interfering in the internal affairs of countries.
In that context, the United Nations can help to
develop or strengthen the preventive diplomacy and
early warning capacities of regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the Council’s willingness
to seriously look at innovative ways to further that type
of cooperation.
In some cases, the prevention of conflicts means
addressing some of the root causes that may lead to
conflict, in particular social and economic
underdevelopment. There too, cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations may be useful. In Latin America and the
Caribbean, for example, which are largely free from
threats to international peace and security, the United
Nations could make a positive contribution to the
continued stability of the region by increasing its
cooperation with the OAS in that area, in particular
with a view to helping countries to attain the
Millennium Development Goals in a timely manner.
The potential advantages of regional and
subregional organizations are also valuable when
prevention fails and conflicts arise. In such cases, our
first and firm choice must be the peaceful settlement of
the dispute. Here again, the Security Council will have
to judge whether peace is best served through its direct

10-20793

S/PV.6257

action or in cooperation with partners in the affected
region or subregion.

Our thoughts and prayers are with all the victims of
that disaster, including the United Nations personnel.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional or subregional organizations has also proven
beneficial in the domain of peacekeeping. That is
evident, for example, in the collaboration between the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the
OAS in Haiti, and especially in the active relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union.

This debate is coming right on the heels of the
commencement of the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa, as declared by the African Union. The
proclamation of 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security
in Africa was made against the backdrop of the sober
acknowledgment of the scourge of conflicts and the
shortcomings and errors in resolving them.

We support the increased cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union envisaged in
the presidential statement of October 2009
(S/PRST/2009/26), especially the acceleration of the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme. We look
forward to its full and timely implementation. More is
needed, however. The support to troops in the field
must be more agile and substantial; operation
coordination and political dialogue should improve;
and resources should be provided in a more timely and
predictable way.

Nigeria is particularly pleased with the depth of
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union, and welcomes the intention to
consider further steps to promote closer cooperation
between the two organizations. We note with
satisfaction that, since the cooperation began,
significant strides have been made in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding
and economic reconstruction in numerous African
countries. That is in consonance with one of the key
objectives of Africa’s Year of Peace and Security,
which is to create a momentum for a more enabling
social and political environment to emerge in Africa by
the end of this year. In that connection, we recall the
historic meeting of the Security Council in Nairobi,
Kenya, in 2006 and its positive contribution to the
signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on the
Sudan.

Because they are each unique and the product of
a specific political culture, regional and subregional
organizations can offer invaluable specialized
assistance to the Security Council in the discharge of
its primary responsibility. That is a solid foundation for
fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation.
Finally, Brazil supports the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council today and thanks
the Chinese delegation for its timely preparation.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
important debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
and for providing a valuable concept paper (S/2010/9)
to facilitate the discussions. Nigeria is pleased to have
the
representatives
of
various
international
organizations, whose activities have greatly inspired
world peace and security, share their perspectives with
us. In particular, I appreciate the presence of the
Secretary-General and his very useful contribution to
this debate. Let me also acknowledge the presence of
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro,
at this forum.
Let me take this opportunity to express Nigeria’s
solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti
over the tragic earthquake that took place yesterday.

10-20793

While emphasizing the need to consolidate those
gains, Nigeria believes that regional bodies like the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) should assume leadership,
with the international community lending the requisite
support for the maintenance of regional peace and
security. Those organizations are better placed in terms
of geographical proximity, political and cultural
familiarity with local conditions, and shared
experiences with regard to regional peace and security
initiatives.
Indeed, the response of ECOWAS to the
situations in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and the Republic
of the Niger is illustrative of that potential. Thus, we
would like to emphasize the need for the United
Nations to intensify such regional initiatives and to
accelerate its efforts to implement the United NationsAfrican Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union. More strident efforts are also
required to operationalize the African Union Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System.

33

S/PV.6257

Nigeria recognizes that there are competing
demands and needs not only in Africa and with regard
to peace and security, but also in other regions and on
myriad issues. Therefore, we believe that it is
important to consider the following: first, prioritize
actions; secondly, adopt innovative approaches; thirdly,
assess impact and sustainability; and fourthly, promote
the complementarity of roles in the promotion of peace
and security.
This
will
require
greater
partnerships,
inclusiveness and purposeful leadership. We believe
that there is scope in the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union to incorporate
these vital elements. Our best intentions would,
however, amount to nothing if we failed to provide
adequate, flexible and predictable funding for
peacekeeping operations in Africa.
It is also necessary to coordinate efforts between
the United Nations and regional organizations. Indeed,
the integration of Africa into the international financial
and trading system as a partner is imperative. We admit
that the continent cannot go it alone in its quest to
achieve sustainable development. Nigeria strongly
supports closer collaboration between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
and we would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your draft presidential statement. Nigeria endorses
it and we hope that it will be adopted at the end of this
debate.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our heartfelt condolences to the loved ones of
those who lost their lives in the devastating earthquake
that struck Haiti yesterday. At this moment of tragedy,
our hearts and prayers are with the people of Haiti and
the men and women serving under the United Nations
flag there. Turkey is among the countries that swiftly
embarked upon providing emergency relief assistance
to Haiti, and we will continue to do our utmost to
alleviate the suffering of the Haitian people.
I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative to organize this important debate.
Indeed, as is called for in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is of crucial significance in maintaining
international peace and security. I therefore very much
appreciate the opportunity to discuss this issue in the

34

Council, in dialogue with some of the most prominent
regional organizations.
In this context, I would like to extend a warm
welcome to the representatives of the organizations
who are with us today and to thank them for their very
valuable briefings and contributions. Their high-level
presence is testimony to our shared objectives and joint
commitment to advancing peace and security in every
part of the world.
I would, of course, be remiss if I did not mention
the Secretary-General, whose dedication to enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is most commendable. I
also thank him for organizing the retreat held earlier
this week, which, in a way, prepared the ground for
today’s debate and provided important perspectives for
our discussion.
The issue at hand is not new to the Council’s
agenda. In fact, there have been numerous Council
discussions on this particular item in the past few
years. However, today’s debate is distinguished by its
broad representation of regional organizations. Indeed,
in less than two hours, we covered the entire globe
from various regional viewpoints, and benefited from
the insightful perspectives that could only come from
such a distinguished panel of regional bodies.
Beyond this, the decision this time to listen to our
counterparts before making our own remarks has
proved a very wise one. That is because the
organizations represented here today are those that deal
on a day-to-day basis with the problems of their
regions and make a real difference on the ground
through their active involvement. In other words, there
is a lot we have to learn from them while carrying out
our responsibilities in the Council. This is why their
views and recommendations, which are of a very
practical nature, provide an excellent basis for our
deliberations today and in the future.
This new order of speakers also allows me to be
very brief. Indeed, given the scope, breadth and quality
of the interventions made so far, I do not have to dwell
on the issue at length. Suffice it to say that we agree
with the thrust of each and every presentation made
today by the representatives of the regional
organizations. We welcome in particular their keen
interest in working with the United Nations and further
strengthening their cooperation with us.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

The challenge for us now is to build on this
renewed commitment, explore new and practical
schemes of enhanced cooperation, and put in place the
mechanisms that will effectively reflect the spirit of
partnership that prevails in this Chamber today. If and
when we succeed in doing so, we will certainly have
created a win-win situation for both the United Nations
and our regional counterparts, and above all for global
peace and security.
After all, we have to accept that in today’s
security environment, laden with multifaceted and
complex challenges, the United Nations is not capable
of dealing with all the problems threatening
international peace and security. Given the importance
of addressing conflicts at their core, we need strong
and effective partners at the regional level. That in turn
requires genuine collaboration with such organizations,
including regular consultations and exchanges of
experience and best practices, as well as assistance in
capacity-building when necessary.
This is particularly the case with peacekeeping
and peacebuilding endeavours, where the United
Nations is increasingly stretched. Indeed, any
contribution by regional organizations in this area is of
great importance, not only for the purposes of sharing
burdens but also to ensure regional ownership, which
often proves to be the best guarantee of sustaining
peace and stability. In this regard, we are particularly
grateful to such organizations as NATO, the European
Union and the African Union for their determined
efforts and exemplary commitment. We cannot
overemphasize the need to further enhance United
Nations cooperation with these organizations in the
area of peacekeeping and related activities.
That said, the scope of United Nations
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations goes far beyond peacekeeping. Indeed,
conflict prevention through early warning, political
mediation, cooperative interaction and confidencebuilding is as important as peacekeeping, if not more
so. This is also where regional organizations, with their
innate understanding of the root causes of conflicts and
of the dynamics in play among different parties, are at
their best.
Here, I would like to pay special tribute to the
endeavours undertaken in these areas by all the invited
organizations
from
Turkey’s
immediate
neighbourhood, notably those of the League of Arab

10-20793

States and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Of course, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC), whose membership
spans four different continents, plays a particularly
unique role in solidifying the foundations of global
peace and creating better understanding between
different cultures and religions. As was pointed out by
Secretary General Ihsanoglu, the OIC’s active
involvement in many issues of common interest,
ranging from Iraq to Somalia and Afghanistan, and
from counter-terrorism to peacebuilding, makes that
organization an integral part of the solutions we are
collectively seeking in the United Nations.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the President for extending an invitation to the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA), whose Executive Director
was unfortunately unable to make it here today, due to
a scheduling conflict. That said, Turkey is the
upcoming chair of CICA, and in that capacity I assure
the Council of CICA’s firm dedication to upholding
peace and security in Asia in cooperation with the
United Nations. CICA is something of a newcomer to
the family of regional organizations, but, given its
broad membership, which covers almost 90 per cent of
the continent, as well as its track record in building
confidence and cooperation among its members, it
holds great potential for advancing our common goals.
In conclusion, allow me to express Turkey’s
sincere commitment to exerting every effort with a
view to further advancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
Turkey is a full member of four of the
organizations invited today and enjoys very special
relations with the rest. As such, we will be pushing
from both ends to bring about truly effective
collaboration between the United Nations and these
organizations in pursuit of our common objectives and
principles. It is also in that spirit that we fully support
the draft presidential statement prepared by China.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Gabon would naturally like to associate itself with the
heartfelt words of solidarity and condolence offered by
previous speakers towards the people of Haiti
following the tragedy they have just experienced. The
brotherly people of Haiti should know that we are
shoulder to shoulder with them in these extremely

35

S/PV.6257

difficult circumstances. I would also like to offer my
condolences to the Secretary-General on the loss of
United Nations personnel that was caused by this
tragedy.
Mr. President, Gabon welcomes your country’s
initiative to hold during its presidency this public
debate devoted to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Although this issue
has been addressed in a number of United Nations
debates, it is still undeniable that its complexity and
the breadth of concerns that it covers mean that we
must continue to reflect on this issue in the light of
recent developments. This debate is thus a further
opportunity for us to have an exchange of views on this
important subject and to take stock of the progress
made.
I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General and of the representatives of
regional organizations, who have come to share their
views on this matter.
We cannot speak of the maintenance of
international peace and security without mentioning
the numerous crises and conflicts in Africa. Africa has
already shown its commitment to turn to African
solutions to African problems. African countries are
deploying their own peacekeeping mission and provide
large numbers of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the continent.
In many cases and in a variety of areas,
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations has yielded significant results. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, did not fail to mention them in their
statements. The potential for partnership between the
AU and the United Nations is vast. Therefore, it must
be pursued further, so that we can achieve even better
results.
As recognized unanimously during previous
meetings of the Security Council on this subject, Africa
is still facing a shortfall in the financial and logistical
resources that it needs to successfully conduct its
peacekeeping activities. Somalia, for example, is very
worrisome. The difficulty of restoring peace and
stability in that country is due essentially to the
absence of more effective cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations on the ground.

36

As we know, the African Union by itself will be unable
to restore stability in Somalia. The deployment of
hybrid forces under United Nations auspices, and
predictable, flexible and sustainable financial
assistance from donor countries to the African Union
are absolutely necessary in order to bring peace to that
country.
The crisis in Somalia clearly shows how
important it is for the international community to
increase its technical, financial and logistical support
to African Union peacekeeping missions. We would
like to welcome the conclusions of the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel of experts chaired
by Mr. Romano Prodi (see S/2008/813). The report
contains important recommendations, including those
pertaining to the financing of African Union-led
peacekeeping missions. My country fully supports the
report’s proposals and particularly appreciates the
recommendation to establish a trust fund to finance the
peacekeeping capacities of the African Union. No one
can deny that this fund will give the pan-African
organization the resources it needs to carry out
activities in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is at the heart of the political and ideological
mission of the United Nations. Therefore, it is
important that the Security Council take up the
challenge of collective security in partnership with
regional and subregional organizations; only they have
a deep understanding of the underlying causes of
conflicts in their respective regions and the ability to
propose strategies for resolving them. With regard to
Africa, the Year of Peace initiative is an opportunity to
further build on this partnership.
Peace cannot be restored in Africa — or
elsewhere — solely by deploying troops. We must
promote a comprehensive approach to these problems
in order to best develop long-term strategies that will
enable countries to practice the virtues of good
political and economic governance. Here, the
international community should assist our countries in
our search for solutions to our economic problems to
enable us to respond to the aspirations of our people
and to break the cycle of violence and conflict.
As the proposed draft presidential statement takes
into account the views of my country, I cannot fail to
support it or to congratulate you on it, Mr. President.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

The draft statement to the press on the situation in
Haiti also has our support.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims and to all
those affected by the earthquake that struck Haiti
yesterday. Our support goes to the Government and the
people of Haiti in their rescue and recovery efforts.
Our sympathy also goes to the families of all United
Nations personnel currently in Haiti; our thoughts are
with them.
Mr. President, we would like to thank you for
convening today’s debate on improving cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. We would also like to thank
the representatives of those organizations for sharing
with the Council their latest accomplishments,
challenges and experiences with respect to enhanced
cooperation and coordination among themselves and
with the United Nations. This debate is timely, given
the new and enduring threats and obstacles to
international peace and security. Some of these
challenges call for determined action and more
coordinated and vigorous engagement.
One of the most complex examples of regional
and international collaboration to date took place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Even though the cooperation
in peacemaking and peacebuilding was complex and
difficult, the process ultimately resulted in peace.
Moreover, the experience in Bosnia and Herzegovina
contributed to the development of institutional
knowledge, strategies and tools subsequently applied in
other war-torn regions.
As a result of our own experience, we believe
that international organizations can ultimately
complement one another’s efforts. While regional
organizations can contribute knowledge of local
circumstances in pursuit of peace and security, the
United Nations possesses legitimacy, the power to
mandate, institutional knowledge, resources and
experience.
The complementary roles of the United Nations
and regional organizations in several key spheres have
contributed to peace and security. For instance,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nation, regional and subregional organizations
have worked together in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Operations in Liberia, the

10-20793

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the
Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo, Afghanistan and
other places have been carried out jointly between
regional organizations and the United Nations. We
should reaffirm once again our commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes within such
frameworks.
There is an increasing awareness that some
peacekeeping missions may need to grow into
peacebuilding missions. We should support such
transformation because, more often than not, long-term
regional peace and security depends upon the internal
stability of States. Regional organizations can act as
bridges when ownership of a peace process is
transferred from international organizations to
domestic authorities.
The fight against international terrorism is
another area where the aforementioned cooperation is
required, as is the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Regarding the latter issue, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) has called for closer
coordination of efforts on the international, national,
regional and subregional levels. Sharing information in
a timely manner can prove essential in addressing these
issues.
The roles and responsibilities of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention are
important. In this context, cooperation and
information-sharing can enhance early warning system
for conflict prevention. Hence, the development of
regional safeguards should be encouraged, so as to help
create coherent and well-built frameworks to address
such security concerns.
In addition, it is essential to tackle cross-border
problems, for the sake not only of regional but also of
global peace and security. Issues such as illicit drug
trafficking, crime prevention, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
problems of displaced persons and refugees and
trafficking in human beings, to name but a few, can be
further integrated into existing frameworks of
cooperation.
To
streamline
efforts
between
regional
organizations and the United Nations is particularly
critical when dealing with the response to natural
disasters. Natural disasters require a quick and well
managed response. This is especially relevant and

37

S/PV.6257

challenging, since there is always a link between
natural disasters and long-term economic and other
kinds of security.
The success of cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations relies on a
common vision and common goals. Moreover, reaching
those goals will require a flexible but systemic
approach in which coordination mechanisms ensure the
optimal use of time and resources. Such cooperation
enables countries which only yesterday were subjects
of international peace endeavours to actively take part
in such efforts today.
In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement that has been circulated.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we convey our most sincere condolences to the
people of Haiti and to the personnel of international
organizations at this time of tragedy.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important discussion and for this opportunity to engage
in an exchange of views with representatives of
regional and subregional organizations on cooperation
between the United Nations and such organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his participation in
this meeting and for his valuable contribution. We
welcome the representatives of regional organizations;
we appreciate their presence at today’s meeting.
The authors of the Charter of the United Nations
devoted an entire chapter — Chapter VIII — to
regional organizations and indicated their role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, noting
that this role was complementary to that of the United
Nations. Hence the importance of this cooperation and
of the added value these organizations bring. A number
of examples may be drawn from current international
relations, the most recent among them on the African
continent. These examples show the importance of
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, whether in terms of
deploying peacekeeping forces or of dispatching
representatives to the field to participate in political
processes and serve as mediators in conflict situations.
The success of these efforts is based on the fact
that these organizations are in close proximity to the
conflicts taking place in their respective regions. Their
historical, geographic, social and cultural ties enable

38

them to understand the background of a conflict and to
find the best path to a peaceful resolution. Moreover,
such organizations have special motivations to address
conflicts on the ground.
Regional and subregional organizations play a
role during three phases: prior to the outbreak of a
conflict, to engage in preventive diplomacy; during a
conflict, to lessen and contain its effects and bring
about a peaceful settlement; and following a conflict,
to participate in peacebuilding. We believe it very
important
that
additional
memorandums
of
understanding and other arrangements be signed
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, taking into account the
capacities and responsibilities of each, with a view to
setting out a clear, effective framework for cooperation
and coordination mechanisms for promoting dialogue
and exchanges of expertise. It is also necessary to
broaden the framework of cooperation to encompass
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, along with economic and social,
cultural and environmental issues. Such efforts are
extremely valuable in addressing the root causes of
crises.
We welcome the efforts that have been made in
this area. In our view, there should be an annual
meeting between the Security Council and
representatives
of
regional
and
subregional
organizations in order to assess cooperation, identify
lessons learned and formulate future policies.
Multilateral cooperation requires the exchange of
expertise, information and lessons learned both with
respect to peacekeeping operations and to a variety of
newer tasks such as election monitoring.
Lebanon encourages the provision of material
support for regional organizations. They deserve such
resources to enable them to carry out their missions.
Also needed is greater interest in technical training and
human resource development for those organizations.
There must be coordination meetings between the
United Nations and the secretariats of regional
organizations, and among the latter.
Lebanon calls for greater coordination and
cooperation between the League of Arab States and the
United Nations. The League covers a broad area of the
world, encompassing more than 22 States ranging from
West Africa to the Atlantic Ocean. That region
continues to be the theatre of many conflicts and great

10-20793

S/PV.6257

suffering. The most salient is the Israeli-Arab conflict,
which has been on the agenda of the Security Council
for a very long time. Promoting cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States could
help realize the Organization’s goals of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
through the implementation of international law and of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, in
particular with respect to bringing an end to occupation
and ensuring the right of self-determination.
There is little need to recall that the Arab Peace
Initiative offered by the League of Arab States during
its 2002 summit in Beirut, aimed at achieving a just
and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East
conflict, is an essential initiative. There is little need to
recall that, in the context of the issue of Israel’s nuclear
weapons and the prevention of a nuclear arms race in
the Middle East, the League of Arab States was among
the first organizations to call for a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.
Lebanon continues also to be committed to
enhancing cooperation and coordination with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which
encompasses more than 1.4 billion Muslims
worldwide, given the growing urgency of dialogue
between cultures and religions. Such a dialogue is even
more urgent today than in the past.
Finally, we thank the Chinese delegation for
having prepared a draft presidential statement for
adoption by the Security Council; we endorse that text.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
We are gravely concerned about the powerful
earthquake that occurred yesterday in Haiti. We
express our deep condolences to the Haitian people and
concerning the casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel. As an initial step in
our assistance, a Chinese international rescue team of
more than 60 members departed Beijing this morning
in a special aeroplane and with specialized equipment.
The team is expected to arrive in Haiti this evening to
begin its rescue work. Moreover, the Chinese Red
Cross has decided to provide $1 million in
international humanitarian assistance to Haiti.
Turning to the item on our agenda, China places
great emphasis on cooperation between the United

10-20793

Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that connection, I would like to focus on the following
four points.
First, to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it is
imperative to adhere to the principles and relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, regional organizations have unique
advantages in carrying out preventive diplomacy and
engaging in facilitation with countries in their
respective regions to settle disputes through such
peaceful means as mediation, negotiation and good
offices. The Security Council should encourage
regional organizations to play a positive role in that
regard.
Thirdly, the United Nations and regional
organizations have their own respective advantages in
maintaining international peace and security. They
should strengthen coordination and complement and
synergize each other’s efforts. As regional
organizations vary from each other in many aspects, a
flexible and pragmatic approach may be adopted in the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
Fourthly, with regard to capacity-building, we
support the United Nations in providing more
assistance to regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements of its
President which underscore the importance of
developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant statutes of the
regional and subregional organizations.
“The Security Council recalls the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, reiterates its primary responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance of

39

S/PV.6257

international peace and security and further
recalls that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and
security, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.
“The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider further steps to promote
closer and more operational cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the fields of conflict early
warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and to ensure the coherence,
synergy and collective effectiveness of their
efforts. In this regard, it welcomes the already
existing strong cooperation initiatives between
the United Nations and regional organizations.
“The Security Council commends the
ongoing efforts and contributions made by the
Secretariat to consolidate partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations and
welcomes the convening of the SecretaryGeneral’s Retreat with Heads of Regional and
other Organizations on 11-12 January 2010. The
Council expresses its intention to hold in the
future informal interactive dialogues with
regional and subregional organizations.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the peaceful settlement of
disputes,
acknowledges
the
important
contribution of regional and subregional
organizations to the peaceful settlement of local
disputes and preventive diplomacy, as they are
well positioned to understand the root causes of
many conflicts and other security challenges. The
Council underlines the importance of utilizing the
existing and potential capabilities of regional and
subregional organizations in this regard,
including through encouraging countries in the
region to resolve differences peacefully through
dialogue,
reconciliation,
consultation,
negotiation, good offices, mediation and judicial
settlement of disputes. The Security Council is
resolved to strengthen United Nations support for
the peaceful settlement of disputes through
improved interaction and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations.

40

“The Security Council invites the
Secretariat and all regional and subregional
organizations that have a capacity for
peacekeeping to enhance their working relations
and to further explore how their collaboration
could better contribute to the fulfilment of United
Nations mandates and goals, so as to ensure a
coherent framework for peacekeeping. The
Council underlines the importance of regional
and subregional organizations enhancing their
peacekeeping capabilities and the value of
international support to their efforts, in particular
to the African Union, in terms of the 2006 United
Nations-African Union Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union.
“The Security Council recognizes the role
that regional and subregional organizations can
play in post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery,
reconstruction and development processes and
affirms the importance of interaction and
cooperation
between
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional
organizations. The Council encourages the
Commission to continue to work in close
consultation with regional and subregional
organizations, with a view to ensuring more
consistent and integrated strategies for postconflict peacebuilding and recovery.
“The Security Council recognizes the need
for close cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as appropriate, for the
coherent and effective implementation of its
resolutions, including those on thematic issues
applicable to a wide range of conflict situations.
“The Security Council encourages the
Secretariat and regional and subregional
organizations to further explore informationsharing on their respective capabilities and
lessons-learned in maintaining international
peace and security and to continue to compile
best practices, in particular in the field of
mediation, good offices and peacekeeping. The
Council also encourages strengthening of
cooperation and dialogue among regional and
subregional organizations in this regard.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/1.

10-20793

S/PV.6257

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives
of
regional
and
subregional
organizations for participating in today’s meeting.

10-20793

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

41
