United Nations

S/PV.6130

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6130th meeting
Thursday, 28 May 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 13 May 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/246)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-35192 (E)

*0935192*

S/PV.6130

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 13 May 2009 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2009/246)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Czech Republic and Serbia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Palouš
(Czech Republic) and Mr. Kruljević (Serbia) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2009/246, containing a
letter dated 13 May 2009 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-fifth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko. This is
the first appearance of Mr. Inzko in the Security
Council as High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. On behalf of the Security Council, I
extend a warm welcome to him and wish him success
in his important assignment. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Inzko: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to present my first report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have
been in office just two months, but I will update the
Council on significant events over the past six months.
I will also outline my priorities.
Some progress has been made towards our
objective of making Bosnia and Herzegovina a peaceful,
viable State, irreversibly on course for European
integration. Equally on the positive side, the country
remains stable and the physical environment is secure.
On a less positive note, however, the State is not
yet fully viable and its role and competencies are
contested by some of its political leaders. As a result,
recent progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration has
been modest, and as a consequence, the country still
requires high attention. Last week, United States VicePresident Biden and European Union (EU) High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy Solana were in Bosnia and Herzegovina in an
unprecedented joint visit.
The focus was extremely useful and warmly
welcomed by the population. However, the poor
performance on EU and transatlantic integration is
deplorable, particularly as the world recession now
also threatens the fragile economy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The State and entities’ successful
negotiation of a €1.2 billion stand-by arrangement with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revealed an

09-35192

S/PV.6130

unusual degree of common purpose, but the reforms
agreed with the IMF will have the desired result only if
the authorities take appropriate and targeted steps. The
Federation’s finances are especially dire, and its
capacity to agree upon and implement cuts in the face
of strong vested interests is rather weak. The Republika
Srpska of Bosnia and Herzegovina is, in this regard, for
the time being, in a better position.
In these circumstances, it is clear that obstruction
of urgent reforms that would help improve living
conditions is absolutely unjustified on moral as well as
political grounds. I will seek to keep this plain fact at
the centre of public debate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the same time, I will seek a change in the political
paradigm that downgrades practical and pressing
economic issues and stresses instead a strident and
unhelpful kind of posturing.
My predecessor reported last December on a
highly hopeful development towards overcoming the
political stalemate. This was the initiation, in
November 2008, of the so-called Prud process of
dialogue among leaders of the three largest national
parties and coalition partners at the State level: Dragan
Covic of the Croatian Democratic Community;
Sulejman Tihic of the Bosniac Party of Democratic
Action; and Milorad Dodik of the Serb Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats. My Office and I have
supported this process since it represents a homegrown political initiative for dialogue and cooperation.
Periodic meetings of the “Prud three” over a
three-month period resulted in various compromise
agreements and prospective agreements on major
issues, ranging from the question of a State budget for
2009 to the promise to initiate talks on constitutional
reforms and the early fulfilment of parts of the
outstanding objectives and conditions set by the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) in February 2008 for the
closure of my Office and its transformation into an
EU-led presence.
Unfortunately, the Prud process lost momentum,
and the three party leaders have not met on their own
again since late March, though they have been brought
together by the international community on a number
of occasions, recently by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of three successive EU presidencies —
Ministers Bildt, Kouchner and Schwarzenberg — and
then, last week, by United States Vice President Joe
Biden and EU High Representative for the Common

09-35192

Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana. On each
occasion, the three leaders expressed their commitment
to continuing their dialogue.
Foremost among the achievements facilitated by
the Prud process has been the passage on 26 March of
the first-ever amendment to the country’s 1995 Dayton
Constitution. This amendment defines the status of the
Brcko District and provides it with direct access to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court in the
event of any dispute with the State or entities. Not only
was the enactment of such an amendment one of the
five objectives set out by the PIC Steering Board as
prerequisites for a transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the EU Special Representative,
it was also a condition for the Supervisor to do away
with the Arbitral Tribunal and for the PIC Steering
Board to terminate the supervisory regime. That could
now happen soon.
Other positive news included the agreement
among the State, entities and Brcko District on the
budget framework for 2009, which enabled a relatively
early adoption of the budget.
In addition, the National War Crimes Strategy
was finally adopted in late December. This Strategy
was part of the fifth objective — the entrenchment of
the rule of law — set by the PIC to allow for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative.
Progress on the second objective — apportionment
of State property — has been more limited, due to the
inability of the Prud three to compromise on this issue.
However, pressure on and cooperation with local actors
has recently brought a first move forward in this area,
with the initiation in late April of the long-delayed
process of the inventory of State property, which
provides the necessary legal framework. I would like to
expressly thank Prime Minister Špirić for his efforts
and input in this regard. We will focus, of course, in
the weeks to come, on this issue to ensure its
completion.
Notwithstanding the positive achievements that
have been made, divisive rhetoric and official
resolutions challenging the sovereignty, constitutional
order and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina all continued during the reporting period,
principally on the part of Republika Srpska. That entity
has, in official Government and National Assembly
documents, on several occasions referred to the

3

S/PV.6130

possibility of unilateral self-determination. Its leaders
have been in the forefront of attacks on the legitimacy
of State institutions — judicial, prosecutorial, policing,
economic, intelligence and defence — as well as in the
forefront of efforts to reverse previous State-building
and EU-mandated reforms. That is all taking place at a
time when the State Investigation and Protection
Agency has submitted a preliminary report to the State
Prosecutor on possible financial wrongdoing by the
Prime Minister. On 14 May, those attacks culminated
in the adoption by the Republika Srspka National
Assembly of conclusions that call for the return of 68
competencies allegedly stolen by the State.
The conclusions also undermine the legitimacy of
the decisions of the Peace Implementation Council and
the Office of the High Representative, as well as those
of the previous High Representatives. I take that
seriously, and I take people at their word. My basic
role as High Representative is to uphold the Dayton
Peace Agreement, at the centre of which is the
sovereignty of the State and the competencies of its
institutions. I will not let those be challenged.
That campaign has also blocked the passage of
State legislation required to complete the EU’s road
map for the elimination of visas for Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens travelling to EU States. It has
also for some time blocked other State legislation that
would fulfil Bosnia and Herzegovina’s obligations
under the Stabilization and Association Process.
While Bosniak and Croat politicians have of late
generally avoided wholesale attacks on Republika
Srpska’s legitimacy, it should be noted that Federationbased media have maintained an offensive stance
towards the other entity.
As 2010 is a general election year, there is now
only a small window of opportunity to start work on
even minimal constitutional reforms, particularly if
those are to entail any revisions of the election law,
which they surely will. The positions of the main
parties remain far apart, but the onus is now on them to
engage in serious dialogue, and then reach agreements
that reflect their EU aspirations and can secure a twothirds majority in Parliament. I will assist them in my
capacity as EU Special Representative. Do they have
the capacity to succeed in this? I believe they do. Do
they have the political will? Only they can answer that
question.

4

Of the five objectives and two conditions set by
the PIC for the transition of the Office of the High
Representative into a reinforced office of the EU
Special Representative, three objectives can now be
considered as having been met. Two of them were
completed during this reporting period. They are the
constitutional amendment to secure completion of the
Brcko Final Arbitral Award and the entrenchment of
the rule of law through the adoption of a Bosnia and
Herzegovina strategy for the domestic prosecution of
war crimes, as well as action plans to implement a
justice-sector reform strategy over the period 2009 to
2013. That leaves two unmet objectives, relating to
acceptable and sustainable agreement on apportioning
ownership of State property and defence property
between the State and its entities.
My Office has long argued that, as a first step, the
Council of Ministers should initiate an inventory of the
property involved. The Council of Ministers eventually
agreed to do so, for which I thank Chairman Špirić,
and has set up a working group with a deadline of
30 September to complete the process. My aim is now
to engage political leaders so that an appropriate
solution can be found as quickly as possible.
The defence property issue is less complicated
and less important to the political parties, but is
nonetheless crucial to cementing defence reform and
sustaining Bosnia and Herzegovina’s hopes of joining
NATO. We had previously assumed that a settlement
would follow naturally. However, it now seems
necessary to deal separately with the issue of what real
estate the armed forces are to possess. The issue of
surplus weaponry, ordnance and equipment has long
been settled, at least in theory. My Office, together
with NATO headquarters in Sarajevo, will now focus
on quickly resolving the issue of military real estate
and property.
Given the failure of domestic authorities to
deliver on all five objectives set by the PIC Steering
Board, the Board did not consider the issue of
transition when it met in late March. While I can report
that there has been progress on State and defence
property issues, at this stage it appears rather unlikely
that the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
will take a decision to close the Office of the High
Representative when it meets in late June. However, I
believe that the objectives and the conditions can be
delivered before the PIC meeting in October. The PIC
could then possibly be in a position to decide on the

09-35192

S/PV.6130

closure of the Office and the transition to the EU’s
Special Representative.
Following the joint visit in April by the three EU
presidency Foreign Ministers — Ministers Kouchner,
Schwarzenberg and Bildt — the joint visit by VicePresident Biden and High Representative Solana on
19 May attested both to a strong common approach and
the EU’s seriousness about the need for a robust and
tailor-made strategy for the future EU Special
Representative in the country. Current domestic
circumstances make such enhanced involvement by the
EU and the wider international community essential.
The vast majority of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to support Euro-Atlantic
integration and the prosperity, security and self-respect
it would bring. Although we have seen signs of
progress, in general the nationalistic political dynamic
routinely overrides popular sentiment. I will need the
Council’s support in countering that.
I have outlined the progress that we have made
and the obstacles we have encountered. The fact is that
there is progress, although it is slow, and we have
reason to believe that the positive will win out over the
negative. That is what the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina want and that is what we must continue to
help them to achieve. As I said during a recent meeting
with civic activists, the majority of citizens
undoubtedly believe in doing what is necessary and
right. That is the real majority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — not an ethnic majority but a majority
of those who want to live in a free and prosperous
country that is part of the European Union. I am on the
side of that majority and I believe that it will prevail.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to make a statement.
Mr. Špirić (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in
Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation):
May I first convey my warmest greetings to everyone
and express my pleasure at having once again been
given an opportunity to share my views with this body
about the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the challenges we face. I would also like to avail
myself of this opportunity to welcome the new High
Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, who is the third
High Representative during my time in office. I wish

09-35192

him a successful tenure, which would also redound to
my country’s success. This is also an opportunity for
me to express my readiness to cooperate with his
Office, thereby contributing to achieving the objective.
Despite different views as to the successes,
impasses and failures of my country during the
reporting period, I can agree that all of us in Bosnia
and Herzegovina could and should have done more to
make progress towards integration into the European
Union (EU) and NATO at a faster pace. In order to do
so, Bosnia and Herzegovina must have more
confidence in itself and political leaders must work
more and expect less. The much-needed compromise
must be viewed as a virtue, not a weakness.
Guided by this idea, the Council of Ministers has
been doing its best to ensure the progress of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic road in an
environment that, more often than not, has not been
one of compromise, dialogue and consensus. Since
December, we have held 19 sessions, two of which
were thematic — one devoted to European integration
and another devoted to NATO integration.
As regards our goal to attain full membership of
the European Union, over the past period the Council
of Ministers has focused on adopting laws and meeting
the requirements of the action plan for the
implementation
of
the
European
Partnership
commitments, and we have discussed and adopted 37
bills and draft laws, eight of which are related to the
European Partnership. We have also issued a number of
decisions and strategies that, in practice, constitute the
fulfilment of the European Partnership requirements.
Domestic authorities have been involved in
implementing the Interim Agreement on trade and
trade-related matters between the European Community
and Bosnia-Herzegovina, which will remain in force
until the full ratification of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. The quarterly report indicates
that, as of 31 December 2008, all requirements for the
period had been met in a timely manner and in line
with the action plan adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers. That trend
continues in 2009.
As regards the liberalization of the visa regime
for Bosnian citizens, we have focused on fulfilling the
requirements as laid down in the road map. Of 174
requirements set forth in the document, we have fully
met 149, 18 are being fulfilled, and 7 are still to be

5

S/PV.6130

met. I am well aware of the importance of this issue for
Bosnian citizens, given the fact that we are behind
other countries in the region in fulfilling the
requirements, and that six crucial laws required for the
visa regime liberalization have not received the
necessary support within the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament. Therefore, at the penultimate session of the
Council of Ministers, I tasked the State-level ministers
with convening a mini-ministerial conference as soon
as possible, to be attended by the responsible State and
entity ministers, and with producing a harmonized
wording of the said laws, which would subsequently be
forwarded by the Council of Ministers to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliament in a summary procedure.
I expect that, when we return to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we shall be in a position to forward the
new wording of the laws to Parliament and fulfil the
remaining requirements for the visa regime
liberalization. The messages that United States VicePresident Joseph Biden and the EU High Representative
for Security Policy, Mr. Xavier Solana, sent during
their recent visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina are strong
encouragement on that path.
The White Schengen list for our citizens would
certainly strengthen the European idea within Bosnia
and Herzegovina and provide incentives to the forces
that are unequivocally committed to those processes.
The goal of our adoption of these laws is to send a
clear message to Brussels that we are resolute, which
gives us due cause to expect that the visa regime will
be liberalized by the end of this year or possibly early
next year. I hereby wish to urge Council members to
encourage the European Commission to expedite its
procedures and thus further strengthen the European
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
towards NATO, at its thematic session devoted to the
issue the Council of Ministers discussed the level of
implementation of the plan of action for the
implementation of the Individual Partnership Action
Plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Action Plan is the
most important document for Bosnia’s further progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration. The level of Action
Plan implementation, which has exceeded 85 per cent
of the total of 291 activities, further corroborates the
high level of success of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
process of acceding to NATO.

6

We have also focused on attaining the goals for
Bosnian institutions set by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council. In that respect, the
Council of Ministers took the initiative to push forward
the constitutional amendment related to the status of
Brcko District, which was subsequently adopted by the
vast majority of the members of the Parliamentarian
Assembly. We have also adopted a strategy to reform
our judiciary system and address war crimes, by which
we have completed the goal related to the
establishment of the rule of law.
In addition, we have issued a decision to establish
the property census, which is a prerequisite for
adopting the law and for the ultimate resolution of the
issue. We are determined to fully attain the said goals
so as to enable the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council to issue a decision in
November to transform the Office of the High
Representative into the Office of the European Union
Special Representative.
Democracy, good governance and the rule of law
cannot continue to develop within Bosnia and
Herzegovina if the fundamental principles of democracy,
good governance and the rule of law are not observed
by the very international representatives who claim to
seek their establishment. The State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entities have the legal and moral
obligations to protect the rights of their citizens as set
forth in their laws, constitutions and human rights
instruments, and to adhere to general principles of
international law and the rule of law. It is now time for
the international community to end any support for
peremptory powers in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
instead to support the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entities in the discharge of their legal and
moral obligations.
The agreements that constitute the Dayton
Accords, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution set forth in annex 4, are the legal
instruments to which the relevant parties are bound as
the framework for enduring peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a fundamental principle of
international law and pursuant to Bosnian domestic
law, these cannot be amended or modified except by
further agreement of the relevant parties. The Security
Council should support the Dayton Accords as the
binding legal framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Attempts by foreign States or international
organizations to impose a system of governance that is

09-35192

S/PV.6130

inconsistent with the Dayton Accords through the
exercise of peremptory powers or other methods will
not be legally valid, and such actions would not have
the support of Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens. The
consensus on which the legitimacy of all Governments
ultimately rests must come from within.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully committed
to full cooperation with the Hague Tribunal; hence,
over the past period we have adopted a strategy to
reform the judiciary system and address war-crimerelated matters, as well as a decision to set up a
supervisory authority for monitoring the implementation
of the said strategy. Considering the importance of the
issue of the return of refugees and displaced persons,
we identified and adopted a revised strategy for the
implementation of annex 7, which was subsequently
adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly.
The issues of the global economic crisis and of
mitigating its consequences in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have dominated the past period. The establishment of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council and its
efficient operation have led to a coordinated approach
to the issue, which has resulted in successful
negotiations with the International Monetary Fund.
This example shows that when Bosnia and
Herzegovina speaks with one voice, it is possible to
reach agreement even on the most delicate issues. The
goal of such a package is to preserve macroeconomic
stability in the midterm and ensure further economic
growth.
I take this opportunity to express my concern
over the absence of a regional and European dimension
in resolving this issue, as I am almost certain that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like any other State acting on
its own, will not be able to address the challenges
presented by the economic crisis. It is for this reason
that I have launched an initiative before the Regional
Cooperation Council secretariat, headquartered in
Sarajevo, to found an investment bank for South-East
Europe. Taking into account the economic challenges
to the region, as well as the European Commission’s
announcement that the new strategy for the countries
of South-East Europe will prioritize economic
development and regional cooperation through joint
projects, I believe that this is the right time to launch
such an initiative.
As Council members know, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country that has managed to fulfil

09-35192

various requirements, implement reforms and address
difficult issues emerging on its European path, with
varying success. I concur that this is the year in which
we will have to face constitutional reform as a new
challenge. It must go hand in hand with realistic goals,
and its ultimate success will require us to ensure
conditions in which civilized dialogue is possible. I
deem of the highest importance the fact that such
reform must be the fruit of internal dialogue and
compromise based on the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The assistance of international institutions in the
form of good advice is certainly more than welcome.
Such assistance will certainly result in achievable
constitutional reform. There are some who feel or hope
that constitutional reform that will come through
pressure or diktat from Washington, D.C., or Brussels.
I believe that this approach would not only be a waste
of time, but also lead to instability.
On an earlier occasion, I have had an opportunity
to read the High Representative’s report before the
Council (see S/2009/246). Without seeking to qualify
the report in any way, I note that no one is exclusively
guilty or absolutely blameless for what has happened
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, either before or after the
Dayton Accords. Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community must find a way to stop
identifying scapegoats and turn to seeking better
solutions. I am personally of the opinion that not only
is Bosnia and Herzegovina a greater success than is
reflected in the report, but also that there is greater
optimism within the country that will bring us further
success.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Špirić for his statement.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
also like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, the new High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Special Representative of the European Union. We are
very grateful to him for his detailed report (see
S/2009/246) and welcome his efforts to orient and
coordinate initiatives related to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. We recognize a healthy dose of
realism in his report, in which he recounts the positive
advances and the current limitations in the situation in

7

S/PV.6130

Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, my country
would like to make the following specific observations.
First of all, it has not been easy to leave behind a
conflict that cost so much sacrifice in human lives, nor
has it been easy to create a multi-ethnic and
multinational State. The Dayton Peace Agreement and
all the subsequent agreements and declarations of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
(PIC) are a solid, consistent framework that points an
unambiguous way forward towards peace and political
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secondly, we are aware of the fact that it is hard
to bring all positions into agreement towards the
achievement of a political system and dynamic
endorsed by all participants. But a way has been shown
by political movements that have committed to
dialogue, and there is a route leading to constitutional
reforms to consolidate the democratic foundations and
modernize the political structures of the country.
Unilateral positions are not acceptable if they
jeopardize the efforts made towards that end.
Sensitivity and openness to dialogue must prevail in
the attitudes of all political forces without exception.
We note with concern some pockets of resistance
that complicate the job and mandate of the High
Representative and imperil the decisions of the Peace
Implementation Council. According to those decisions,
there are five objectives and two conditions that must
be met before the transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the Special Representative of
the European Union can be completed. My country is
carefully monitoring compliance with these agreements
and finds it advisable not to force the deadlines if the
political conditions for this transition are not
sufficiently mature. Respect for agreed institutions is
indispensable. We urge the High Representative to
redouble his efforts with all actors to establish a
political climate that will facilitate the adoption of the
necessary legislation before the 2010 elections and the
constitutional reforms equally necessary to consolidate
the stability achieved.
My delegation welcomes the adoption on
26 March 2009 of the first constitutional amendment
since the Dayton Peace Agreement. It is a healthy sign
of a system that values ethnic, cultural and political
diversity.
We welcome the entrenchment of the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is one of the five

8

goals set up by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. The firm commitment to the
rule of law, and particularly in cases of war crimes,
deserves special praise. The adoption of the War
Crimes Strategy is welcome, as is cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal. Transparency and
cooperation with the Court and adherence to the
principles of law are very important elements of the
fight against impunity. In that vein, we would like to
highlight our concern for human rights and the
humanitarian aspects of the situation. We believe that
the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons deserves special attention.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome and
thank Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing, and we wish him success in his duties.
Libya follows with great attention the ongoing
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note
that positive progress has been achieved in the recent
period with the signing of a broad agreement between
the leaders of the three principal political parties in the
country on constitutional reform issues that have been
long awaited. We also welcome the express readiness
of the leaders of the political parties to agree on and
move towards resolving the principal political issues,
including the outstanding conditions and objectives
that remain to be fulfilled before the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative can come into effect.
We also salute the adoption of the constitutional
amendment incorporating the Brcko District into the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution, the adoption of a
War Crimes Strategy, and the endorsement of the
implementation action plans of the National Justice
Sector Reform Strategy. We hope that such positive
steps will continue to be taken so that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can attain lasting stability. Undoubtedly,
it is important at this stage to pursue the process of
constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
basis of the principles of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Despite the positive achievements that have been
made in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we still have some
concerns about the ongoing extreme nationalist
rhetoric that casts certain problems in the country in a

09-35192

S/PV.6130

maximalist light. Such nationalist ethnic attitudes
could undermine the role of the State, delay progress in
achieving reforms, and pose a challenge to the very
foundation of the State, as defined in the Dayton Peace
Agreement, and to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. No one, we believe, can have any doubt
that such nationalist rhetoric could reignite the conflict,
thereby undermining stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region.
Based on the foregoing, we appeal to all sectors
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s population to live up to
their political responsibility and find ways to coexist
through dialogue, respect for the institutions of State
and full cooperation with the High Representative.
They should also abide by the obligations imposed on
everyone under the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Paris
Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions.
We have no doubt that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confronting some difficult problems, and we believe
that the only solution is to find agreement and a
common vision for the future that is acceptable to all
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the
framework of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We believe
that would be the correct way to turn Bosnia into a
stable country based on ethnic and cultural diversity
and which would play a role in stabilizing the Balkans
and achieving prosperity and sustainable development
for all its citizens.
In conclusion, we emphasize that continuing to
pursue perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity and bringing them to justice will help heal
the wounds and ease the pain of the recent past in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and will help to achieve a
better future.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I express to Chairman Špirić
a warm welcome to the Security Council this morning.
I also wish to congratulate Mr. Valentin Inzko on his
assumption of the position of High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Knowing personally his
professional competence and deep knowledge of the
region, I am convinced that Mr. Inzko will fulfil his
responsibilities with distinction and will make a
significant contribution to achieving stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I am also grateful for the efforts made to prepare
the comprehensive report (see S/2009/246) and for this
morning’s valuable briefing. We agree with the
assessment that only limited progress was made during

09-35192

the reporting period. We acknowledge that some
progress has been made regarding the five objectives
and two conditions, including issues on the legal status
of the Brcko District. However, the political situation
has remained unstable due to continuing exchanges of
ethnocentric rhetoric. We have serious misgivings
about a failure of coordination among Government
agencies and major political parties, which has left
many issues unresolved. Japan believes that all parties
should maintain a constructive attitude in order to
develop Bosnia and Herzegovina into a vibrant and
sustainable State.
We were somewhat disappointed to hear that the
Prud process has lost momentum. We should extend
full support to complete the Prud process. Continuation
of that process is indispensable if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to become a full-fledged member of the
European community. We urge all political leaders to
accept that fact and to maintain active engagement in
the process to address constitutional reform.
Japan continues to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
to achieve its integration into the Euro-Atlantic
community. For that purpose, necessary progress has
been made, including on implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions and on the transition
from the Office of the High Representative to the
European Union (EU) Special Representative. High
attention must be paid towards urging the international
community to work as a strong driving force towards
achievement of the Prud objectives.
The recent visits to Sarajevo by the EU troika of
Foreign Ministers and by the EU High Representative
for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and
United States Vice-President Biden demonstrated the
determination of the international community to jointly
strengthen engagement in the region. We welcome
those initiatives to advance the reform process and to
stabilize the situation.
Consolidation of peace in the country is the
cornerstone of peace and prosperity in the Western
Balkan region as a whole. Japan believes that the
human security perspective helps to consolidate
coexistence, reconciliation and stability in a multiethnic society. Based on that belief, we have been
actively contributing to community reconciliation,
stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
through bilateral programmes. We have also been an
active member of the Peace Implementation Council

9

S/PV.6130

(PIC) Steering Board, since the beginning. Early this
year, we decided to support a new project on demining
in Banovici and processing war crimes cases, with a
view to enhancing human security. We will extend
additional support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
efforts to establish a sound base for sustainable
development and to consolidate peace.
In conclusion, the role of the High Representative
will continue to be important in the light of the stillunstable situation. As a member of the PIC, we
encourage Mr. Inzko to make full use of his authority
as High Representative, including the exercise of his
Bonn powers in the event that necessity so demands.
We urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to accelerate
stabilizing efforts and its integration into the EuroAtlantic community. I reiterate my country’s firm and
continued commitment to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in advancing that process.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Let me begin by extending a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nicola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thanking him for participating in our
debate today. The messages he gave are clear. I would
also like to extend my congratulations to Mr. Inzko on
his appointment as High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We wish him all success in his work. He
can always count on my country’s support and
cooperation.
Allow me also to thank Mr. Inzko for his report
(see S/2009/246). We welcome it, and we agree with its
tone and content. Bosnia and Herzegovina occupies a
distinct place on our foreign policy agenda.
Considering ourselves a part of the Balkans and
attaching great importance to the maintenance of
peace, security and stability in the region, Turkey
provides troops, civilian police and other experts to the
European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) and to the European Union
Police Mission. And as a member of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council, we follow the
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina closely and
would like to see the country firmly integrated into
European and transatlantic institutions at an early date.
To achieve all of that, consolidation of an
effective, stable and viable State structure in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as foreseen in the Dayton Peace
Accords, is essential. In this vein, we appreciated and
supported all the efforts made by the leaders of the

10

three political parties to establish trust and find
common ground in order to carry out the reform
agenda. At the same time, I would like to underline that
we need to understand some of the concerns of the
political parties that have not yet signed that Agreement.
In this vein, we encourage the three parties to
seek broader agreement with all others and welcome
the process as a sign of ownership of the future of the
country. Indeed, initially there were some concrete
outcomes, as the High Representative has informed us.
Still, we are far from the end of the road, and further
efforts are needed to tackle certain difficult issues. But
we are afraid that momentum is being lost. What is
even more important and worrying is the increase in
nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions, especially
by the leaders and institutions of the Republika Srpska,
that inevitably challenge the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and constitutional order of the country.
As is well known, the Peace Implementation
Council set five objectives and two conditions for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative, about
one and a half years ago. Let me underline that we do
not want the Office of the High Representative to
remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever — and that
is clearly not the wish of the peoples of the country.
However, for the Peace Implementation Council to
make a positive assessment and to start the process of
transition, the international community needs to be
convinced that all in Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
common vision for the future of the country.
That is not the impression we have at this
moment. We do not yet see a country whose people and
entities are fully united around the common goal of a
peaceful, stable and prosperous State fully anchored
within the Euro-Atlantic community of nations. What
we see, rather, is a country of opposing views and
divisions. Definitely, this is not the point that Bosnia
and Herzegovina should have reached more than
14 years after the Dayton Agreement.
Time is of the essence for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would very much like to see the
reform process revived so that the five objectives and
two conditions are completely fulfilled. We know that
this can be done as long as there is the political will. In
that respect, we call on all the leaders and authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work and cooperate
closely with the High Representative.

09-35192

S/PV.6130

The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina have in
the recent past shown their determination and
resilience in putting an end to the conflict and setting
up a partnership State. We are confident that they will
also succeed in achieving those reforms. As has been
the case in the past, Turkey remains ready to assist the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in any way it can,
in achieving their aspirations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
welcome the presence in the Council today of
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to extend a very warm welcome to my countryman and
my friend of long standing, High Representative
Valentin Inzko. He knows that he can count on
Austria’s full and continued support. Furthermore, we
should also pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, whose activities are covered in much of the
report before us today (see S/2009/246).
Prime Minister Špirić knows that Austria is and
will remain a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards lasting stability and
European integration. We are convinced that the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is key for the
realization of a broad zone of stability in the Balkans.
The Prime Minister knows that we believe that
membership of the European Union (EU) offers by far
the best medium-term and long-term chance for a
solution to most of the problems that we have heard
about today.
Against this background, Austria hopes that the
reforms necessary for the Euro-Atlantic integration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be taken up again and
brought to a successful completion. The political
atmosphere currently prevailing in the country —
nationalistic and divisive rhetoric, attacks that
undermining State institutions and the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and challenges to
the authority of the High Representative — will not
serve that purpose. We appeal to all political leaders in
the country to overcome the past and to give priority to
what is really important for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina: its European perspective, which is in the
interests of all the citizens of the country.
Austria attaches great importance to the principle
of Bosnian ownership. Lasting stability can be
achieved only through efforts coming from within the
country. In this respect, we believe that it is the

09-35192

principal role of the High Representative to support
Bosnians’ efforts in addressing their own pending
problems: to help Bosnians help themselves. At the
same time, we are aware that the High Representative
has far-reaching powers at his disposal, and he has our
full support in making use of them if that is warranted
by the circumstances.
Austria fully supports the objective of a transition
from the Office of the High Representative to a
substantially reinforced presence of the European
Union. Preparations for this step are well under way
within the Union. We welcome the progress achieved
so far by Bosnia and Herzegovina in delivering on the
five objectives and the two conditions, including the
recent decision on the Brcko District. The process of
dialogue and compromise launched in Prud last year
has significantly contributed to this progress, and we
hope that increased efforts by all political leaders, but
also a stronger will to find common ground, will make
substantial progress possible. We also hope that the
ongoing disagreements on the inventory working group
for State property will be overcome soon, and that the
group will be able to continue its work.
We welcome the progress achieved in
strengthening the rule of law. The adoption of a war
crimes prosecution strategy and the adoption of a
justice sector reform strategy are important steps, and
we look forward to their full implementation.
Continued cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, effective measures
against those helping the remaining fugitives evade
justice and the strict enforcement of sentences against
convicted war criminals are crucial to promote justice
and the rule of law.
The economic developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina outlined in the report give rise to concern.
The seriousness of these challenges is further
aggravated by the global economic crisis. These
difficult issues have to be addressed in a concerted
effort by all political actors across entities and ethnic
affiliations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other Western
Balkan countries have the perspective of future
membership of the European Union. Bosnia and
Herzegovina took a major step on its European path
when it signed a comprehensive Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union in
2008; this will enter into force once its ratification

11

S/PV.6130

process has been completed. The Agreement
constitutes the legal framework for EU-Bosnia and
Herzegovina relations until future membership.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its Western Balkan
neighbours are currently engaged in a dialogue with
the European Union in order to achieve visa-free travel
for their citizens in the countries of the Union. For that
to become reality, the countries of the region must
make substantial efforts in areas such as the security of
documents, readmission and the fight against illegal
migration. Austria will continue to strongly support
those efforts. Austria is hopeful that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will soon fulfil the conditions for visa
liberalization, because that would also contribute to
building a sustainable and strong security partnership
with the European Union.
Finally, we share the assessment of the High
Representative that the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) is still
vital for the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that that
operation continues to be a key reassurance factor in
the country. As a troop contributor to the operation
since its establishment, with some 110 troops currently
serving within EUFOR, Austria is committed to
maintaining that contribution.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome the new High Representative and
to thank him for his statement this morning. We fully
agree with his analysis of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I wish also to welcome Mr. Nikola
Špirić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We take careful note of his
reaffirmed intention to carry out the necessary reforms,
and we encourage him to continue and step up his
endeavours to that end.
The representative of the Czech Republic will
soon make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, and France naturally associates itself with that
statement. I should like, however, to make some
supplementary remarks in my national capacity.
Over the past 14 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with the support of the European Union, has carried
out reforms that are essential for its stability and
prosperity. In June 2008 it reached an important
milestone by signing a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union, which reasserted
its commitment to joining the Union. Some

12

encouraging progress has been achieved in recent
months, notably the adoption of the constitutional
amendment on Brcko District and the adoption of the
War Crimes Strategy and the implementation action
plan for justice sector reform. This progress was made
possible by the spirit of compromise and dialogue that
was initiated last November at Prud. From the outset,
the European Union and France have supported the
Prud process, which should continue and indeed be
extended. We urge all Bosnian political actors to
become part of the process and to participate fully.
At the same time, the High Representative has
drawn our attention to some worrying developments.
The increase in nationalist rhetoric, and actions and
statements challenging the underlying structure of the
State — whether directed against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina or
against the existence of the Republika Srpska — are
matters of grave concern. The political situation
continues to be marked by a continuing lack of trust
among the leaders of the three constituent peoples,
which gives rise to tension and hampers progress in the
country. We therefore call on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina leadership to cease opposition to change
and to work towards compromise on the main issues.
Only a constructive attitude on the part of all Bosnian
political actors will make it possible to move forward
on reforms that will open the way for an evolving
international presence, along with reforms that arise
from European partnership.
I wish to assure the High Representative of our
confidence in him and of our full support as he works
to ensure respect for the Dayton-Paris accords, to
promote the reforms that the country needs and to
complete the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union special representative
with a strengthened mandate.
It is time to open a new chapter in the country’s
history, which requires that the objectives and
conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the transition be fully met. Important
progress remains to be accomplished to achieve that
crucial stage. Notwithstanding the measures that still
have to be taken, I would especially like to emphasize
the urgency of overcoming the delay in the inventory
and apportionment of State property. That is an
essential point upon which we await progress over the
coming weeks.

09-35192

S/PV.6130

France supports the aspiration of the Bosnian
people to rejoin the European Union. The future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and that of all the countries of
the Western Balkans lies in Europe; that is the key to
the stability of the region, to anchoring democracy in
the region and bringing about its future prosperity, as
the President of the French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy,
has stressed on several occasions in recent months. The
High Representative referred to the joint meeting of the
Czech, Swedish and French Foreign Ministers in April
and to the visit of Javier Solana a few days ago,
confirming the constancy of European Union
commitment towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
confidence with regard to its European future. Europe
remains committed through the EUFOR-Altea
operation and the European Union’s police mission.
The course set is clear, but the tempo of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s rapprochement with Europe
depends on the country itself. The international
community can help the Bosnian leaders to achieve
that, and that is something towards which the High
Representative is working energetically, but it cannot
substitute for the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bernard Kouchner has emphasized that there is no
magic wand. It is for the Bosnians and their leaders,
first and foremost, to be the actors in the reforms the
country needs. That is work for a united Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can be thoroughly integrated into the
European Union.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me first to extend
our welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his statement. We also
wish to welcome the High Representative and Special
Representative of the European Union (EU), His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, and to thank him for
his briefing today, his first in his new role. I wish to
assure him of Croatia’s full support in his new position
and wish him every success in fulfilling his mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union. Here, I wish to make some additional
comments.
In December 2008, when the Council was
discussing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the then-High Representative, Miroslav Lajčák
(6033rd meeting), we warned that despite some important
progress that enabled Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign the

09-35192

Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union on 16 June 2008 — which was Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s first contractual relationship with the
European Union — the situation in that country had slid
under the radar and that new focus on the part of the
international community was urgently needed.
Today we note that the report (S/2009/246)
informs us that limited progress has been achieved in
the implementation of reforms in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including those necessary for transition
from the Office of the High Representative to the
European office. We are concerned at the High
Representative’s assessment of the current situation in
the country, where “anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional
order … has played the dominant role” in this reporting
period, “despite an effort by the three political leaders
to open a process of dialogue and compromise” (ibid.,
annex, enclosure, summary, first paragraph).
It has been our long-standing position that the
impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be overcome
only through a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue
that includes all three constituent peoples in the entire
territory of the country. This is closely linked with the
reforms needed to bring Bosnia and Herzegovina closer
to the path of integration with the European Union and
will also facilitate the fulfilment of the country’s other
international obligations. It is particularly important
that the dialogue on constitutional reforms intensify
under the reinvigorated and more focused guidance of
the international community and with additional and
firm support assured to the High Representative.
As we can see, Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing
considerable problems. Some are challenging its very
foundations as established by the Dayton Accords,
especially territorial integrity, and can only have a
detrimental effect on its future. However, by the same
token, it should be stressed that any constructive
engagement and any intention to improve the current
situation and remedy the fundamental problems that
support the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be welcomed and encouraged.
On this point we wish to reiterate that the
country’s stability depends on respect for the equal
rights of all three constituent peoples: Bosniacs,
Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian Croats. We have stated on
several occasions that there cannot be a Bosnia and
Herzegovina without the Croats in Bosnia and

13

S/PV.6130

Herzegovina. Their political and cultural survival is
vital for the future and survival of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as these two elements are closely
intertwined.
One needs to keep in mind the particular situation
of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the smallest
and most vulnerable group of the country’s three
nations. Their voice must be considered on the basis of
equality, both ethnic and civic, as guaranteed in the
Constitution and as stemming from the history of the
country. All three peoples — Bosniacs, Bosnian Serbs
and Bosnian Croats — must feel that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is their country, and they should feel safe
and protected over its entire territory. Their
fundamental rights and freedoms, as well as their civic
and ethnic rights, should be protected throughout, as
should be their right to return to their pre-war homes.
Another important factor in the normalization of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the fight
against impunity for war crimes committed. We wish to
stress that all fugitives from the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia who are still at
large must be arrested and transferred to The Hague as
soon as possible.
Finally, Croatia has always supported the clear
and unambiguous European perspective of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The future of all countries of Southeast
Europe belongs in the European Union, and we will do
our utmost to help our neighbours exercise this most
beneficial option for their overall development. That is
the biggest guarantee for sustainable peace, security
and prosperity for all the countries and people of
Southeast Europe.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset I wish to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative, and to thank
him for his briefing. As this is the first time he is
participating in a Security Council meeting since
taking office, we wish him every success in carrying
out the work entrusted to him. We also wish to
welcome Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We very much
appreciate his statement today.
In the almost 15 years since the signing of the
Dayton Agreement Bosnia and Herzegovina has
achieved significant progress on the difficult path
towards national reconstruction and reconciliation. The

14

citizens of the country, irrespective of their origin, are
hoping for a future of stability, development and peace.
That is why all the leaders of the country must
redouble their efforts to ensure compliance with the
pending commitments, maintain the path of dialogue
and negotiation to settle disagreements and avoid
actions that would imperil the stability and
constitutional framework of the country. All that would
be most acceptable to the international community.
The reforms that preceded the signing of the
Stabilization Agreement with the European Union last
June, the political accord signed in November by the
leaders of the three communities and the reforms that
made it possible for the Brcko District to be granted
access to the constitutional court demonstrate that it is
possible to achieve consensus on relevant topics and to
promote an agenda of reform. Nevertheless, the High
Representative notes that the political environment has
obstructed the work of State institutions and has
reduced the options for opening up the legislative
agenda. In light of the foregoing, we appeal to all the
parties to fully meet the five objectives and two
conditions established for the transition from the Office
of the High Representative to the European Union
Representative, and we call upon them to cooperate
fully with the High Representative.
We note with satisfaction the adoption of the
National War Crimes Strategy and the implementation
of action plans of the National Justice sector Reform
Strategy. These are positive advances in enhancing
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. In this regard, we would
like to reiterate that all parties must continue to
cooperate with the Tribunal in the effective discharging
of its mandate and, in particular, provide any relevant
information that would contribute to the arrest of the
accused in the pending cases under its jurisdiction.
We are concerned that, over the past few months,
a deterioration in freedom of expression has been
noted, in particular through an increase in reports of
incidents of aggression, death threats and other
violations of the rights of journalists. The legal
framework and the institutional structure must
therefore be strengthened as regards the promotion of
protection of human rights.
Another important aspect is compliance with
annex 7 of the Peace Agreement, which concerns a
strategy for the return of displaced persons and

09-35192

S/PV.6130

refugees by supporting the reconstruction of housing
and compensation for properties that cannot be restored
to the original owners. The authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with the support of the international
community, must adopt the necessary measures to
ensure the safe return of more than 100,000 displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin. This
must be a central focus for national reconciliation
efforts.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
country’s support for the work of the High
Representative and expressing the hope that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will manage to overcome its
differences and be able to build a democratic, multiethnic State, in which its citizens — along with those
of the entire Balkan area — will enjoy a more stable
and prosperous future as an integral part of Europe.
Mr. Du Xiacong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, for
his briefing and appreciates his efforts to promote the
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to today’s meeting and to thank him for
his statement.
In the past year Bosnia and Herzegovina has
continued to take positive steps in the field of
constitutional reform, the entrenchment of the rule of
law and ethnic harmony. The political process in the
country has continued to move ahead.
However, there are still destabilizing factors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The situation remains fragile
and sensitive. We express our concern in this regard.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We sincerely hope that all
parties will commit themselves to long-term peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
Balkan region and cooperate in good faith in
accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement to
advance the political process by making further
progress in the fields of government- and institutionbuilding, the reform of public administration,
constitutional reform and the entrenchment of the rule
of law, with a view to securing lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
China is pleased to see the prospects for the
gradual integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union. We believe the High Representative

09-35192

should continue his in-depth consultation with all
parties, as mandated by the Dayton Peace Agreement,
and prompt the political entities within Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take constructive measures and act in
unity in the process of joining the European Union so
as to make significant headway.
Meanwhile, we also welcome the important role
that the European Union continues to play in the
maintenance of security and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the advancement of economic and
social development in that country.
China will continue to support the High
Representative in his efforts to carry out his mandate
and is ready to join the rest of the international
community in providing the necessary assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to achieve lasting
peace, stability and development in that country.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I would like to
start by congratulating Mr. Valentin Inzko for his
assumption of his position as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and wishing him every
success in his important work. We thank him for his
comprehensive report (see S/2009/246) and insightful
briefing before the Council today. We also welcome
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Council
and thank him for his statement.
My delegation has closely followed the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
We therefore welcome the positive developments that
Mr. Inzko has identified in his report, most notably the
adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly of an amendment that incorporates the Brcko
District into the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution
and ensures its access to the constitutional court of the
country. We acknowledge the progress that the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have recorded in
an effort to meet the five objectives and two conditions
set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) to expedite the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to the European
Union (EU) Special Representative.
However, we are deeply concerned about the
mounting divisive and nationalistic rhetoric that
challenges the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the actions and statements
by some key actors that challenge the authority of the
High Representative and the PIC Steering Board.

15

S/PV.6130

Given the overall fragile political situation of the
country, we are preoccupied by the attempts by certain
circles to keep rolling back previous reforms and
undermine existing State-level institutions.
While reiterating the full support of Viet Nam for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we also note with concern
the recent attempt made by a certain institution to seek
the right to secession. This, in our view, really casts
doubt on its announced commitment to the rule of law
and impedes further progress towards the building of a
secure and stable multi-ethnic State. It also contravenes
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which states that no
entity has the right to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In the light of the ongoing political tension, it is
important for the major political parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to show their flexibility and willingness
to compromise so as to make real progress towards
important political issues. There is also a need for
Bosnian political leaders to translate the 8 November
agreement into concrete actions, including by
addressing the integration of those displaced persons
who cannot return and the issue of compensation for
property that cannot be restored to owners. All that is
even more essential in anticipation of next year’s
elections and potential ensuing problems, such as
possible heightened nationalistic rhetoric and reduced
space for compromise, to name just two.
Finally, we commend and support the important
role of the High Representative in facilitating the
implementation of the Dayton Accords and the
adoption of the individual requirements set forth in the
EU Partnership and its Stabilization and Association
Agreement. Viet Nam remains fully committed to
supporting the genuine common efforts of the
international community contributing to building a
secure, democratic and stable multiethnic State in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should first like to welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whom we would
also like to thank for his important statement. I should
also like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, who has just
assumed his new functions as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Special Representative of

16

the European Union, for introducing his report. We
wish him every success in his office.
We would also like to welcome the progress that
has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular since the signing of the Prud Agreement.
That reflects the willingness of political leaders to
reach compromise, in particular in the area of
constitutional and budgetary reform.
We nevertheless deplore certain extreme
nationalistic attitudes, which could jeopardize the
ongoing political momentum and even the very
foundations of the State. My country therefore strongly
supports every effort aimed at fully implementing the
Dayton Agreement, as well as the steps taken to
improve the functioning of State institutions. We urge
all political actors to work to safeguard the territorial
integrity of the country and to provide a secure and
stable democratic future for their citizens.
Moreover, it should be possible to find a just
solution to the issue of apportioning public goods
between the State and the various entities. We are
encouraged to note that the Council of Ministers has
already begun that process.
We are concerned by the difficult economic
situation in the country, which has been exacerbated by
the world economic and financial crisis, whose effects
threaten to undermine a political process that is already
fragile as a result of political tensions. It is also urgent
to increase economic integration among the country’s
main groups.
As we urge the international community to extend
its technical and financial support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we also call on the country’s political
leaders to facilitate the reforms necessary to improve
good governance and the country’s institutional
capacity.
We welcome the efforts that have been made to
entrench the rule of law, in particular the adoption, on
29 December 2008, of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
War Crimes Strategy, as well as the implementation of
the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy. Those
developments should have an impact on cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and, eventually, on dealing with various
issues as the Tribunal concludes its work.
There are also other reforms under way that will
have an impact in the economic, public administration

09-35192

S/PV.6130

and defence sectors. We hope that the problems
encountered in that regard will be speedily resolved so
that the country can resolutely embark upon European
integration and open itself up to even greater prospects.
Bosnia and Herzegovina must also make
altogether more meaningful progress in respecting
international human rights standards and press
freedoms and in the treatment of refugees and
minorities. Integration into European and international
institutions will depend upon improvements in that
regard.
In an unpredictable environment such as that in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, cooperation with NATO and
its Stabilization Force (SFOR), as well as between
EUFOR and European police, have been of crucial
importance not only in properly implementing reforms
in the defence and security sectors, but also and above
all in ensuring national security. Given the many
challenges that remain to be overcome, it is essential
that the international community, including the
Security Council, continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina along the path of recovery and national
reconstruction.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome back to the Council Prime Minister
Špirić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to thank him for his comments
today. I would also like to welcome High
Representative Inzko and congratulate him on the
assumption of his position. Let me take this
opportunity to thank the High Representative and his
staff for their hard work and dedication.
The United States is a friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and supports the aspirations of the
Bosnian people to enter Euro-Atlantic institutions. Our
support was demonstrated by the joint visit this month
of Vice President Biden and European Union High
Representative Solana. When he addressed the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
19 May, Vice President Biden expressed our
commitment to assist the Bosnian people to achieve
their dream. He also expressed our strong support for
the Office of the High Representative. We reiterate
those pledges today.
A good deal of progress has been made in Bosnia
and Herzegovina since the conflicts of the 1990s.
Prime Minister Špirić cited several examples today.
But we do remain deeply concerned about the situation

09-35192

there. As the High Representative’s report (see
S/2009/246) makes clear, some leaders and political
parties still pursue narrow ethnic interests and still
espouse zero-sum nationalism. By doing so, they
continue to impede progress on urgently needed
reforms that would help all of the country’s citizens.
Regrettably, we also continue to hear divisive
rhetoric. Those who purvey it seek to challenge the
High Representative’s authorities, which have been
confirmed by the Security Council, and even to
threaten Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which is enshrined in the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We are also witnessing efforts to
undermine the very State institutions that must be
strengthened if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to meet the
challenges of modern statehood and advance towards
membership in NATO and the European Union.
Let me cite one particularly egregious
example — the 14 May conclusions of the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, which falsely asserted that
many of the authorities of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including those explicitly granted by the
Dayton Constitution, were somehow illegally obtained.
As my Government noted when the Council met last
December to discuss this issue, and as Vice President
Biden said in his recent address to the Bosnian
Parliamentary Assembly, the United States will stand
behind the Office of the High Representative so long as
it remains in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will support
the transition of the High Representative’s Office to a
European Union special representative once the five
objectives and the two conditions of the agreed upon
reform agenda have been completed. The Peace
Implementation Council will consider statements and
actions that serve to undermine the Bosnian State when
it gauges whether the criteria for closing the Office of
the High Representative have been met.
Ambassador Inzko’s report rightly highlights a
bright spot that has been seen since our last meeting —
the enactment in March of the first amendment to the
Dayton Constitution to protect the multi-ethnic nature
of the Brcko District. The efforts that led to that
amendment, which grew out of the Prud process, offer
some cause for optimism, but while moving ahead with
additional reforms. We hope that this initiative will
translate as quickly as possible into actions that meet
the outstanding 5+2 requirements set by the Peace
Implementation Council.

17

S/PV.6130

The United States remains fully committed to
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based
on Dayton. We are also entirely committed to
supporting reforms that will allow that country to
achieve its aspirations for greater integration into the
structures of Europe and the Atlantic alliance. We urge
all Bosnian leaders to abandon the divisive nationalist
politics that have brought such suffering and sorrow in
the recent past, and we urge them to work across ethnic
lines towards the reforms required to advance the goals
that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina share.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I join others
in welcoming Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
our Council today, and thank him for his remarks. I
should like also to join others in welcoming the new
High Representative, Mr. Inzko, to the Security
Council for the first time, and thank him for his report
and briefing on the latest developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, if I may say so, were admirably
clear.
We note from the High Representative’s report
that there has been some progress against the five
objectives and two conditions set by the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) that, of
course, have to be met ahead of the closure of the
Office of the High Representative. The resolution of
the Brcko Final Award, the adoption of the National
War Crimes Strategy and the implementation of the
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy are all
welcome developments.
But overall, despite this, progress is slow. I am
afraid it is too slow. Despite the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement last year, we
remain concerned about the serious nature of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been
a few signs of flexibility and compromise from some
of the Bosnian leaders, notably developments in the
Prud process. However, overall progress on reform has
been disappointing. There are several areas where
progress is badly needed and could easily be achieved
if there were the necessary political will. I am thinking
of such areas as visa liberalization, banking
supervision, public procurement and State and defence
property.
At this pace and in this atmosphere, it seems
unlikely that the five objectives and two conditions can
be met in time for a positive decision at next month’s

18

meeting of the Steering Board of the PIC. I hope that
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina understand that
we are not going to negotiate on the five plus two
conditionality. As the PIC Steering Board agreed in
March, it is vital that all the five objectives be met and
that the two conditions be fulfilled before we move to
close the Office of the High Representative, and we
would like to achieve that as soon as possible.
We appreciate the High Representative’s efforts
on facilitating progress against the remaining two
objectives, and we are encouraged that the issues of
State and defence property have seen some movement.
We would ask the High Representative to continue his
efforts. Mr. Inzko is representing the entire
international community, and he has our backing even
when he is making difficult decisions. Recent
dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina, marked by
unhelpful nationalist rhetoric, are making it an even
more difficult context for his work.
The United Kingdom strongly supports Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s European perspective. We are
determined to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina as
partners, wherever possible, so that it can take its
rightful place in Europe, along with other countries of
the region. But if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to make
decisive progress down the path to integration with the
European Union (EU) and NATO — goals that
Mr. Špirić set out again today — the political culture in
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to change. The
country’s leaders must take opportunities to seek
common ground and recognize that ethnic maximalism
only leads to deadlock and the failure to achieve
collective aspirations.
Lastly, I wish to say just a word on the European
Union. We are continuing to plan carefully for the EU
presence after the Office of the High Representative is
brought to an end. We shall need a robust mandate for
that so that we are in the best possible position when
the moment for transition arrives. I am encouraged by
the progress that we have seen so far on the draft
mandate. It is worth noting that the EU Special
Representative will be the central point for the
international community’s engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but I would also note that the continued
participation of non-EU partners would help to
strengthen its role.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers

09-35192

S/PV.6130

of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him for his
statement. I also welcome Ambassador Valentin Inzko,
High Representative and European Union (EU) Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his briefing.
We are encouraged by the progress that has been
achieved towards meeting the requirements set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative, particularly the
adoption of a constitutional amendment incorporating
Brcko District into the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We welcome the progress that has been
achieved in the area of entrenchment of the rule of law
and acknowledge the efforts of the Bosnian authorities
to establish the new State-level police bodies, as
provided for in the police reform laws.
We note with appreciation that the European
Union military mission (EUFOR) continues to play an
important role in the overall security situation, in
cooperation with local law enforcement agencies. We
commend EUFOR for its support to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and its cooperation
with the Bosnian authorities on joint military affairs.
Uganda commends the High Representative for
his efforts in facilitating implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We urge all parties, including neighbours
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to uphold their commitments
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the spirit of good-neighbourliness and
peaceful coexistence, as enshrined in the United Nations
Charter.
We have noted the economic challenges facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as reflected in the report. In
particular, we are concerned about the funding deficit
that has impeded the Government’s capacity to cover
its obligations. In addition, we are concerned about the
registered unemployment rate, which was 41 per cent
in late 2008 and appears to be rising. We call upon the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus, with
support from their international partners, on addressing
this issue, which has serious implications for the
stability of the country.
Finally, we are concerned about the situation of
refugees and displaced persons. We call on the
authorities to address their plight with a view to
ensuring their early return and resettlement.

09-35192

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Security Council of Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We listened carefully to his assessment of the current
situation in his country.
We
thank
Mr.
Valentin
Inzko,
High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
report (see S/2009/246) submitted to the Security
Council on the development of events in that country.
At the same time, we cannot agree with its overall
tenor. The leitmotif of that document is one of
persisting tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
inability of the Bosnian authorities to meet the
challenges facing the country on their own. In our
opinion, this assessment is not objective.
The report is unwarranted in relegating to the
background an analysis of the dialogue among the
three leading national political parties of the country,
which — a fundamentally important factor — was
launched at their own initiative. We feel that this trend
is the most important in the period covered by the High
Representative’s report. Thanks to the constructive
disposition of the three, breakthroughs have been
achieved, including passage of the national budget
through Parliament at record speed. The adoption for
the first time of an amendment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Dayton-mandated Constitution, definitively
enshrining the status of the Brcko District pursuant to the
Award of the Arbitral Tribunal, is a key indicator of the
potential of the three to identify and implement
compromise solutions.
Incidentally, the substantial progress registered
recently in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the stabilization
of the situation and the implementation of the Peace
Agreement is graphically illustrated in the report of the
Government of the Republika Srpska on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I note that, in February this
year, the leadership of Republika Srpska brought that
report to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.
Too much attention is given in the report of the
High Representative to harsh rhetoric, using
descriptions such as “nationalistic” and “anti-Dayton”,
and in the process all the blame for it is placed on the
Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik.

19

S/PV.6130

Indeed he is sometimes wont to be outspoken, reacting
to the unremitting attacks on the Dayton constitutional
status of the Republika Srpska and persistent attempts
to abolish it, particularly by the Bosniac leader,
Mr. Siladjič. At the same time, the Serbian entity’s
leadership is not taking real actions that would run
counter to Dayton. Furthermore, the Republika Srpska
itself — if one considers its political, economic and
social situation — is a factor of stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, unlike the Federation. The report does
not take account of this important aspect and
emphasizes outside appearances.
We appeal to the High Representative to work
closely with the leaders of the leading political parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina so that at the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
(PIC) at the end of June in Sarajevo they can adopt a
joint statement on commitment to Dayton and
unconditional respect for its provisions. Such a step
would shift the focus of the Bosnian parties away from
sterile polemics towards the working out and
implementation of specific steps to resolve the pressing
financial and economic problems that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is facing, which the High Representative
rightly referred to in his report.
On the whole, we have developed the impression
that the High Representative apparatus is largely
operating by inertia and is not taking sufficient account
of the fundamentally new trends that have become
clearly apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent
months. We expect Mr. Inzko to bring to the activities
of his office more objectivity and impartiality and
direct it towards the future.
Qualitative changes in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have objectively increased the need for
reforming the international presences in the country.
Specifically, we are thinking of prompt implementation
of the 5+2 formula adopted by the PIC Steering Board,
that is, to resolve the only outstanding question of State
property. We expect that by June of this year the
Bosnian parties will have achieved agreement on the
problems pertaining to military property. By the end of
September, the process for apportioning State property
among the different levels of authority will, on the
whole, be completed. That will make it possible for the
PIC Steering Board to take, no later than October, a
definitive decision on the schedule for turning the High
Representative apparatus into a Special Representative
mission of the European Union.

20

We are ready for close interaction with the High
Representative, all interested partners in the
international community and the Bosnian parties in
completing these tasks.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.
Mr. Kruljević (Serbia): At the outset, I would
like to express my respect for His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Špirić, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I read very carefully the latest report
of the High Representative contained in document
S/2009/246 and listened to the statements made in the
Council today.
As a neighbouring country and one of the
guarantors of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia
continues to be committed to full respect for the
Agreement as a basis for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the whole region of the Western
Balkans. My country fully respects Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign State, with its two entities
and three constituent nations.
One of Serbia’s foreign policy priorities is
development of good-neighbourly relations and a
strong commitment to regional stability in the Western
Balkans. Serbia is working actively to promote the
stability of the entire region and considers respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States to
be of vital importance in that regard.
Regional cooperation is a way to resolve
differences through dialogue, not confrontation. We
therefore support the participation of all United
Nations Member States in Southeastern Europe in
various regional projects and initiatives. We also
welcome the continued participation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo on
behalf of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija, in accordance with Council resolution 1244
(1999). Europe has become a regional unifying force.
All of us share the same dedication to join the
European Union. It is Serbia’s central strategic priority.
As a signatory of the Dayton Agreement, Serbia
fully respects its obligations and firmly believes that its
consecutive implementation and strict compliance with

09-35192

S/PV.6130

its provisions are of paramount importance. It is our
view that the relations between the three constituent
nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be dealt
with by the international community with due attention
and mutual respect. Any reform should be carried out
in a way that it could contribute to Bosnia’s path
towards integration in the European Union.
Serbia supports all efforts towards stability,
democracy and the social and economic prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and welcomes all decisions
and solutions that are the result of a democratic
agreement between its three constituent nations —
Serbs, Bosniacs and Croats.
I would also like to reiterate the importance of
the commitment of all countries in the region to the
universal values in the areas of the rule of law and
human rights, as well as to respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and the fundamental principles of
international law. It is our firm belief that all those who
perpetrated heinous crimes during the tragic conflict in
our region must be brought to justice and that that is
the moral and political duty of all countries that have
been affected. Serbia continues to make efforts in that
regard and towards full cooperation with International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
Let me start by welcoming the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko in his capacity of High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union and thanking him for his report (see
S/2009/246) and briefing on the latest developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Nikola Špirić, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since the signing of the Stabilisation and
Association
Agreement
between
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina and the European Union a year ago, some
progress has been made by Bosnia and Herzegovina.

09-35192

The European Union welcomes the adoption of an
amendment to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution providing Brcko District with access to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court.
Further reform priorities, such as the National Justice
Sector Reform Strategy, continue to be implemented.
The National War Crimes Strategy was adopted in
December 2008. The European Union also welcomes
the provisional agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). We hope that the conditions set by the IMF will
be implemented in a constructive manner and without
delay, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities
will take all necessary and effective measures to
counter the repercussions of the global economic and
financial crisis.
Despite some positive developments, many
challenges remain. Nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric
challenging the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina
undermines efforts of its political leaders to find
common language and compromise. State institutions
have made inadequate progress in relation to European
Union reforms. Therefore, we call upon local political
leaders to engage thoroughly and with stronger
determination on the reform agenda in order for the
country to make substantial progress towards EU
accession. Membership in the EU of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single and integral State remains the
ultimate goal, which will serve the stability,
reconciliation and the future not only of that country,
but also of the whole region of the Western Balkans.
The European Union fully supports and is ready
for the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to the reinforced Office of the EU
Special Representative, which includes increasing local
ownership after the five objectives and two conditions
set by the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board are met in full. We urge the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to maximize efforts to deliver
the remaining objectives — the acceptable and
sustainable solution to the state and defence property
issues — and to achieve full compliance with the
second condition: a positive assessment of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina based on full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement.
We also consider the full cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to be a priority, as

21

S/PV.6130

well as an important element in the country’s
association process with the European Union, in line
with international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The European Union is actively involved in
promoting stability in the whole Western Balkans
region. The security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. EU-led police and
military missions continue to provide reassurance and
play an important stabilization role in the country.
The European Union remains committed to
assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach its ultimate
goal of full integration into European structures. We
fully support the work of the High Representative and
EU Special Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and his
Office — and of Mr. Miroslav Lajčák before him — in
their endeavours to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the path towards European Union integration.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the
floor to Mr. Inzko to respond to the questions and
comments raised.
Mr. Inzko: I wish to cordially thank you, Sir, and
everybody for their support and for all of their input,
ideas, suggestions, analysis and kind words of
welcome to me in my new function. I also thank
Council members for their offers to continuously
cooperate with me and with my Office.
I also thank the Council for its support on the
ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the Peace
Implementation Council, the Contact Group, the
European Union military mission, the police mission and
other configurations, including past European Union
presidencies, the current Czech Presidency and the future

presidencies of Sweden and Spain. I also thank all
neighbouring States for their support.
As far as the statement of Prime Minister Špirić
is concerned, two sentences caught my attention. First,
Mr. Špirić said that imposing a system of governance
by international organizations would not be legally
valid. Secondly, he said that democracy and the rule of
law cannot develop if principles of democracy and the
rule of law are not observed by the international
community.
Those are quite serious allegations, but believe
me, I do not take it personally because I have been in
Bosnia for only two months. But I must protect my
predecessors — Carl Bildt, Carlos Westendorp, Wolfgang
Petritsch, Lord Ashdown, Christian Schwarz-Schilling
and Miroslav Lajčák — who did an excellent job based
on the Dayton Peace Agreement and on the decisions of
the Security Council, which gave full support to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. In that
respect, I will not accept any challenges to the Dayton
Agreement and I think this should stop. It is exactly such
rhetoric and such allegations that have delayed the closure
of the Office of the High Representative.
In any case, I am still optimistic and I think that
based on the next meetings of the Peace Implementation
Council at the end of June and in October, we will be able
to report further progress.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Inzko for the clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22

09-35192
