A /69/PV.63

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

63rd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 3 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Masood Kahn
(Pakistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family
Agenda item 26
Social development
b) Social development, including questions relating
to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family
The Acting President: This meeting is being held
in accordance with resolution 68/136, of 18 December
2013, and serves to discuss the role of family-oriented
policies in the elaboration of the post-2015 development
agenda.
I shall now deliver a statement on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly.
“I am pleased to address the Assembly today as
we gather to observe the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family.
“Over the past two decades, the international
community has recognized the importance of
families in development efforts and shared global
concern over their well-being. That concern has
been expressed in human rights instruments, in
outcomes of major conferences and summits and in
resolutions of the General Assembly itself.

“The International Year of the Family,
proclaimed and celebrated by the General Assembly,
helped raise awareness of family issues among
Member States. The Year promoted knowledge of
socioeconomic and demographic trends affecting
families. It also stimulated efforts to respond to
challenges facing families through effective public
policies. Following up on the achievements of the
International Year, subsequent General Assembly
resolutions recommended specific actions to
ensure that families were both participants in
and beneficiaries of development efforts. The
resolutions recognized that families are often
challenged to provide economic and emotional
support to their members.
“Maintaining
strong
intergenerational
connections in an increasingly mobile and
competitive world is another difficulty faced by
many families, as is the struggle to balance work
and household commitments. In that context,
families need effective support through public
policies and programmes. That is the responsibility
of national Governments, in partnership with civil
society, the private sector and families themselves.
“Preparations for the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family have recognized
those challenges and focused on three major
themes, namely, confronting family poverty and
social exclusion, ensuring work-family balance and
advancing social integration and intergenerational
solidarity. The General Assembly has recommended
action on all three areas and recognized that

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-66387 (E)

*1466387*

A/69/PV.63

anti-poverty policies and programmes targeting
family units, such as conditional and unconditional
cash transfers and child allowances, contribute to
overall poverty reduction. Decent jobs and workfamily balance policies are essential not only for
economic well-being and children’s development,
but for gender equality as well. Policies promoting
intergenerational support and exchanges are
essential for bringing generations together. We
must do more to encourage social and economic
policies that meet the needs of families, especially
those that are most vulnerable. We must also ensure
opportunities for family members and help them
meet their social responsibilities, for the young and
old alike.
“As Assembly members may know, gender
equality and women’s empowerment is a key priority
for this year’s General Assembly session and will
be the subject of a high-level thematic debate that
the President will convene on 6 March next year. In
that regard, greater effort must be geared towards
enlisting all family members in the struggle for
gender equality and women’s empowerment. Such
values have their roots in the home when girls and
boys are treated equally and provided the same
educational opportunities. Raising boys to respect
their mothers and sisters leads to societies where
women are treated respectfully, not just in practice
but under the law as well. Recently the “HeForShe”
campaign was launched, which recognizes the
importance of involving men in the fight for
gender equality. That important campaign further
solidifies the integral role of boys and men in
achieving gender equality.
“Myriad development goals, including those
that address poverty and hunger, inequality,
education and health, require greater focus on
families. Policies that focus on families can greatly
contribute to the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, and should be advanced
further. As the world looks ahead to the formulation
of the post-2015 development agenda, let us not
forget about the vital role of families in our societies
of today as well as of tomorrow.”
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Ms. Schlyter (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
2/18

03/12/2014

The European Union and its member States attach
great importance to family-related issues. As far back
as 1989, the European Commission published its first
communication on family policies, followed by a
number of important actions addressing such issues
as parental leave, reconciling family and work life and
improving the living conditions of vulnerable families.
We recognize the crucial role of parents, caregivers
and families in improving outcomes for children and
young people, the important role of families concerning
responsibility and care for the elderly and the need to
provide support for families to do so. We share the view
of many in the Hall about the valuable contribution
that families make to strengthening our societies,
and the need to develop policies to support their role.
Indeed, our aspirations for a transformative post-2015
development agenda cannot be realized without the
engagement of people through all levels of society,
including at the level of families.
But for those policies to be successful, they must
also be inclusive. Across the EU, as in the rest of the
world, families have changed and continue to change
with time, thereby illustrating the fact that a family is a
living, dynamic entity. In that regard, we believe that we
must all continue to recognize this diversity, as we did
at the various United Nations conferences and summits
of the 1990s and in their follow-up processes, and that
our ongoing policy discussion and development should
similarly continue to reflect the diversity of family
forms.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Prőhle (Hungary): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to take this opportunity to give a short
summary of Hungary’s standpoint regarding the role of
family policy in the post-2015 development period.
One of the key issues of the coming years is that
of sustainability, which does not apply only to the
environment but to our societies as well. Without a
sustainable population, no long-term development goal
can be accomplished. Therefore, we believe it is crucial
that we reinforce the part of the community that forms
the basis of the society: the family, where children are
brought up, family values and knowledge are passed
down and children are taught to be responsible and
good citizens and how to live with others.
When considering the complex question of
demography, we must be aware of those differing
14-66387

03/12/2014

tendencies that characterize different parts of the
world. While certain areas combat overpopulation,
others, including Europe, and therefore Hungary,
face an increasing rate of ageing. That fact prompts
us to do everything in our power to ensure future
subsistence and development by supporting the birth
of children, providing them with the possibility for
healthy development in both body and mind and the
opportunity for education so that as active citizens they
might contribute to society’s lasting sustainability and
progress. The family is the best basis for achieving those
objectives. Therefore, the Hungarian Government’s
policy will continue to place families in the mainstream
in the coming years.
The goal and principles of Hungary’s family policy
are also defined in our fundamental law. Hungary
protects the institution of marriage as the union of a
man and a woman, established by voluntary decision,
and the family as the basis of the survival of the nation.
Family ties are based on marriage and the relationship
between parents and children. Hungary encourages the
commitment to have children and protects the life of
the fetus from the moment of conception. Our act on the
protection of families also states that family protection
and the reinforcement of family welfare is a task shared
by the State, local Governments, non-governmental
organizations, media providers and businesses. We
also count on the participation of churches in achieving
those objectives.
The commitment to family values and marriage
does not mean that we judge those who feel that
marriage or having children is not for them. At the same
time, I believe that it is unnecessary to fear standing by
our Christian values, which are part of the Abrahamic
religious tradition. As Archbishop Bruno Forte said,
our family tradition is deeply human and is never
against anyone, but it is for the dignity and beauty of
life of all people and all of society.
Long-term security and a solid framework is
required for a person to live a good and happy life. A
number of researchers have confirmed that married
people are happier and live longer lives. In families
based on marriages, health indicators are better and
more children are born whose life and career prospects
are better, which is also a crucial condition for the
development of both society and the economy.
The fact that there are families functioning
incorrectly — failed marriages, financial and
employment difficulties, sicknesses, violent acts

A/69/PV.63

and other hardships that require solutions, help or
support — does not override the basic truth of the
family’s role and its significance, but requires a safety
net from the wider community. Hungary wishes to weave
this safety net around the family, while safeguarding
the autonomy of families, the individual’s freedom of
choice and decision regarding the framework of his or
her life.
It is our conviction that in the post-2015 period the role
of families in the sustainable development of the world
will not diminish. Indeed, local communities consisting
of strong families should be given an increasingly
significant role. Beyond the incontrovertible rights of
individuals, society and the State should grant families
the right to protection consistent with the spirit of the
international documents on families adopted in recent
decades under the authority of the United Nations and
expressing the agreement of peoples.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlSaloom (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Sam Kutesa,
President of the General Assembly, for having
introduced this important item into the agenda of the
General Assembly.
We would like to congratulate the international
community on the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family. We have considered
document A/69/61, on the preparations for and
observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family in 2014 at the
national, regional and international levels. It reflects
the important initiatives adopted by States on the
implementation of various family policies. We would
like to thank Governments, the United Nations and
civil society for having put together those policies.
The international community has acknowledged
the importance of policies and programmes aimed at
the family, as the family is the main unit in society and
the very foundation of social development. The family
therefore is of primordial importance with respect to
education and health care, which protect it from being
scattered, for society could not succeed without a
cohesive family unit. We therefore need strategies for
the well-being of the family that will have an impact on
the well-being of society as a whole.
The implementation of policies for the family will
benefit children and will improve the gender balance.

14-663873/18

A/69/PV.63

Kuwait attaches great importance to the family and
its role in society. According to article IX of our
Constitution, the family is the foundation of society
on the basis of religion, morality and love of country.
Those provisions enhance family relationships with
respect to women and children. Furthermore, law No.
31 of 2008 requires that certain tests be administered
before a marriage takes place in order to ensure that
generations are protected from disease. In addition,
a draft bill has been introduced in Parliament for the
creation of a family court, as it is not appropriate to
consider family problems together with other problems
such as criminal matters. Each province in our country
will soon have a special court for the family where a
psychological adviser will be available to the court in
order to address family problems.
With regard to children, of the many policies enacted
to preserve the rights of the child and acknowledge
in advance the cases of abuse and violence, we have
taken into consideration a whole range of problems,
but particularly those related to minors. As to disabled
persons, we have provided the right environment, in
the form of a special club for the disabled, so that they
can engage in sports activities, and we have set up a
special unit for them. The law provides for a number
of privileges for them in order to integrate them into
society as a whole, so that they have a well-balanced
access to general services like everyone else.
Kuwait is very proud of the successes of its
handicapped athletes on the international scene, of
whom the most recent example is Tariq Alqallaf, a
disabled person who earned three gold medals in fencing
at the Virginia international paralympic competition.
Finally, the State is providing health care and
housing to those who are 65 years of age or older,
who represented more than 3.3 per cent of the general
population in 2012, and 3.55 per cent in 2013.
We would like to reiterate our appeal to Member
States to spare no effort in order to attain the objectives
of the International Year of the Family and to provide
programmes that enhance national capabilities with
regard to the family. Kuwait asks the international
community to give priority to family strategies,
particularly for the young, the elderly and the disabled,
with specific regard to the post-2015 development
agenda. We support the draft resolution introduced by
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on this
item.

4/18

03/12/2014

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The United Nations International Year of the
Family, established in 1994, is of definite and ongoing
significance. It is encouraging that the twentieth
anniversary of the event has become a catalyst for an
active discussion on the role and place of the family as
the key institution for society in the process of global
social development.
On many occasions, the Secretary-General has
noted the importance of the international community’s
action in expanding the rights and opportunities
of the family, in overcoming generational poverty,
social exclusion and inequality, in achieving a balance
between family and work and in strengthening the ties
of intergenerational support. We fully support those
aspirations.
Support for the institution of the family is part of
the United Nations social priorities. That objective is
inextricably linked to achieving the strategic objectives
of ensuring gender equality and expanding the rights
and opportunities of women. It is also linked to the
global community’s efforts to encourage and protect the
rights of children. One of the important prerequisites
for social stability is strengthening the institution of the
family — an equal union of a man and a woman.
Many people in today’s world share those
approaches. In June, at its twenty-sixth session, the
Human Rights Council adopted a resolution entitled
“Protection of the family”, once again reaffirming that
“the family is the natural and fundamental group
unit of society and is entitled to protection by
society and the State”. (Human Rights Council
resolution 26/11, eighth preambular paragraph)
Very recently, on 20 November, the ministerial
declaration of the Asian and Pacific Conference on
Gender Equality and the Women’s Empowerment
was adopted in Bangkok. It spoke in particular of the
“critical and equal role of women and men in the family
as the building block of society”. That provision carries
even more weight in the sense that the declaration
reflects the opinion of the representatives of a region
with the largest number of people and families on the
planet.
An important step in supporting the institution
of the family was taken in Russia in August this year

14-66387

03/12/2014

with the adoption of a concept paper for a Government
family policy up to 2025. The goals of the concept
paper are to provide support, strengthen and protect
the family and family values, establish the necessary
conditions for the family to function, improve the
quality of family life and ensure the rights of family
members during their social development. The State in
fact has an obligation to share with families the risks
associated with childbirth and child-rearing, thereby
assuming the function of a partner and helping parents
protect their children from poverty and want.
We are implementing a wide range of practical
measures to that end, including a national programme
of one-time subsidies for the birth of second and
subsequent children. Multi-child families receive
a number of significant social benefits, including
discounted public services and free public transit. In
many regions, those families are allocated no-cost
parcels of land for construction of individual residences.
The strength and well-being of the traditional
family, as the cornerstone of social harmony, is critical.
Therefore, we regard the strengthening of the family’s
social functions and intergenerational solidarity, as
well as the recognition of traditional family and ethical
values, as important factors in promoting the sustainable
development of our country in the long-term.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the President of the General
Assembly and you, Sir, for organizing this plenary
meeting on the observance of the twentieth anniversary
of the International Year of the Family and to discuss
the role of the family and family policies in the post2015 development agenda.
As we observe the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family, we have a unique
opportunity to highlight efforts to further the welfare
and the role of the family in promoting development and
the environment and in protecting the family. Although
the role of the family and the need to provide assistance
and satisfy its needs have been widely acknowledged,
great challenges persist, including poverty and the
need to balance work and family life, especially given
the negative impact of the international financial and
monetary crises. Today, we wish to underscore the
dire need for strategies, policies and comprehensive
programmes focused on the family to meet the needs

A/69/PV.63

of all its members, especially strategies to overcome
poverty and promote family and intergenerational
values.
We attach primary importance to the protection
of, and respect for, the family, which constitutes the
basic unit of societies, as well as to providing all kinds
of support to, and creating an enabling environment
for, families. That could be reflected clearly through
policies that promote family well-being and the
upbringing of children and that take the work-family
balance into account and provide decent work.
We have adopted policies and enacted legislation in
that regard. Our constitution includes a provision that
stipulates the need to strengthen links among family
members. We have also adopted a comprehensive
strategy covering the period 2011 to 2016 that identifies
the family as the main component. In addition, the
Doha International Family Institute has been making
every effort to promote the family and to facilitate the
adoption of policies that promote family members and
protect the family. Last April, the Institute also played
a major part in highlighting the role of family as part
of the celebrations of the observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family. In
2004, as part of the observance of the tenth anniversary
of the Year, Qatar hosted the Doha International
Conference on the Family, and we have been developing
relevant policies over the past decade.
The family has great potential to promote
development, given that it is the key unit and the major
promoter of sustainable development. It should be part
and parcel of the post-2015 agenda. Gender equality and
respect for human rights and the fundamental rights
of family members are some of the main elements of
the well-being of families. We would like to stress
our unchanging position with regard to promoting the
family and its values.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): An extraterrestrial
paying a short visit to this planet, with a tight schedule
that allows only enough time to visit the United
Nations, may get a fairly incomplete idea about the
current human perspective on the family. On the one
hand, the extraterrestrial may certainly notice that the
United Nations is getting together to observe, if not to
celebrate, the twentieth anniversary of the International
Year of the Family. It should notice that the moral

14-663875/18

A/69/PV.63

beacons of freedom for humankind — the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights — state clearly
that the family is the natural and fundamental group
unit of society and is entitled to protection by society
and the State. It could also not fail to observe that the
norms of international law continue to recognize only
the natural family, based on marriage between men and
women of legal age and aimed at procreating children.
Yet many important things may escape the
inquisitive eye of the alien. Looking at the world
exclusively through the lens of United Nations
documents, the extraterrestrial may overlook the fact
that some national Governments regard the notion
of the sanctity of the family and marriage as dated.
It be oblivious to the increasing number of national
Governments that, by their actions, call into question
the validity of the maxims of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, especially with regard to the family
and the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion
and belief — effectively no longer regarding them as
sacrosanct or tenable. The extraterrestrial might depart
from Earth unaware of the true depth of our world’s
collective confusion, and that, were it not today, those
otherwise united countries most probably would not
have agreed on establishing an International Year of
the Family.
Of course, discussing the role of family-oriented
and family-centred policies is important. Yet this
discussion runs the risk of becoming marginal if, here
at the United Nations, we continue to remain cautiously
silent about the real challenge the institution of the
family faces today. What I intend to say may sound
harsh, yet, as someone coming from a part of the world
that was engaged in extensive social experimentation
and engineering in the twentieth century, often with
very tragic results, I feel I have a moral obligation to
be blunt in sharing my point of view with Assembly
members.
This challenge to the family is an attempt to
blur the moral points of reference that the family
has traditionally provided. The challenge posed is
an attempt to apply the absolute of homocentrism to
redefining the role of the family in society.
Apparently, significant strides in human
liberation over past decades have tempted some
Governments to test the limits of the possible with
regard to the family. Even in name, some of our most
honourable initiatives — such as the Rights Up Front
6/18

03/12/2014

campaign — inadvertently reveal our growing sense of
entitlement to as many rights and freedoms as we can
claim, often at the expense of our sense of responsibility
for the state of our natural and social environment. Yet,
as we all know, human wants and needs are endless.
Where do we stop? When do we understand that not
everything that can be done should be done? Just as we
have to learn to live on our planet without destroying
it, we have to learn to respect the fragility of our social
environment.
It goes without saying that we have to exert our
utmost to prevent the mistreatment, harassment and
persecution of our fellow human beings on the grounds
of their otherness — be it race, ethnicity, religion or sex.
Yet the success of that effort can be easily subverted
by a “cavalry attack” charging over the precipice,
demanding the impossible. While having every reason
to go “all out” in preventing negative discrimination
in our society, we have to be twice as careful about
the need for “positive discrimination” of concepts we
choose to propagate, of the trends and mores we want to
encourage. In a tragic ironic twist of fate, the surrender
to extreme permissiveness in one part of the world
reverberates in another part of the world in an upsurge
of extreme animosity and hate. It does indeed recall the
principle of communicating vessels.
Unless, in our decision-making, we manage to
strike the right balance between rights advocacy,
on the one hand, and a clear sense of responsibility,
moderation and restraint, on the other, we may risk
rupturing the fabric of our society. That is already
happening in family matters in the opinion of hundreds
of millions of concerned people all over the world. Take
a look at the family: by dint of its very existence and
foundation it provides invaluable guidelines about the
ways of living in this world sustainably and responsibly.
Besides being a source of empowerment, protection and
encouragement, a loving and caring family instils in its
members a clear sense of the limits, an understanding
of the boundaries of the acceptable, the very notion of
the golden mean and moderation.
Today Belarus presents its perspective on the
family openly and firmly. We strongly believe in the
sanctity of the traditional family, and we intend to
make every effort to uphold its values and role in social
life at the United Nations. We call upon all concerned
Member States to be vocal and strong in defending the
family values we cherish. Today the family badly needs
our protection. It is an uphill battle that will not be won

14-66387

03/12/2014

by our silence or by avoiding an inconvenient subject.
To rely solely on the protective power of the wording of
existing international and national instruments would
also be a weak strategy. One can ride out a storm, but
the only viable response to the current challenge to the
institution of the family, including here at the United
Nations, is engagement in debate, action and advocacy.
We have to provide the family with the best support
from the State by giving it the priority it deserves in
our political and social strategies. We should make
strengthening of the family one of the key sustainable
development goals. Some say in response: “Let us
not overemphasize this delicate issue beyond paying
traditional lip service to the problem; this is not
a big deal. Let the social innovators deal with the
consequences of their actions within their national
borders. Let us not touch that Pandora’s box.” Well,
the box is no longer sealed. May no one be lulled into
thinking that national borders provide immunity to the
corruptible influence of relativism on family matters.
We all know that in the age of globalization no border
is impermeable — not in matters not requiring a visa
to cross that border. Whether we admit it or not, the
truly civilizational gap in the way that the family and
its role in society are understood today has not just been
charted, it is deepening.
Twenty years after the International Year of the
Family was established, we stand at a crossroads. We
can either watch the foundations of the family being
destroyed and traditional family values sacrificed in
the name of artificial social constructs — all under
the guise of the protection of human rights — or we
can raise our voice in defence of the natural family, in
defence of motherhood and fatherhood as inalienable
attributes of the human self.
It is not at all common for people around the world
to follow the day-to-day activities of the United Nations
with bated breath. Yet our action or inaction on the
family at the United Nations will be one of the rare
occasions when the world really will be watching.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Today’s
meeting, which marks the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family, draws attention
to critical family-related issues and the need to
reinforce a comprehensive family-centred approach
to global development. The institution of the family

A/69/PV.63

is the basic unit of society and embodies the core
foundation of spiritual values for the development and
prosperity of any nation. The lessons learned from the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
clearly proves that no significant strides can be made
in eradicating poverty, promoting education, reducing
infant and maternal mortality, as well as halting the
intergenerational transfer of poverty and inequality,
unless the family is given the highest priority. We
therefore commend the integration of crucial familyrelated issues into the outcomes of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, as reflected
in almost all of its vital goals. In that regard, my
delegation particularly endorses the recommendations
of the Secretary-General pertaining to family
empowerment as an important tool in fighting poverty,
social exclusion and inequalities.
In addition, we encourage the Commission for
Social Development to establish an appropriate followup mechanism for the observance of the International
Year of the Family in order to guide national policy
development. The family agenda should therefore
be significantly advanced at the international
level in a coordinated and systematic way. Thus, a
comprehensive review associated with the observance
of the International Year of the Family promotes
learning lessons, adopting best national policies and
monitoring the progress achieved at the national and
regional levels.
In that regard, Kazakhstan wishes to share its
experience of contributing to the global review process.
This year, Kazakhstan adopted its comprehensive
Strategy 2050 and the corresponding new economic
policy — the Nyrly Zhol, or Path to the Future — both
of which were presented by President Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan at his two latest state-of-the-union
addresses. Those two documents aim to attain enhanced
social standards focused on poverty eradication
and earmarked social protection through improved
education and high-quality health care, especially
for persons with disabilities, the elderly, mothers and
children. High priority is thereby given to healthful
nutrition and a positive lifestyle. Measures will also
be undertaken to modernize labour, employment and
wage policies by enacting new laws and models of
labour relations. At the same time, services will meet
intellectual and information needs. The social sector
gains predominance in the strategies of the national
development of Kazakhstan. The new housing policy
and infrastructure will revise the current rental housing

14-663877/18

A/69/PV.63

practices and construct social housing with low interestrate mortgages to make housing more affordable for
various strata of the population, including young
families.
My Government will also increase its funding
by an additional $1 billion during 2015-2016. An
amount of $110 million will be allocated to address
the problems related to inadequate schooling and the
three-shift educational system. Ten institutions of
higher education have been designated to ensure firm
links among science, the various economic sectors and
personnel training, with $55 million earmarked from
now through 2017.
The Government has also elaborated a sound
programme of family development through its
specialized National Commission on Gender and Family
Demographic Policy, established 20 years ago. The
Commission has been updating pertinent legislation
and evaluating State plans, strategies and policies to
improve the protection of children, reproductive health
and the prevention, treatment and rehabilitation from
diseases and serious medical conditions. The national
plan of action for improving the status of women and
the strategy on gender equality will strengthen the role
of the family in society with gender equality as its key
element.
Demographic stimulation is envisaged through
maternity and child-care allowances. Likewise, social
risks will be minimized by increased benefits from
the State social insurance fund in cases of income lost
due to pregnancy or childbirth, and for the adoption of
newborn children, for childcare until 1 year of age and
for financial allowances for parents and caregivers of
children with disabilities.
Last year, by a presidential decree, a day of the
family was established in Kazakhstan, aimed at
enhancing the role of the family and family traditions.
The day was celebrated with numerous family events
and educational programmes. Separate mothers’ and
fathers’ councils were established in close cooperation
with civil society organizations. In addition, the National
Commission plans to initiate family academies in every
subregion of the country to unite and coordinate familyrelated non-governmental organizations. The currently
operating 28 crisis centres will also pay attention to
preventing domestic violence and assisting with family
rehabilitation and skills training through increased
budgetary provisions.

8/18

03/12/2014

In conclusion, Kazakhstan is committed to
work with the international community to share its
experience and to learn the best practices of Member
States to protect and promote family values to ensure
stronger and more stable societies.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Monaco.
Mrs. Bruell-Melchior (Monaco) (spoke in
French): At a time when we are preparing to define our
development goals for the next 15 years, we all have
recognized the importance of focusing our attention on
the human being and on aiming for inclusive development.
Families are the most faithful reflection, daily, of the
strengths and weaknesses of action taken on matters
of social protection and sustainable development, and
they offer a unique perspective for the definition of our
next development paradigm. Therefore, my country’s
Government ascribes to the family a particular role in
our societies. As the basic building block of society,
the family is a natural unit capable of promoting social
development and the implementation of policies as part
of a development strategy framework that favours an
integrated approach. The family unit must contribute to
the transmission of values based on respect for others,
gender equality and the rights of children. It assumes,
among other things, the primary responsibility for the
development, education and socialization of children.
The observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family should be an opportunity
to formulate general policies capable of optimizing the
role of the family. Reconciling professional work life
and family life must be a priority, especially to ensure
the flourishing and well-being of all its members. In
our Principality, the Government ensures that women
can enjoy adequate social protection so that they can
achieve a better balance between their private lives
and their professional lives through the granting of
maternity leaves, the allocation of family subsidies and
the flexible planning of work schedules. In general, the
services offered include housing assistance; parental
leave, notably, maternity, paternity and adoption leaves;
and access to nurseries and day care and home care for
sick children.
Those services are complemented by further
allocation of subsidies to all families, in particular to
low-income, single-parent or young-couple families
or those with special needs or people with disabilities.
Those policies also extend to the elderly, who can

14-66387

03/12/2014

benefit according to their needs from medical and social
assistance or to a temporary convalescent home after a
hospital stay. To preserve the family unit, retirement
homes welcome couples and take in residents who are in
declining health; that stability is very much appreciated
by families already being tested.
With the many challenges we face, Member States
should invest in empowering the family so that it becomes
an important tool in the fight against poverty. We must
keep in mind that families, as basic units of social life,
are important agents of sustainable development at all
levels of society. The contribution of the family to the
new post-2015 development framework is essential to
effectively and successfully combat poverty.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Egypt believes that the
traditional family is the natural and fundamental
core unit of society. The family has the primary
responsibility for nurturing and protecting children,
ensuring that they grow up in a family environment and
enabling them to fully and harmoniously develop their
personalities in an atmosphere of happiness, love and
understanding. That healthy family environment cannot
be achieved without the total engagement of States and
societies in protecting the family. Egypt emphasizes
that family issues should be given the attention they are
due in accordance with each country’s laws, traditions
and religious background. All cultures and traditions
respect the family as the main unit of society and the
guardian of children’s rights.
During the deliberations of the Third Committee,
Egypt was disappointed with the attempts of some
Member States to introduce notions of gender identity
and issues of sexual orientation into draft resolutions
concerning the family and children and to impose those
notions on other Member States. Egypt rejects such
attempts for a number of reasons.
The first is that such notions of gender identity and
sexual orientation are neither universally acceptable nor
reflected in any international human rights instruments
negotiated and adopted by consensus.
The second is that they are counterproductive
and likely to have a negative impact on the concept of
family that we are celebrating today.
The third is that imposing those notions, which are
rejected by Egypt and many other Member States, as

A/69/PV.63

well as a broad spectrum of civil society organizations,
sets a negative precedent for the work of the United
Nations and contravenes the principle of the Charter
of the United Nations of non-intervention in Member
States’ internal affairs.
The fourth is that those notions run counter to
the provisions of many universal instruments, among
them the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, particularly the provisions
of the latter that concern a child’s right to an identity.
Egypt fully respects the human rights of all
individuals on its territories, without discrimination
based on colour, origin, sex, religion or ideology. Egypt
has equal respect for the choices of other Member States
based on their national cultures, laws and religions, and
expects reciprocity.
Egypt urges Member States to abandon such
controversial notions and to be practical in dealing
with family issues. While we are preparing a new post2015 development agenda, our main focus should be on
developing family-oriented policies and providing the
relevant education, housing and health-care services,
with an intergenerational approach. Many families are
still living in abject poverty. Our main objective should
be to support those families, especially their members
who are vulnerable women and children.
In conclusion, let us collectively pursue familyoriented development programmes and refrain from
attempting to change other Member States’ social and
cultural patterns. Let us all work for our children’s
welfare according to each country’s social and cultural
patterns and understanding of the family. Let us help
every family to raise its children within a normal
environment while safeguarding their innocence and
ensuring that it is not disturbed by controversial notions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Ordoñez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to commend the President for convening this
plenary meeting and for giving us this opportunity to
discuss the role of family policies in the preparation
of the post-2015 development agenda. This meeting
is particularly timely, since we have reached a crucial
moment in defining the development agenda and taking
decisive steps in the preparation of the draft final
document that our Heads of State and Government will
adopt next year.

14-663879/18

A/69/PV.63

Colombia’s Constitution enshrines the notion that
families have their own collective rights as well as a
shared responsibility for ensuring the rights of their
individual members. We have therefore developed and
begun to implement policies enabling us to strengthen
the family as an institution and ensure its comprehensive
development as a fundamental unit of society.
In 2014, as we mark the twentieth anniversary of
the International Year of the Family, Colombia believes
we should take advantage of the occasion to enhance
the family’s role in promoting sustainable development,
strengthening
intergenerational
solidarity
and
furthering the recognition, protection and attention
to the specific needs of the various forms that the
family takes. In that regard, Colombia sees the role
of the family in the post-2015 development agenda as
based on recognizing it as an agent for sustainable
development and a key player in implementing the post2015 development agenda.
That is particularly important in view of the
fact that the agenda should promote the possibility
that families and their members can fully enjoy and
exercise such rights as those of decent, good-quality
work with a fair income, full health and social security,
equal-opportunity education, the protection of family
assets, mutual respect among family members and
gender equality, among others. Those are all goals cited
in the report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals (A/69/970), which forms the
fundamental basis for the post-2015 development
agenda of the United Nations. We must therefore work
to advance the development of an agenda that will help
to empower the family and its members in dealing
with sustainable development and in turn will enable
them to participate in implementing the results of our
deliberations in 2015.
Achieving the goals we have set ourselves for the
post-2015 development agenda requires policies that
take account of the family’s evolution as an institution
and meet the specific needs it is facing. As recent
debates in negotiations in the Third Committee,
the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Population and Development, among
others, have shown, reaching an international consensus
on the best way to address family-related issues is not
easy. However, we must recognize that there is no one
family model and that we must adjust the way in which
the United Nations addresses the issue in order to

10/18

03/12/2014

reflect the demands of reality and societies’ inevitable
evolution.
If we are to achieve social development and
improve our peoples’ living conditions, we cannot
ignore the particular needs and challenges facing
single-parent families, families in which grandparents
or aunts and uncles are raising grandchildren or nieces
and nephews, families whose members are physically
separated by members’ migration, the particular
family configurations of indigenous peoples and those
of same-sex couples. Recognizing such individual
realities of the various forms the family can take will
not only give us better results in achieving our post2015 development agenda goals, it will also enable us to
improve the promotion and protection of human rights
and the realization of our objectives as democratic,
inclusive and pluralistic countries.
Eradicating poverty is the greatest challenge
facing the world today and an essential condition for
sustainable development, which is why our discussions
must enable us to see progress in making a reality of the
promise of striving for a fair, equitable and inclusive
world and working together to promote sustained and
inclusive economic growth, social development and
the protection of the environment, in an atmosphere
conducive to families’ achievement of their rights and
responsibilities.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Bayat Mokhtari (Islamic Republic of Iran):
If a nation is to live in peace and prosperity, free from
want, fear, corruption and crime, and become a nation
of beautiful minds and rich ethics, there are two key
members of society who can make a difference. They
are the father and the mother, who create the family.
The General Assembly decided to celebrate the
International Year of the Family in recognition of the
central role that the family plays in social development
and of the need to focus on a comprehensive,
people-centred perspective on development issues.
The observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family creates momentum to
remind the international community once again of the
important objectives of the International Year of the
Family. It also creates an opportunity to refocus our
attention on the pre-eminent role that the family plays
as a major contributor to international development

14-66387

03/12/2014

efforts. It goes without saying that strengthening the
family can contribute to eradicating poverty and hunger,
achieving universal primary education, reducing child
mortality, improving maternal health and combating
HIV/AIDS, malaria and even Ebola.
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
especially those related to eradicating poverty,
advancing education and reducing maternal mortality,
is a great challenge. The means for advancing the Goals
can be better enabled by placing greater emphasis on
strategies that incorporate the role of the family. By
the same token, family policy development should be
included as we draw up the post-2015 development
agenda by inviting Member States and United Nations
system organizations to take into account the role
of the family as a major contributor to sustainable
development. The need to strengthen family policy
development in order to achieve internationally agreed
development goals should therefore be emphasized.
Notwithstanding the demographic, social and
economic changes occurring around the world that
affect the family, more or less everywhere, the family
remains the basic societal unit of reproduction,
consumption, asset-building and, in many parts of
the world, production. The family bears the primary
responsibility for the development, education and
socialization of children. It provides material and
non-material care and support to its members and is
the backbone of intergenerational solidarity and social
cohesion.
The achievement of development goals depends, to
a significant extent, on how the family and its members
are empowered to fulfil their numerous functions.
Accordingly, family-oriented policies have a unique
role to play in helping families to fulfil their functions
and benefit society at large.
Although, there is no specific international
instrument to advance a family perspective in
development, Governments have been actively pursuing
family-oriented policies at the national level, largely
in response to the increasing challenges faced by the
family.
In the Islamic Republic of Iran, the family is
the fundamental unit of society and the main centre
for the growth and edification of human beings.
Article 10 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of
Iran stipulates that:

A/69/PV.63

“Since the family is the fundamental unit of
the society, all laws, regulations and pertinent
programmes must tend to facilitate the formation
of the family, and to safeguard its sanctity and the
stability of family relations on the basis of the law
and ethics of Islam”.
The Government of Islamic Republic of Iran, in
pursuing Iranian religious and cultural values and
in fulfilling its international obligations, is fully
committed to continuing its efforts to ensure the
provision of the necessary protection and promotion of
the institution of the family. In the same vein, concrete
measures have been undertaken by the relevant
authorities and stakeholders in Iran. I will touch upon
some of those measures.
The family perspective has been integrated into the
five-year national development plan, and, accordingly,
the necessary budget resources have been allocated for
the protection and promotion of the institution of the
family. Grants and loans with preferential terms are
provided to families in need, especially to households
headed by single females. Public-health services are
provided to low-income households, especially in
rural areas. Consultative centres have been established
at the local and national levels in order to provide
advice to those in need. Such consultative services
are basically demand-oriented and are provided on
various family-related issues, such as health, education,
employment and family planning. Those services are
usually provided free of charge by the Government,
as well as by civil society and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs).
The provision of the necessary social security
and protection for women and girls is facilitated
and the protection for mothers, especially during
pregnancy, orphans and widows ensured. We are
investing extensively in the education and health
sectors, with particular attention to women and girls,
with a family perspective, especially in rural areas.
We are promoting the role of pro-family NGOs and
the participation of civil society as well as think tanks,
academia and research institutions in designing and
implementing family-related policies and programmes
aiming at strengthening and maintaining the integrity
and well-being of the family. And we are establishing
various committees and working groups in the different
branches of the Government to deal with specific
problems that members of the family, especially female

14-6638711/18

A/69/PV.63

03/12/2014

members, may face, such as violence, unemployment,
ageing, drug abuse and HIV/AIDS.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General accentuated
in his 2011 report on the Follow-up to the tenth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family and
beyond,

Mr. Eriza (Indonesia): It is a great privilege
for me to share Indonesia’s views on the occasion of
the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family.

“the majority of the Millennium Development
targets, especially those relating to the reduction
of poverty, education of children and reduction in
maternal mortality, are difficult to attain unless
the strategies to achieve them focus on the family.”
(A/66/62, para. 7)

The family is the core element of human development
as well as of the cohesion of society. Within the course
of development, the family unit releases people to act
as players and participants in different areas. That is
an indispensable role that cannot be replaced. For that
reason, this fundamental institution of society and
development must be continuously promoted. We must
also provide an opportunity to share good practices in
family policymaking and further discuss the growing
challenges faced by families worldwide, in particular
in their efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve
sustainable development. Allow me to share our views
on the issue at hand.

Therefore, as the international community
takes its historic decisions regarding the sustainable
development goals in the post-2015 development
agenda, the inclusion of strengthening family policy
development is inevitably a must.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America.
Ms. Hamilton (United States of America): I am
pleased to further discussion at the United Nations
about the human rights enjoyed by all individuals
within a family, as we mark the twentieth anniversary
of the International Year of the Family. The family
clearly plays an important role within society, and we
have come to observe that the nature and role of the
family adapt over time while the family retains its
fundamental value. We believe that the family plays an
essential role in the raising of children and in fostering
an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
as recent General Assembly resolutions on the family
have described.
We believe that social development across the globe
requires stable and strong families of all types to address
the important issues of poverty, work-life balance and
support among and between the generations. Any and
all United Nations discussions on the important role of
the family must consider all types of loving families that
exist today, be those families headed by one mother and
father, a single parent, a same-sex couple, grandparents
or the myriad other family structures that provide
essential support for raising children. It is essential
that the United Nations recognize these various forms
of the family as we further address human rights and
the family throughout various United Nations forums,
including any discussion that may take place in the
context of the post-2015 development agenda. In our
work, we do not want to leave anyone behind.
12/18

First of all, Indonesia attaches great importance to
the role of the family as the natural and fundamental
group unit of society. As Confucius once said, the
strength of a nation derives from the integrity of the
home. We therefore believe that a stable and healthy
family is the backbone of a strong society, which is
needed to ensure a nation’s well-being.
Secondly, despite the growing acknowledgement
of the important role of the family in development,
the family is often excluded from the development
process. Such exclusion leads to increasing inequality
in the form of economic and social exclusion, which are
major barriers in the common endeavour to eradicate
poverty and achieve sustainable development. To
tackle those challenges, Indonesia wishes to emphasize
the importance of the empowerment of the family in
supporting development to contribute to enhancing
social integration, economic inclusion and supporting
efforts to ensure full and productive employment and
decent work for all.
Thirdly, Indonesia is of the view that the value of
the family in development deserves due consideration
in the elaboration of the post-2015 development
agenda. As the Secretary-General notes in his recent
report, adding the role of the family to the post-2015
development agenda would be a step forward in
the direction of empowerment and the reduction of
inequality, and contribute to the achievement of the
sustainable development goals. Nonetheless, as we turn

14-66387

03/12/2014

towards future development goals, it is indeed a timely
juncture to mainstream the family as the fundamental
unit of community in development processes.
Indonesia has been an avid promoter of the
perspective of the family in development and social
policies. The Government of Indonesia has enacted
a number of national laws and established national
bodies to address issues related to marital and family
institutions. Together with civil society and other
relevant stakeholders, the Government has also
produced policies at the municipal level to complement
those national laws and bodies. Indonesia has also
developed the national initiative of family day.
More than just a simple ceremonial celebration on
29 June of every year, the initiative also aims to raise
awareness of the importance of the family as the core
unit of society and to promote national family-related
multisectoral services, including family planning and
family counselling. Over the years, our Government
has been engaging families, in urban as well as rural
communities, as instrumental partners in rendering
social safety nets as well as in empowering and enabling
women and all persons of the family to unleash their
maximum potential and fulfil the roles in development.
On a final note, my delegation believes that
the series of events commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family will
further echo the global recognition of the central role of
the family in ensuring social and economic development
and the importance of building a comprehensive
people-centred approach with regard to development.
To achieve that, we encourage all countries to continue
their efforts to fulfil the objectives of International
Year of the Family and its follow-up processes, both
by developing strategies and programmes aimed at
strengthening national capacities on family issues and
by strengthening international cooperation at all levels.
Such cooperation is imperative in advancing the role
of the family in important areas, including property
eradication.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): One of the most significant
challenges of our time is the increased poverty and
inequality within and among countries. The eradication
of poverty and inequality cannot be accomplished
through anti-poverty programmes alone, as it requires
changes in economic structures in order to ensure
access to resources and opportunities. Poverty and

A/69/PV.63

inequality have various manifestations, from a lack
of productive resources and access to land and of
education to inadequate housing, social discrimination
and exclusion. It occurs in all countries, as mass
poverty in many developing countries and as pockets
of poverty amid wealth in developed countries. It may
be caused by an economic recession resulting in loss
of livelihood, as experienced in 2008. It can also be
aggravated by the utter destitution of people who fall
outside family support systems, social institutions and
safety nets.
These words were written almost two decades ago
by us Member States, at the Fourth World Conference
on Women, held in Beijing in 1995. Sadly, they depict a
reality we still face, as poverty — and inequality, which
I added to that excerpt — remain serious challenges
worldwide.
In addition, rural-to-urban-centre migration
and massive movements of migrants, refugees and
displaced persons have profoundly changed family
survival strategies and structures. Those changes have
placed an extra burden on women, especially those who
provide for several dependants.
Today, women-led households account for
25 per cent in most of our societies. In many countries,
women-led households are very often among the
poorest because of wage discrimination, occupational
segregation patterns in the labour market and other
gender-based barriers. Discrimination against women
usually starts in the realm of the family. That is one
of the reasons that back in Beijing in 1995 we agreed
on the need to eliminate intra-family discrimination
against the girl child and on the supportive, nurturing
and educational role of the family in improving the
status of the girl child.
Education is a human right and is recognized as an
essential dimension for achieving the goals of equality,
development and peace. According to the Beijing
Platform for Action,
“non-discriminatory education benefits both girls
and boys and thus ultimately contributes to more
equal relationships between women and men.
Equality of access to and attainment of educational
qualifications is necessary if more women are to
become agents of change. The literacy of women
is an important key to improving health, nutrition
and education in the family and to empowering
women to participate in decision-making in

14-6638713/18

A/69/PV.63

society. Investing in formal and non-formal
education and training for girls and women,
with its exceptionally high social and economic
return, has proved to be one of the best means of
achieving sustainable development and economic
growth that is both sustained and sustainable”.
(A/CONF.177/20, paragraph 69).
Those words could not be more relevant today.
Against the backdrop of poverty and inequality,
the post-2015 development agenda offers a historic
opportunity to make adjustments and correct priorities
for the decades ahead. In compliance with the Rio+20
vision, the post-2015 agenda should aim for social
inclusion and more equitable and sustainable societies.
To that end, we have agreed that the eradication of
poverty and the reduction of inequalities must be
prioritized, while not losing focus on issues and groups
that require special attention, such as women, girls,
older persons, persons with disabilities and youth — all
of them as individuals or as members of a family.
As the main basis for the post-2015 agenda, the
report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals (A/68/970), which includes a set
of 17 sustainable development goals and 169 targets,
places human rights and development at the centre of
our efforts. It builds on recent successful experiences
of developing and developed countries. Those who
invested in social inclusion and anti-recession
policies in the last six years are now reaping the
benefits associated with the redistribution of wealth.
Prioritizing social protection, decent work, education
and health can help eradicate poverty and pave a new
path for development that is inclusive and sustainable
for individuals and families.
As we agreed at both Cairo and Beijing, families
should be strengthened and are entitled to receive
comprehensive protection and support. In different
cultural, political and social systems, various forms
of the family exist. The rights, capabilities and
responsibilities of family members must be respected.
In the years since Cairo and Beijing we have recognized
that families can make an important contribution
to development. We have also agreed on the critical
role that women play in families. They contribute to
families’ welfare and society’s development to an
extent still not universally acknowledged or valued in
its full importance today.

14/18

03/12/2014

In the case of Brazil, in the last decade we have
experienced an unprecedented reduction in inequality.
That has been made possible through a framework of
economic stability, access to credit, the promotion of
decent work, the expansion of social-protection systems
and investment in human capabilities. Our best-known
social-protection programme, the Family Stipend, is
centred on women. It constitutes recognition in practice
of the fact that women head at least one fourth of all
households, both worldwide and in Brazil, and that
many other households are dependent on female income
even when men are present. The success of the Family
Stipend programme testifies to the fact that if we had
not targeted all kinds of families — single-parent,
no-children, same-sex and no-parent — we would not
have lifted 36 million Brazilians out of poverty into
the middle class. Quite the opposite — we would have
helped to deepen their vulnerabilities and the multiple
intersecting forms of discrimination they already suffer
from. Such measures would never have succeeded
without an open-minded perspective on the family
unit. Brazil is firmly committed to protecting all forms
of families from socioeconomic vulnerabilities, with
a view to eradicating poverty, promoting their social
inclusion, creating decent work for all and eliminating
domestic violence.
We understand that individuals in a family hold
rights and fundamental freedoms no matter how their
family is constituted. From Brazil’s perspective, we
should focus our attention on those in a situation of
vulnerability, among them children, young people,
women, persons with disabilities, older persons
and all individuals who are victims of prejudice and
discrimination, including by virtue of their race,
religion or sexual orientation. One of our concerns is
addressing the many challenges that women face in
their family life as a consequence of discrimination,
bearing the burden of unpaid work and, above all,
suffering from domestic violence, which is a grave
violation of human rights and limits the enjoyment of
all other fundamental freedoms.
Finally, I would like to express our belief that the
United Nations can stand up for people in need and
recognize vulnerabilities beyond cultural divides and
countries’ specifics. Human rights are universal and
should be universally promoted and protected. As we
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the International
Year of the Family, let us raise our awareness of the
fact that a one-dimensional perspective on families

14-66387

03/12/2014

A/69/PV.63

can mean keeping millions of persons excluded from
society, depriving them of citizenship and a better
future in the twenty-first century.

shows that welfare schemes that enable women to
combine work and caring for children are key to
economic development.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.

This year we are also celebrating the twentyfifth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. To a large extent, the Convention has set
the agenda for Norway’s policies concerning children
and their families over the past 25 years. The rights of
children and young people must be respected within the
family, including, for example, their right to education
and information and to privacy and confidentiality,
as well as their right to health, including sexual and
reproductive health. In our experience, allowing
children to be heard and to participate in processes
that affect their lives and well-being paves the way to
better policies and more sustainable solutions. In every
society, children are the experts on children’s lives.

Ms. Larsen (Norway): Norway has been actively
engaged in working to formulate ambitious sustainable
development goals and in the process of creating a post2015 development agenda. We have taken a humanbased approach to our priorities, and we welcome
today’s discussion on advancing the rights of all the
individuals within families, as we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family. To
us, families are fundamental group units and important
bearers of tradition and culture in our societies,
and they should be a safe place for children. What
constitutes a family has changed and will continue to
change over time and around the world. No individuals
should be discriminated against because of the form of
family to which they belong. Unfortunately, for many
the family is a setting for rejection, discrimination and
even violence. Norway believes that we must continue
to recognize diversity within the concept of the family,
including acknowledging parents of the same gender.
Norway believes that gender equality and the
advancement of women’s rights are key to the post-2015
agenda. Ensuring women’s economic independence
and freedom from violence and suppression, as well
as safeguarding women’s reproductive rights within
the family, is important in that regard. And men
play an important role in advancing women’s rights,
whether they are husbands, fathers, brothers or sons.
In that regard, we welcome UN-Women’s “HeForShe”
campaign.
Gender equality is a right in itself, but it is also smart
economics, and thus key to sustainable development.
And we speak from experience. At the beginning of
the previous century, Norway was among the poorest
countries in Europe. Investment in gender equality
accelerated development and economic growth.
Norwegian women’s participation in the workforce has
increased from 50 per cent in 1970 to more than 75 per
cent today, representing a source of wealth not only for
the family but also for Norway as a whole. If Norwegian
women’s participation in the workforce was the same
as the average of the countries of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, we would
have lost an amount equivalent to the Norwegian oil
fund, which is more than $800 billion. Our experience

While we want the family to be the safest place
there is for a child, sadly, a main finding in one of
UNICEF’s recent reports, Hidden in Plain Sight, shows
that six children in 10 worldwide — almost 1 billion
of those aged between 2 and 14 — are subjected to
corporal punishment by their caregivers on a regular
basis. In all regions of the world, violence often occurs
in the context of families, especially towards women,
children and the elderly. Domestic violence occurs in
every society. We would therefore like to recall States’
obligation to protect the human rights of individual
family members from human rights violations or
abuses that occur in a family context. It is of the utmost
importance that those who provide parental guidance
and care always have the best interests of the child as
their main objective. Norway believes that preventive
efforts and good parenting are one way of preventing
domestic violence. In a few weeks we will launch a new
action plan to intensify efforts against violence and
abuse against children, entitled “A good childhood lasts
a lifetime”. We will also deliver a white paper on family
policies to our Parliament next year. We therefore
welcome today’s debate, as it provides input on areas
where we need to strengthen our efforts and strategies
in the best interests of the child.
I would like to conclude by inviting all those present
to an event to be held next week on 10 December,
Human Rights Day, entitled “Love is a family value:
supporting all families and family members”, in the
Chamber of the Economic and Social Council.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the observer State of the Holy See.

14-6638715/18

A/69/PV.63

Monsignor Urbańczyk (Holy See): My delegation
warmly welcomes the holding of this plenary meeting
of the General Assembly to mark the twentieth
anniversary of the International Year of the Family.
The anniversary is a good opportunity to consider
what has been achieved over the past 20 years, and
thus to highlight the importance of the family and
understand its functions and needs, focus on the rights
and responsibilities of all family members, strengthen
national institutions and formulate, implement and
monitor policies regarding the family.
Along those lines, the Holy See hopes this meeting
will help States, and the United Nations as a whole,
acknowledge the role of the family in formulating and
implementing the post-2015 sustainable development
goals. The family is critically important as one of
those intangible assets that societies and States need.
In efforts that range from preventing conflicts to
building peaceful societies, from fostering agriculture
to preventing crime in inner cities, from caring for
the Earth to ensuring food security, from eradicating
poverty to sustaining healthy communities, the family
is and always will be at the forefront. Its contribution
to the life of societies and States transcends tangible
measures and defies monetary quantification. A
family animated by unity and mutual responsibility
makes an undeniable contribution to nurturing future
generations and taking care of the more vulnerable
members of our society, such as the sick, the elderly
and the marginalized. As Pope Francis has affirmed,
the family is a fundamental pillar of society, the
foundation of coexistence and a guarantee against
social fragmentation.
Given the family’s exceptional potential and the
obvious and widely acknowledged social and economic
contribution it makes to society, it is sad to note that,
as the Secretary-General’s report underlines (A/69/61),
families are rarely the focus of major policy initiatives.
Often such policies target women and children
separately, not the family unit per se. While that may be
understandable for particular reasons, the fight against
violence and discrimination against women and girls
and for the empowerment of women and the promotion
of the rights of children could yield greater results if
we took a more integrated approach of focusing on the
family unit. Indeed, studies show that those who build
stable families are at a lower risk for domestic violence,
mental illness and alcoholism. Children in such families
display a lower risk of alcoholism, drug addiction and
mental illness, a lower incidence of criminality later
16/18

03/12/2014

in life, and higher academic achievement. In many
cases, the breakdown of families also contributes to
feminizing poverty and stunting child development.
From an economic perspective, a stable family is the
lowest-cost option for both its members and the State.
My delegation considers it urgent that the post-2015
development agenda create an environment conducive
to strengthening and supporting the family, in order
to enable it to undergird the maintenance of peace and
security, the advancement of women and girls, respect
for fundamental human rights, the reconciliation of
work and family life and shared parental responsibility
for children’s upbringing and development. While
echoing the recommendations articulated in the
Secretary-General’s report, my delegation would like
to reiterate a strong call to all international and national
institutions and State and civil-society structures to
promote and advance family empowerment through
appropriate family-centred policies and programmes,
without falling into what Pope Francis has referred to
as the trap of being limited by ideological concepts.
The family is indeed an indispensable, natural and
anthropological asset to humankind. Let us promote
and support it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. The plenary devoted to
the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family is now concluded.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 26.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/69/L.27)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and
its sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.27.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Proceeding from the
mandate given by the Committee of Ministers of the

14-66387

03/12/2014

Council of Europe for the period from May to November
2014, I have the honour to introduce, on behalf of
the sponsors, draft resolution A/69/L.27, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”. In addition to the 34 sponsors listed
in the document, the following countries have joined
the list: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland,
Iceland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Macedonia,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the
Russian Federation, San Marino and Sweden.
Since its adoption in its first version by the General
Assembly in 2000 (resolution 55/3), today’s draft
resolution has evolved as a reflection of the increasing
cooperation between the two organizations. Over the
years, that collaboration has further deepened, creating
more opportunities for synergies and partnerships in
areas of common interest.
Today’s draft resolution A/69/L.27 includes some
updates with regard to the work undertaken by the
Council since the adoption of resolution 67/83, while
recognizing its important role and contribution to
the protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, the promotion of democracy and
the strengthening the rule of law through its standards,
principles and monitoring mechanism as well as to the
effective implementation of the relevant international
legal instruments.
The draft resolution also acknowledges the
importance of the work of the Council in a broader
context, and the growing interests in its activities
aimed at enhancing dialogue in cooperation between
international and regional mechanisms. Focusing on
its core values, the Council has also contributed to the
enhancement of stability, social cohesion and cultural
diversity within and beyond the region.
The Council of Europe remains committed to
the promotion of its objectives around its three key
pillars — human rights, democracy and the rule of
law — and stands ready for dialogue and cooperation
to advance its core values and achieve greater synergy
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
In conclusion, I wish to thank all members of the
Council of Europe for their cooperation and the support
extended to us during our chairmanship, and to all the
other delegations for their constructive approach and
contributions to the discussions on the draft resolution,
enabling us to arrive at an agreement on the text.

A/69/PV.63

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.27. The Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt it?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 69/83).

A/69/L.27

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): In view of
the adoption of resolution 69/83, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of
Europe”, I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of Switzerland and the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
countries Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area; as well as the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
We welcome the adoption of this resolution,
which aims to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe. Since the
signing, in 1951, of the agreement between the Council
of Europe and the Secretariat of the United Nations,
the cooperative arrangements between the respective
secretariats in 1971 and resolution 44/6, of 1989, the
Council of Europe has continued to contribute to the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Moreover, the Council of Europe has striven to improve
the synergy between its work and that of the United
Nations.
The resolution before us contains an operational
paragraph on questions relating to human rights. In
the informal consultations, several delegations called
for a moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
Unfortunately, we note with regret that this call has once
again not been taken on board and that the paragraph
on this issue was not retained. The Council of Europe,
together with the European Union, its member States
and many other European and non-European countries,
has been engaged in this campaign for a long time.
On the occasion of the World Day against the Death

14-6638717/18

A/69/PV.63

Penalty, on 10 October, the Council of Europe, via its
Secretary General, appealed to all the States Members
of the United Nations to support the moratorium on the
use of the death penalty. We therefore strongly urge that
in future this issue be included in the draft resolution
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe.

18/18

03/12/2014

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

14-66387
