S/PV.8416

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8416th meeting

Tuesday, 11 December 2018, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Miranda Rivero
Mr. Liu Yang
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Habtemariam
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2018/569)
Letter dated 19 November 2018 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (5/2018/1033)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43100 (E)
*1843100*

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2018/569)
Letter dated 19 November 2018 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2018/1033)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/569, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I also with to draw attention of the Members to
document S/2018/1033, which contains a letter dated
19 November 2018 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: Today marks my final appearance
before the Security Council as President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. It has been a profound privilege to serve in
this role since the founding of the institution, and it
2/28

11/12/2018

is an honour for me to provide my last briefing to the
Council on the progress of the work of the Mechanism.
(spoke in French)
Before doing so, I would like to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. Adom, Ambassador of the Côte
d’Ivoire, on his country’s accession to the presidency
of the Security Council and wish him every success in
that role.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
my deep appreciation for the considerable attention and
commitment shown by the members of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
both now, under Peru’s expert leadership, and during the
many years that I have been appearing before the Council.
The support and engagement of the Working Group has
been invaluable to the success of the Mechanism and,
before that, of the International Criminal Tribunals
for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia. Finally, as
always, I must underscore my tremendous gratitude
for all of the assistance provided to the Mechanism by
the Office of Legal Affairs, as well as to the UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Stephen Mathias, and their dedicated teams.
Over the past six months, notwithstanding a
challenging budgetary situation and the myriad
operational consequences engendered thereby, the
Mechanism continued to make significant strides in
the conduct and completion of the mandate entrusted
to it by the Council. From the provision of vital
assistance to national jurisdictions to the methodical
preservation of materials in the archives, and from the
sustained protection afforded to vulnerable victims
and witnesses to the enforcement of sentences across
two continents, the Mechanism and its staff continued
to carry out key residual functions inherited from its
predecessor Tribunals with steadfast professionalism.
In that context, I wish to pay special tribute to the
Mechanism’s Registrar, Mr. Olufemi Elias, for his
leadership, abiding integrity and excellent stewardship
of our institution during this challenging period.
The Mechanism reached several important
milestones during the reporting period. After in-depth
internal and external consultations, the Mechanism
adopted the Rules of Detention to govern detention
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

matters both in Arusha and The Hague. Those Rules,
together with the related regulations, came into effect
last week. Alongside the recent amendments to the Rules
of Procedure and Evidence, and the continual review
and revision of other policies pertaining to a wide range
of judicial and non-judicial activities, the adoption
of the Rules of Detention reflects the Mechanism’s
unceasing attention to finding ways to improve its
methods of work and serve as a model for courts in
other jurisdictions. The Mechanism’s activities in that
respect benefited greatly from the engagement and
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services during the course of the evaluation of the
Mechanism, which was completed last spring, as well
as in the context of regular audits.
In another significant milestone, the Mechanism
held its first judicial hearing at the new, custom-built
courtroom in Arusha in September. That hearing, which
saw an initial appearance by the five individuals accused
in the new contempt case Prosecutor v. Maximilien
Turinabo et al., went very smoothly — testament to
both the exceptional efforts of Mr. Elias and his team
and the invaluable cooperation of the Government
of Rwanda in carrying out the arrest and transfer of
those accused. That development is also an important
demonstration of the Mechanism’s readiness for when
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda are apprehended.
I had hoped to stand before the Council here today
and announce another significant milestone, this time
in the case Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić, as the
projection had been to deliver the judgment in that case
this very month — significantly earlier than previously
forecast. As the Council may be aware, however,
changes were made to the composition of the Appeals
Chamber benches in both the Karadžić case and the case
of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić, following motions for
the disqualification of certain Judges, including myself.
I regret that I am no longer in a position to see
the Karadžić case through to its conclusion, as had
been my aim. Nonetheless, as set forth in my decision
to withdraw from the bench in that case, and while I
would have continued to adjudicate with an impartial
mind had I remained on the case, I considered it to be
in the interest of justice that I withdraw in order to not
allow the then-pending disqualification proceedings to
impede the progress of the appeals in the case. I am
pleased to inform the Council that, notwithstanding
the changes in the bench composition, it is expected

S/PV. 8416

that the appeal judgment in the Karadžić case will be
delivered in the first quarter of 2019, just a short time
later than previously projected.
In the Mladić case, meanwhile, the briefing recently
concluded. The changes in the bench composition in
that case are not expected to delay the rendering of
the judgment, which, prior to the briefing process,
had been projected for completion by the end of 2020.
Proceedings in the review case Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware took an unanticipated turn during the
reporting period, with the postponement of the hearing
that had been scheduled for September. The hearing
was postponed at Mr. Ngirabatware’s request, in the
light of the material disclosed following the arrest of
the five accused in the Turinabo et al. case and was
recently been rescheduled. A variety of pre-trial
matters are also being litigated in the new Turinabo et
al. case before a single Judge, who just last week issued
a decision declining to refer the case for trial within a
national jurisdiction.
In another contempt case — the case Prosecutor
v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta — a single Judge
granted such a referral within a national jurisdiction
and an appeal on that ruling is currently pending before
the Appeals Chamber. In the meantime, the retrial of
the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
case is proceeding apace, as is the work that the
Mechanism Judges carry out on a variety of smaller,
ad hoc requests pertaining to everything from the
protection of vulnerable victims and witnesses to access
to confidential materials. In that context, I would like to
underscore my deep gratitude to my fellow Judges for
their dedication to our work and institution. I likewise
wish to express my thanks to the Council for its efforts
to ensure that the current vacancies on the Mechanism’s
judicial roster will be filled expeditiously.
As I have spent the waning weeks of my presidency
consulting with my successor and taking all possible
steps to ensure a smooth transition to the presidency of
my friend and colleague, Judge Carmel Agius, I have
also had the occasion to pause and reflect on all that
has been achieved during the nearly seven years that I
have served as this institution’s President. I would not
be human if I did not have certain regrets in that regard.
I regret, of course, that the Karadžić appeal judgment
will not be delivered during my tenure as President, and
that the disqualification decision in the Mladić case
departed from established jurisprudence.

18-431003/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I also regret that a suitable and sustainable solution
for the resettlement of the acquitted and released persons
in Arusha has not been found, notwithstanding mine
and my colleagues’ best efforts and the engagement of
the members of the Council on this issue. The Council’s
continued focus and the cooperation of key Member
States are essential if this problem is to be resolved
once and for all.
I likewise regret that, notwithstanding the best of
intentions and goodwill, we have yet to fully achieve
the harmonization of practices and procedures across
the Mechanism’s two branches. Our aim, from the
beginning, was to have a single, unified institution on
two continents. While that goal has been achieved in a
great many respects, challenges still persist and may
continue for some time.
It is, in many ways, inevitable that some judicial
rulings are met with negative reactions, particularly
where those rulings pertain to controversial issues.
I have always been, and always will be, guided by
the law and by evidence in reaching my judicial
rulings — nothing more and nothing less. Nonetheless,
I regret that some of my rulings on matters such as
early release have caused pain or concern for victims
and their communities. In that respect, I have reflected
at length on the issues raised in the Security Council
plenary meeting last June (see S/PV.8278) and I have
taken concrete steps to address the concerns reflected
in resolution 2422 (2018) — such as by inviting certain
convicted persons to undertake to abide by certain
conditions if granted early release — while ensuring
fundamental fairness and continued adherence to the
Mechanism’s governing legal framework.
For me, it remains a profound regret that a different
and better resolution of the situation of my former
colleague Judge Aydin Sefa Akay was not found. At a
time when the world is facing deeply troubling trends
related to the undermining of independent judiciaries
and the weakening of the rule of law, we at the United
Nations simply cannot afford to be anything less than
exemplary when it comes to our own handling of
interference with judicial independence and actions
undertaken in contravention of United Nations
immunities. At the very least, it is imperative that, going
forward, fair and transparent processes be developed to
determine whether any proposed non-reappointment of
a Judge accords with the fundamental principles of the
rule of law.
4/28

11/12/2018

Despite all those regrets, I am also exceptionally
proud of what has been achieved at and by the
Mechanism over the past almost seven years. It was
during my tenure as President that the Mechanism came
into being; the Rules of Procedure and Evidence were
first adopted; the Judges sworn in; and the branches
in Arusha and The Hague first opened. Systems and
policies to support the Judges as they carried out their
judicial work remotely were put in place and repeatedly
revised and refined over the years, reflecting our
continued focus on improvement, efficiency and
economy. A broader legal and regulatory framework
was established for the Mechanism, which was
also — and continues to be — refined and augmented
as needed. Moreover, my fellow Judges and I adopted
a groundbreaking Code of Professional Conduct for
Judges — something our predecessors had never
done before — and we proceeded to revise the Code
to provide a disciplinary process: a reflection of the
importance of accountability in all aspects of our work.
During my tenure, in full cooperation with
colleagues at the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), responsibility for
judicial activities — as well as non-judicial residual
functions — was transferred from those Tribunals
and carried out smoothly and to the highest standards
at the Mechanism. The Mechanism took the steps
needed to stand on its own, without the assistance of
its predecessors, and to realize its own administrative
capacity, spanning a wide range of functions and
tasks. In the meantime, hundreds upon hundreds of
judicial rulings were issued, addressing a wide range
of requests, and every effort was taken to ensure that
judicial work was conducted in a timely and costeffective manner, in keeping with the Council’s vision
for the institution. Indeed, we have shown that the new
model by which Judges work remotely can function
efficiently and economically and in full compliance
with due process requirements.
That is not all — thanks to the exceptional
generosity of the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania and engagement with local companies — the
Mechanism was able to construct a new, minimalist
facility in Arusha, consistent with the institution’s
mandate to be small and efficient. We have started
important traditions at those new premises, hosting
a judicial colloquium for national, regional and
international Judges and visits by a wide range of
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

officials seeking to learn from our practices, as well
as inaugurating an annual event designed to bring
international and regional organizations and the
local community in Arusha together. We have also
maintained and made accessible one of the leading law
libraries in the region.
We have given back in important ways at The Hague
branch as well, both at our historic premises there
and through collaboration with victims’ associations
and the new ICTY Information Centre in Sarajevo.
During a recent visit to the former Yugoslavia, I met
with senior Government officials in Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia, and I was pleased by the
cooperation received on different fronts, including
in particular the positive indications given in both
Croatia and Serbia with regard to the establishment
of information centres in those countries as well. Of
course, at both branches we continue to make important
strides in making the judicial records and key precedents
of our predecessor Tribunals accessible.
All the while, my colleagues and I have made
it a priority to build an exemplary United Nations
institution and a model of what an international criminal
judicial institution can and should be. Our remarkable
body of staff, drawn from approximately 70 countries
around the world, has repeatedly surpassed the
Secretary-General’s gender parity goals. Through their
professionalism and ingenuity, their resourcefulness
and resilience, the staff have been invaluable when it
comes to making the Mechanism what it is today.
In that context, I wish to salute in particular
Ms. Gabrielle McIntyre, Chef de Cabinet and Principal
Legal Adviser at the Mechanism since its founding
and the Chef de Cabinet to the Presidents of the
ICTY for more than a decade. As a senior official of
the ICTY since 2004, she played a pivotal role in the
conceptualization and creation of the Mechanism,
and she has proven to be an invaluable colleague and
leader at the Mechanism throughout the institution’s
existence. I am deeply indebted to her and her Deputy
Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Willow Crystal, as well as to all
of the excellent staff of the Mechanism, who have made
the institution what it is today.
As I bring my remarks to a close, I hope the Council
will allow me one final moment of personal reflection.
I may be among the last individuals to appear before
the Council who survived the Holocaust. I do not speak
lightly or often of this time in my life — a period during

S/PV. 8416

which many of my loved ones perished — but I wish
to remember it today because it was the horrors of the
Holocaust, and of the Second World War more broadly,
that led us to where we are now. It was the experience of
the scourge of war and the untold sorrow it wrought that
led the peoples of the world to unite in a ringing call
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, human
dignity and the value of justice and the rule of law
through the establishment of the United Nations. It was
that experience that led to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which marked its seventieth anniversary
only yesterday, and it was, in many ways, the echoes of
all that that led to the establishment of the ICTY and the
ICTR — the pioneers of international criminal justice
in the modern era.
Today, in speaking of the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, we often
make reference to the importance of incorporating
lessons learned. But the Mechanism itself, as it
carries forward the invaluable legacies of the ad hoc
Tribunals, is a symbol of the lessons learned by past
generations. It is a symbol of what we hold dear: respect
for the rule of law, fundamental fairness and justice and
adherence to the highest principles and our obligations
arising thereunder.
It is a reminder of the thread of human events
that connects our work today with those dark days of
unimaginable cruelty and chaos from the Second World
War. It is a reminder that none of us may stand idly by
while genocide and other violations of international law
are committed, or while their commission is denied. It
is a reminder today of the chorus of generations — from
the Poland of my childhood to the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, to so many other places around the
world — that, when faced with appalling atrocities,
proclaimed “never again”. We must heed those lessons,
lest we be doomed to repeat them. The leadership of all
those present here today, and the Council as a whole,
is essential in that regard, as my generation passes on
the torch.
For the support that the members of the Security
Council have offered me throughout my presidencies of
the Mechanism and, before that, the ICTY, and for the
support that the Council has provided and will continue
to provide to the Mechanism itself, I am humbly and
deeply grateful.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
President Meron for his briefing.

18-431005/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. My written report provides details about
our activities and results during the reporting period
in relation to our usual three priorities (S/2018/1033,
annex II).
Today I would like to highlight only a few important
issues. However, at the outset, I would like to take this
opportunity to recognize President Meron and express
my Office’s appreciation for his service. President
Meron has led the Mechanism since its establishment,
in July 2012, and greatly shaped our institution during
its first years of operations.
My Office continues to focus on expeditiously
completing the limited number of trials and appeals
transferred from the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In relation to the retrial
of the case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović, we completed the presentation of all our
witnesses, except for one. Our final witness is now
scheduled to be heard in January. Regarding the
Karadžić appeal, my Office continued to litigate a high
volume of matters, including eleventh hour motions to
disqualify Judges from the case. We have taken note of
the revised schedule for the completion of that case and
look forward to the delivery of the judgment.
On 29 November, shortly after the end of the
reporting period, my Office completed the preparation
of our written appeals arguments in the Mladić case,
in accordance with court-established deadlines. In
addition to that work, my Office also litigated a number
of other matters in that case, including motions to
disqualify judges. We will continue to take measures
within our control to expedite the completion of those
final proceedings.
Another of the Mechanism’s residual functions is
the protection of victims and witnesses. In addition,
pursuant to article 14 of the Mechanism statute,
my Office is mandated to investigate and prosecute
contempt of court. I can now report that, following an
intensive and confidential investigation conducted over
the past year, in June my Office confidentially filed an
indictment charging five suspects with three counts of
contempt of court and incitement to commit contempt
of court. That indictment was confirmed in August,
6/28

11/12/2018

and Mechanism warrants of arrest were successfully
executed in September by Rwandan police, in close
cooperation with my Office.
That contempt proceeding, Prosecutor v.
Maximilien Turinabo et al., arose out of the
review proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware case. My Office alleges that four of
the accused directly, and through intermediaries,
interfered with witnesses who had given evidence in
Ngirabatware’s trial and interfered with witnesses
in the ongoing review proceeding. We furthermore
allege that two of the accused knowingly violated court
orders protecting witnesses. The purpose of the alleged
contempt of court was to overturn the final conviction
of Augustin Ngirabatware, and by doing so undermine
the facts of the genocide. My Office has not undertaken
that activity lightly, particularly as it has generated a
significant additional workload, which has stretched
our already lean resources. Nonetheless, we are fully
committed to defending the integrity of the proceedings
conducted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), the ICTY and the Mechanism. My
Office wants to send a clear message that our victims
and witnesses will be protected and that we will oppose
genocide denial in all of its manifestations.
As I previously reported to the Council, my Office
has been taking a number of important measures
to strengthen our efforts to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR. We
restructured our tracking team and adopted a more
proactive approach to our work. Those reforms have
been matched by a temporary increase in resources, on
the clear understanding that we have a limited amount
of time to demonstrate a successful track record.
Prior intelligence and our investigative activities
generated some actionable leads during the reporting
period. Accordingly, I travelled to Harare earlier
this year to seek the cooperation of Zimbabwean
authorities, who assured me of their commitment to
adhere to their international legal obligations and the
Council’s call to Member States. We established a joint
task force to coordinate further investigative activities
to locate a fugitive in Zimbabwe. The task force has
been very active and recently provided another report
to my Office showing that it is pursuing a number of
promising leads.
At the same time, based on information obtained by
my Office and confirmed by the INTERPOL National
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Central Bureau for South Africa, in August I submitted
an urgent request for assistance from South African
authorities. Unfortunately, despite repeated contacts
and reminders, that request has not been answered
and no explanation been provided so far. My Office
trusts that South Africa, as an incoming member of
the Council, will provide the necessary cooperation.
Locating and arresting the fugitives is a priority for
my Office. In order for us to complete that residual
function as expeditiously as possible, State cooperation
remains most essential.
In relation to the countries of the former Yugoslavia,
my Office deeply regrets the continued glorification of
war criminals and the denial of crimes, including the
Srebrenica genocide. While my Office has repeatedly
called for urgent attention to that issue, developments
during the reporting period again demonstrated
that the challenge is severe. Some political leaders
in the region are working to overcome the legacy of
the recent past. Unfortunately, positive steps are
undermined by irresponsible comments from other
officials denying what has been established beyond a
reasonable doubt by international courts and portraying
as heroes men who committed the most serious
violations of international law.
Soldiers do not defend their country with honour by
murdering civilians, burning homes, raping women and
girls, and persecuting communities because of their
ethnicity or religion. Countries cannot build a future
together if they do not have a common understanding
and acceptance of the recent past. In Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia, my Office is committed to
promoting education and remembrance as key tools in
the fight against ideologies of discrimination, division
and hate.
As detailed in my written report, regional
cooperation in war crimes matters between the countries
of the former Yugoslavia is at its lowest level in years
and continues to head in the wrong direction. That
cooperation is essential to achieving justice for victims
from all communities. Today, suspected war criminals
too often find safe haven in neighbouring countries
because authorities fail to work together. Successful
regional efforts in the fight against organized crime,
corruption and other serious offences demonstrate that
such cooperation is possible. When it comes to regional
cooperation in war crimes matters, the challenge is
not inability but unwillingness. If for no other reason
than to secure meaningful justice for their own people,

S/PV. 8416

my Office calls upon authorities in the region to take
concrete steps to remedy the situation, including by
bringing political interference in the justice process
to a halt and allowing the judiciaries to carry out their
responsibilities in accordance with the rule of law and
international and European standards.
The final topic I would like to address, briefly,
is the search for missing persons in the former
Yugoslavia. Significant results have been achieved,
with almost 25,000 missing persons having been
found and identified. Unfortunately, more than 10,000
families still do not know the fate of their loved ones.
I had a number of meetings with representatives of the
families of the missing during my recent missions to
the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Even today,
they suffer the immense pain of not knowing the
fate of their loved ones. Their message to all of us is
simple — we must intensify efforts, deepen cooperation
and finally return the missing to their families. During
the reporting period, my Office took important steps
to strengthen our support for the search for missing
persons. We signed a memorandum of understanding
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) to promote our cooperation. That important
agreement will enable the ICRC to access our evidence
collection in order to obtain information that may assist
in clarifying the fate and whereabouts of persons who
are still missing.
We have also continued to provide national
authorities with access to our records and expertise. In
the past months, we have hosted working visits by the
Commission on Missing Persons of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and have given extensive
operational support to the Missing Persons Institute of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the recent London summit
organized by the United Kingdom, all Governments
of the region pledged to increase their activities and
cooperation and prevent the politicization of the issue.
Achieving further progress is both a humanitarian
imperative and fundamental to reconciliation in
the former Yugoslavia. Victims from all sides of the
conflict must be located, identified and returned to
their families.
In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing its remaining functions efficiently and
effectively, including by investigating and prosecuting
interference with witnesses and contempt of court. We
also remain committed to providing our full support
to the continued implementation by national authorities

18-431007/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of the ICTR and ICTY completion strategies so that
more justice can be achieved for more victims. We are
grateful for the continued support of the Council in all
of our efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I also thank Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism of
the Criminal Tribunals, and its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz, for their important briefings. Taking into
account the completion of Judge Meron’s mandate next
January, in my current capacity as Chair of the Working
Group on International Tribunals, I would like to pay
special tribute to Judge Meron for his great contribution
to the establishment and efficient functioning of the
Residual Mechanism and his well-known track record
in the service of international criminal justice.
Recognizing the fundamental importance of access
to justice and international criminal law in building
sustainable peace, Peru underlines the importance of
the Mechanism, which was established by resolution
1966 (2010) to carry out the remaining residual
functions of its predecessors, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Although it is a small
and temporary structure whose functions and size
will diminish over time, the Mechanism continues to
contribute to the administration of justice. It is time
that we underscore its important role in deterring and
preventing atrocity crimes.
We welcome the fact that the Mechanism’s roster
of 25 judges is expected to be filled through elections
before the end of the year and stress the importance
for Member States to nominate women candidates.
We also commend the transparent, swift, efficient and
effective manner in which the Mechanism is fulfilling
its judicial functions — which have been especially
intense in over the past six months — including by
having certain judges carry out their work remotely.
We also emphasize the need for the Mechanism to
maintain an even balance between civil and common
law approaches.
8/28

11/12/2018

We highlight the assistance that several African and
European Governments have provided to the Mechanism
so that convicted persons can serve sentences in their
own countries, and we underline the need to bring to
justice those fugitives who are still at large. We must
remember that the success of the Mechanism depends
on the cooperation of States in enforcing its sentences,
complying with its orders and responding to its requests
for assistance. We also reiterate the need to respond to
concerns about the early release of persons convicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, some
of whom have expressed no remorse for their crimes.
I would like to conclude by urging for the provision
of significant assistance to the Mechanism’s Department
of Management of the Secretariat and Office of Legal
Affairs, and by stressing, in line with resolution 2422
(2018) adopted in June, the need for the Council to
remain united in its support for the Mechanism. I
encourage the Council to continue to strengthen its
important action in that regard.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals, and its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz,
for today’s reports and briefings.
I would like to start by commending the Mechanism
on its work and progress over the past year. It was only
12 months ago that the Mechanism fully assumed its
responsibilities for both the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). During that
time, its mandate has remained the same — to carry
out the residual functions of the ICTY and the ICTR,
thereby ensuring their legacy. Yet within that period,
the Mechanism has been faced with significant
challenges following the General Assembly’s approval
of a significantly reduced for the 2018-2019 biennium.
That has led to reduced staff and resources. However,
the Mechanism has been determined to continue to
fulfil its mandate effectively and efficiently, and we are
pleased that it has taken the steps necessary to make
that possible.
All three principals have demonstrated their drive
and determination to ensure that the Mechanism
remains on track to deliver its mandate. Through
various initiatives, the Mechanism has adapted to deal
with several setbacks and has subsequently achieved
a great deal with a relatively small number of staff.
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Among the initiatives implemented by the Mechanism,
we take note of its expenditure reduction plan. As
developed by the Registry, the plan has enabled the
Mechanism to continue to fulfil the core elements of
its mandate — particularly judicial functions — as
fully as possible. It has done this by reducing non-post
resources and general operating costs, revising delivery
arrangements for important services and limiting
premises enhancements to essential needs. These
measures have undoubtedly enabled the Mechanism to
manage budgetary constraints. However, looking ahead,
we need to be mindful of how to balance cost-savings
against effectiveness, in particular if the Mechanism is
to continue to fulfil its mandate.
The United Kingdom will continue to support
the Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate. We
also request that Council members and Member States
continue to provide the Mechanism with the support it
needs, whether financially, logistically or politically.
We also commend the Mechanism for its efficiency
in dealing with cases often involving complex and
challenging issues and its practice of remote judging,
which so far has worked without any prejudice to
the defendants. We note that cases have proceeded
expeditiously, and these include the recent Turinabo
et al. contempt case. This was the first hearing for
the Mechanism’s branch in Arusha, and it shows that,
when seized of important matters, such as contempt
or false allegations, the Mechanism will act swiftly.
We look forward to developments in this case, as
well as the related Ngirabatware sentence review. We
also welcome progress in the Stanišić and Simatović
retrial and note the recent judicial appointments in the
Karadžić and Mladić appeals. We have heard from the
President and Prosecutor this morning with regard to
the completion of these important cases and are pleased
that there will not be any significant delay to them
caused by recent motions.
While cases have been progressing, we however
remain deeply concerned about genocide denial in
Rwanda and the denial of crimes and the glorification
of war criminals in the Balkans. In addition, the lack
of regional judicial cooperation among the countries of
the former Yugoslavia is concerning. The Mechanism
can successfully complete its mandate and deliver
justice to victims only through collective efforts of the
international community.

S/PV. 8416

We remind the countries of the region of the joint
declaration on war crimes signed at the prime ministerial
level at the London Western Balkans Summit this year,
which underlined the importance of recognizing and
respecting verdicts from international and domestic
courts related to war crimes and other atrocity
crimes, as well as rejecting the use of hate speech, the
glorification of war criminals and the provocative use
of symbols. We therefore urge countries to work closely
with the Mechanism, in particular with the Office of the
Prosecutor, to ensure accountability through effective
cooperation. We believe that this will help to reduce the
instance of the denial of crimes, including genocide and
the glorification of war criminals.
While attention tends to focus on conviction and
acquittals, we would like to recognize the development
of best practices by the President and the Registry,
including the revised Rules Governing the Detention
of Persons Awaiting Trial or Appeal Before the
Mechanism or Otherwise Detained on the Authority
of the Mechanism and the directions on the procedure
for the determination of applications for pardon,
commutation of sentence and early release of persons
convicted by the ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism.
We are aware that the Registry is also reviewing various
draft policy instruments related to professional conduct
for defence counsel and on the support and protection
of victims and witnesses. These policies are essential
to the Mechanism’s transparency and clarity and to the
legacy it provides to current and future tribunals.
We note the elections later this month to fill two
judicial posts. Ensuring that the Mechanism operates
with a full roster is necessary for it to complete its
mandate and we fully support the Mechanism in filling
these two vacancies. We do, however, regret the lack of
women candidates.
Lastly, but certainly not least, through you,
Mr. President, and on behalf of the United Kingdom, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Judge Meron
for his invaluable work over the past two decades. The
whole international community should recognize the
meaningful and long-lasting contribution he has made
to international law and justice, particularly through his
judicial rules. We are immensely grateful to him for his
efforts, his persistence and the leadership he has shown,
and in particular the very positive impact that this has
had on the functioning of the Residual Mechanism. We
wish Judge Meron the very best for the rest of his time
at the Residual Mechanism and with his future pursuits,

18-431009/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

which I have no doubt will be numerous. We would also
like to congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment
as President and look forward to working with him on
carrying out the Mechanism’s mandate.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Judge Meron
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive
updates this morning.
Sweden welcomes the developments and progress
made by the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals since the last briefing (see
S/PV.8278) and the extension of the mandate in June.
We are pleased to see that the Mechanism has been
working on implementing the recommendations that
were presented in the evaluation report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services earlier this year. We
particularly welcome the implementation of the
recommendation regarding gender-related matters.
It is important that the Registry is now reviewing
how the policies related to the support and protection
of victims and witnesses can better reflect gendersensitive and gender-appropriate approaches. We also
reiterate our satisfaction with the achieved gender
parity among the professional staff. It is evident that
the Mechanism has done its share in ensuring gender
parity. However, we, the Member States, have failed
in doing our part. The continued lack of gender parity
among the judges of the Mechanism is disappointing,
and we regret the absence of female candidates in the
upcoming election of judges. Let us do better ahead of
possible future elections.
The strained budgetary situation also remains a
concern, not least because it risks contributing to the
loss of institutional memory, as highlighted in the
report (see S/2018/1033). We note that the biennial
budget approved by the General Assembly in July did
not even amount to half of the budget proposed by the
Mechanism. To avoid any delays in the implementation
of the mandate and ensure sufficient quality of the
work conducted, the Mechanism must be given the
required resources. We note that, according to the
report, it remains unclear how long the function for
the protection of victims and witnesses would need to
remain operational, and we again stress how important
this work is.
To achieve results, cooperation with the
Mechanism remains of the utmost importance. Sweden
is one of the countries that has received convicted
individuals for the enforcement of their sentences. We
10/28

11/12/2018

reiterate our call on Member States to also assist the
Mechanism in the arrest of the fugitives who remain
at large. We welcome the continued efforts made to
promote communication and cooperation between
the Mechanism and the Governments of Rwanda and
the States of the former Yugoslavia. The continued
challenges in the reconciliation process in the Western
Balkans, as noted in the Prosecutor’s report, are
concerning. The Mechanism must continue to address
this situation in the communication with the States of
the former Yugoslavia.
During our two years on the Council, Sweden has
followed the work of the Mechanism very closely. As
this is our last meeting on this topic before leaving the
Council, let me just briefly share some reflections.
Over these past two years, we have not only worked
on the extension of the mandate of the Mechanism, but
have also witnessed the closure of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which
was indeed a historic event. The ICTY, as well as
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
represented concrete advancements of the international
criminal justice system. We cannot overestimate the
role that these and other international criminal tribunals
have played in the fight against impunity for the most
horrendous crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
At the same time, during our time on the Council
we have also witnessed an international criminal
justice system under increased pressure. Considering
the hostile rhetoric against international courts and
tribunals, one could wonder if accomplishments such
as the establishment of the Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the 1990s, the creation
of the International Criminal Court in the beginning
of the 2000s, and the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism eight years ago would have been achievable
today. As regrettable as this situation is, what it also
tells us is that the courts and tribunals are having
a real impact. The courts and the tribunals were not
established to serve or depend on any one country’s
interests. They were set up to serve justice for victims
and ensure accountability for the perpetrators of the
worst crimes known to humankind. For this reason, it
is only natural that they are uncomfortable for those
who violate international law.
In this light, we want to once again commend the
staff of the Mechanism for their high ethics and morale,
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

their independence and their unwavering commitment
to justice. Since this is Judge Meron’s last briefing to
the Council, we would especially like to thank him for
all his contributions to the international justice system
throughout his career, including as President of both
the ICTY and the Mechanism.
His presence here and his personal words serve as
an important reminder of our joint commitment and
responsibility to ensure the “never again”.
Finally, Sweden’s commitment to an international
rules-based order and justice system remains
unwavering. The principles of seeking justice for
victims and ensuring accountability for perpetrators
will be cornerstones of our international engagement
also in the future. As part of that engagement, the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals can count on our continued support.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative and insightful reports
and briefings. Allow me to express our gratitude for
their commitment to ensuring accountability, which
is manifested in the high quality of the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Given the fact that today’s is the last briefing
of Judge Meron to the Security Council in his capacity
as President of the Mechanism, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to him for his tireless efforts
and great achievements in the challenging quest for
international justice. I thank him in particular for his
important contribution to strengthening international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law, and to the prevention of atrocity
crimes. I believe that it is particularly fitting to do so
70 years after the adoption of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Poland is encouraged by the priorities of the work
cited by the President and the Prosecutor. We note with
satisfaction the significant progress the Mechanism has
achieved in the realization of its functions. In particular,
we appreciate the focus on the expeditious completion
of judicial proceedings and welcome the innovative and
efficient solutions adopted to that end. We commend
the efforts to provide protection and support services
to the victims and witnesses of the atrocities, and we
applaud also the follow up on the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services audits.

S/PV. 8416

We therefore agree with the positive assessment of
the Mechanism’s functioning in the period in question.
We also look forward to its further achievements. We
would like to recognize particularly the determination
and efforts of the President, the Prosecutor and the staff
to carry out their work effectively and efficiently, while
observing in full all applicable rules and procedures.
Their commitment to that end is all the more
commendable in that they are faced with a considerable
workload and a heightened judicial activity, amid
budgetary cuts and downsizing.
Poland takes note of the challenges the Mechanism
faces, including those that are resource-related. We
would also like to highlight the importance of sustained
cooperation with and assistance to the Mechanism from
the Secretariat and Member States. They influence
in an important way the prospects for the timely and
efficient fulfilment of its mandate. In that context,
we call on all States to fully cooperate with the
Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and to render necessary assistance
to it, especially with regard to the location, arrest and
surrender of all remaining fugitives indicted by the
Mechanism as soon as possible.
In conclusion, let me underline that international
criminal justice institutions, including the International
Residual Mechanism, play a crucial role in upholding
accountability and fighting impunity, which can
contribute to the deterrence and prevention of atrocity
crimes. Such efforts remain in compliance with Poland’s
engagement in the strengthening of international law.
Allow me to reaffirm Poland’s continued support for
the Mechanism and readiness to cooperate with it,
which corresponds to our commitment to international
criminal justice. We call on others to take the
same stance.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
reports and briefings. I pay a warm tribute to Judge
Meron, who leaves us an International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals that is fully
autonomous, capable of effectively carrying out its
mandate and of adapting its procedures and working
methods, giving due consideration to the diversity
of legal systems and multilateralism, as called for by
the Council in resolution 1966 (2010). Judge Meron’s
contribution to international criminal justice and to the
work of the Security Council is indisputable and ongoing.
France thanks him for his commitment as Judge and

18-4310011/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the Mechanism,and wishes
every success to the future President of the Mechanism.
With regard to the judicial activities of the
Mechanism during the reporting period, we note that
five accused were arrested in the new Turinabo et al.
contempt case and that those accused were brought
before the court immediately two days after their
transfer from Kigali to Arusha. We welcome the
cooperation of the Rwandan authorities in that matter
and will continue to follow the latest developments.
We take note of the change in schedule for
the Karadžić case, and we are counting on the
professionalism of all to complete all trials in progress
within the planned deadlines. France also recalls that
States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism
in the search and arrest of eight fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
arrest warrants will not go away and their crimes will
not go unpunished.
France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting perpetrators of international crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
and in the territory of Rwanda. The two cases referred
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to
the French courts evolved during the reporting period.
On 21 June, the Paris Court of Appeals confirmed the
dismissal order issued in 2015 in the Munyeshyaka
case. The case is now before the Court of Cassation.
In the Bucyibaruta case, the prosecution requested
a partial discharge and a transfer to the Court of
Cassation. The investigating judge has communicated
the procedure to the Public Prosecutor, who must file
his final submission in this procedure. France will
continue to deal with these cases with all due diligence
and rigour.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s comments
regarding the cooperation provided to his Office by the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and his assessment
of regional judicial cooperation as being “at its lowest
level in years” (S/2018/1033, annex, II, para. 55). For
France and the European Union, which closely follow
the Prosecutor’s reports, the full cooperation of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia with the Mechanism
and the fight against impunity for crimes committed
in the former Yugoslavia are inseparable and essential.
12/28

11/12/2018

I would also like to echo the concern once again
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz in his report
(S/2018/1033, annex II) and his briefing regarding the
denial of crimes and responsibility by some individuals
or political leaders. Judicial rulings relating to war
crimes, crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are
based on facts and responsibilities that have been
rigorously established. Those rulings are binding on all.
We note the resolve of the President and the
Prosecutor to take into account resolution 2422
(2018) on the issue of early release. We encourage the
Mechanism to continue discussions and considerations
in order to endow itself with an early release mechanism
with clear conditions, which will enhance international
criminal jurisprudence.
Finally, I welcome the implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to continue to uphold the principles of
restraint, effectiveness and exemplariness, which must
also apply to the entire United Nations.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me express our
sincere thanks to the President and the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, respectively, for their progress reports
and briefings here this morning. Let me also thank
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Permanent
Representative of Peru, for his impeccable leadership
of the Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
The work of the Mechanism is important to ensuring
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. Its work contributes to reconciliation,
economic development and peace because there cannot
be peace without justice. In that context, I will focus
on three challenges the Mechanism is currently facing:
first, witness protection; secondly, complementarity;
and thirdly, denial of war crimes.
On my first point, witness protection, contrary
to expectations, the progress report shows that the
workload of the Mechanism is increasing and will
continue to increase due to the prosecution of five
suspects accused of intimidating protected witnesses.
We strongly condemn any action that puts the safety
and security of witnesses and victims at risk. Such
actions endanger the legacy of the Tribunals and affect
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the confidence of witnesses and victims in international
criminal justice. The protection of the more than
3,000 witnesses is a key residual responsibility of the
Mechanism. Prosecution by the Mechanism should
send a strong and clear message that those who attempt
to intimidate or to tamper with witnesses will be held
accountable. We urge Member States, in the upcoming
budgetary cycle, to provide the Mechanism with
required resources that reflect the increasing workload
of the Mechanism. Only then will the Mechanism be
able to fully implement its mandate.
That brings me to my second point, complementarity,
or cooperation between national judicial institutions.
States bear the primary responsibility to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute those
responsible for the most serious crimes under
international law. We note with appreciation that both
the Registry and the Office of the Prosecutor continue to
assist and support national criminal justice institutions
in the Great Lakes region, East Africa and the Western
Balkans. The assistance provided by the Prosecutor
enables those national criminal justice institutions
to carry out their responsibilities. We are, however,
concerned about the current situation in the Western
Balkans, where regional cooperation is decreasing.
Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina should
significantly strengthen their cooperation so that the
suspected war criminals who are still at large can be
brought to justice. That is in the interest of the respective
countries, as it contributes to reconciliation, regional
stability, economic development and sustainable peace.
That brings me to my third point, the denial of war
crimes and the glorification of convicted war criminals.
Last Sunday, 9 December, marked the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. While observing that anniversary, we are
deeply disturbed that the war crimes and the genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are
being denied and even glorified. The conclusion that
genocide was committed against the Tutsi has been
crucial to re-establishing peace and security in Rwanda
and to promoting reconciliation between the affected
communities. In that spirit, the General Assembly
designated 7 April as the International Day of Reflection
on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
The glorification of war criminals with the consent
of or even organized by national authorities in the
Western Balkans is disturbing and concerning. The

S/PV. 8416

denial of the Srebrenica genocide by parliamentarians
of the Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and leading politicians in Serbia is reprehensible. It
shows a lack of respect for the victims, their relatives
and the judgments of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We firmly reject the ideology of
discrimination, division and hate, especially in societies
that have already borne the devastating consequences
of hateful words being put into action.
Let me ask a rhetorical question. How can one
glorify ethnic cleansing, forcible displacements,
the destruction of villages and communities, the
rape of women and girls, and the killing of innocent
civilians? We therefore urge members of the respective
Governments first, to set the right example; secondly,
to stop public denials and glorifications of the atrocities
committed; and thirdly, to send a clear message to their
armed forces that only by fully respecting international
humanitarian law can they can truly defend their
country with pride and honour.
In conclusion, in January President Theodor Meron
will step down as the first President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. He leaves
behind an exemplary institution that operates as
efficiently and effectively as possible. There is gender
parity among the professional staff members; there
is a special focal point for gender-related issues; and
amendments to put conditions on early release are
currently under consideration. We support the intention
of the Mechanism to attach suitable conditions when
making decisions on early release. That is of key
importance to the families of the victims and to the
countries involved. The Mechanism has already
achieved much of what the Council envisaged and is
ready to face future challenges.
Finally, allow me to say a few personal words
to President Theodor Meron. In the open debate on
upholding international law earlier this year (see
S/PV.8262), he shared with us that he was 9 years old
when his childhood in Poland was violently disrupted
by the Second World War. He survived a forced labour
camp and lost almost all of his family members during
that war. Again this morning, he shared his life’s history
with us as his motivation for his professional legal
work. He touched our hearts. We are deeply impressed
by how his experience motivated him to put his life in
service of ending the atrocities of war by virtue of the
law. Justice must be done for the victims by holding
accountable those who bear the greatest responsibility

18-4310013/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

for the most serious crimes under international law. At
the same time, he ensures that convicted war criminals
are treated fairly.
His contribution to international criminal law
has been truly extraordinary and indispensable to its
development. On behalf of my Government, I sincerely
thank him for his service and wish him all the best in
his future endeavours. On a personal note, I hope that
he will write an autobiography.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, the Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
for their valuable briefings on the progress achieved so
far. Since this may be the last briefing by Mr. Meron as
President of the Mechanism, I would like to express my
profound gratitude for his tireless efforts throughout
his mandate. I wish his successor, Judge Carmel Agius,
every success.
Only 12 months ago, we witnessed the end of the
mandate of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, with the work of the two International
Tribunals coming to a close. Thus, the judicial
jurisdiction on the residual cases was fully transferred
to the International Residual Mechanism to continue the
same approach adopted by the Security Council with a
view to upholding the rule of law, achieving justice and
fighting impunity in order to attain international peace
and security.
Peace does not simply mean ending armed
conflicts; rather, it is the delivery of justice for the
victims of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing
through the prosecution of the persons proved to have
perpetrated such crimes according to due process, as
per the relevant international laws. In the same vein,
we must study and document in depth the experience
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
cultivate the lessons learned and to assess the strengths
and weaknesses thereof. That would serve as a robust
basis for the future, whenever necessary. Today I would
like, therefore, to highlight the following points.
First, we welcome the efforts of the President and
the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals aimed at improving the
performance of the Mechanism through the adoption
of a Code of Professional Conduct for Defence Counsel
14/28

11/12/2018

Appearing before the Mechanism and the development
of an effective modus operandi that would help to
facilitate legal research and analysis and the drafting
of the decisions and sentences handed down, without
prejudice to the mandate provided for in resolution
1966 (2010), and this notwithstanding the following
challenges: the surge in judicial activities concerning
applications for the review of sentences and access to
confidential information; litigation related to contempt
of the Tribunals due to the discontinuation of the
support provided to the two Tribunals in response to
their closure; and the non-approval by the General
Assembly of the Mechanism’s proposed budget for the
period 2018-2019. The Mechanism therefore devised
a reduced budget by laying off staff, which might not
only adversely affect the delivery of its mandate, but
also lead to low staff morale.
Secondly, we commend the expeditious measures
taken by the Mechanism’s judges, Prosecutor and
Registry regarding the cases reviewed thereby, as they
will lead to the speedy indictment of the accused. That
is evidenced by the final sentences passed in certain
cases ahead of the deadline, in spite of the delay in the
Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić case.
Thirdly, we acknowledge the Mechanism’s efforts
as a small, temporary and efficient structure whose
tasks and size will diminish over time, as per its
establishing resolution and as stressed by the evaluation
and progress report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (S/2018/206).
Fourthly, the responsibility to identify the location
of and arrest the eight fugitives does not rest exclusively
with the Mechanism; rather, it should cooperate with
the relevant States and international organizations to
help bolster its efforts, which were carried out on the
basis of significant information regarding the location
of the fugitives.
Fifthly, we value the measures taken by the
Mechanism in response to the concerns of Member
States with respect to resolution 2422 (2018) regarding
early release. Meanwhile, the Mechanism should
take into consideration the views of Member States
regarding its efforts to attain the desired goal.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
gratitude to Peru, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, as well as to the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Office of Internal Oversight
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Services for their efforts towards the implementation of
resolution 1966 (2010).
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz
for the reports on the recent work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. During
the reporting period, the judicial activities of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continued to make headway, as Residual
Mechanism judges issued a total of 244 orders and
decisions. Trial proceedings continue to advance in
the cases Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović, Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić and
Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić. In the case Prosecutor
v. Maximilien Turinabo et al., prosecution has started
regarding the alleged contempt of court by Turinabo
and others. The Office of the Prosecutor is making
further efforts to hunt down the fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. China
hopes that the Residual Mechanism will take further
effective measures to expedite its legal proceedings and
effectively comply with the Council’s requirements that
the Mechanism be small, temporary and efficient.
Last March the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services reviewed the methods and the
work of the Mechanism. China has taken note of the
efforts made by the Mechanism in implementing the
recommendations of the Office. We hope that the
Mechanism will continue to take those recommendations
into consideration as it steadily improves its work.
As the current President of the Residual Mechanism,
Judge Meron, will conclude his term on 18 January 2019,
China wishes to express its deep appreciation for the
work that he has accomplished during his tenure. China
will also actively support the work of the incoming
President, Judge Agius.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank Peru, Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs for coordinating the work between the
Council and the Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Meron, and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their informative briefings,
as well as for being with us today.

S/PV. 8416

The United States would like to begin by
recognizing President Meron and thanking him for
his service. He has led the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since 2012,
overseeing the assumption of responsibilities from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). President Meron’s efforts, through
his leadership of the Mechanism, have helped to ensure
that victims of horrific atrocities addressed by the ICTR
and the ICTY receive meaningful measures of justice.
We congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment as
President, commencing in January.
The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals is a model of our staffing
expectations regarding gender parity. Fifty-six per
cent of professional staff are female, surpassing the
Secretary-General’s goals. We are also happy to see the
Mechanism’s commitment to strategic planning in the
process of downsizing staff and reducing operational
costs. The volume of work that the Mechanism conducts
is impressive, given its lean operations. For example,
there were 244 judicial decisions and orders issued
in this past reporting period alone, in addition to an
ongoing trial in the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović case, as well as the ongoing appeal
proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadžić,
Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware cases.
The arrest and transfer to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals of five accused
Rwandan nationals during the reporting period is an
important example of the need for the Mechanism’s
continued vigilance against any efforts by any party
to interfere with the integrity of its proceedings. We
commend the strong cooperation between Rwandan
authorities and the Mechanism in executing the arrest
and transfer of those individuals. It also highlights
the importance of the continued efforts made by the
Mechanism to protect the thousands of witnesses
who bravely provide testimony so that justice could
be served. The international community owes them a
debt of continued care and protection.
We would also like to recognize the work of
Prosecutor Brammertz. In particular, we commend his
progress on remaining cases, cooperation with States,
strong efforts to build capacity and national judiciaries
in Africa and the former Yugoslavia, prosecuting war
crimes and the innovative use of tribunal evidence

18-4310015/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

holdings to support the search for missing persons.
We encourage the Mechanism to consider proposals to
respond to the concerns raised by some States about
early-release regimes. We note that some individuals
who have been released early have subsequently
denied responsibility for their crimes, and we share the
concern that such denial undermines the fight against
impunity. We recognize and encourage the practice of
consulting with the States concerned about the earlyrelease regime.
In the former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
Prosecutor’s recent announcement of a partnership
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
support the search for missing persons. It is important
for all of us to remember that approximately 10,000
people remain missing from the conflicts in the
Balkans, as Prosecutor Brammertz has noted. We
call on countries in the region to cooperate with one
another, the Mechanism and other groups in those
efforts and commend Croatia and Serbia for their
public commitment to working together to that end.
The politicization of the issue callously disregards
the suffering of the victims and their families. We are
hopeful that the evidence collection of the ICTY may
assist in clarifying the fate and the whereabouts of
missing persons.
We again highlight that, although the ICTY closed
last December, the pursuit of justice for atrocities
related to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia is
not over. Many hundreds of cases remain unresolved
in national jurisdictions. We welcome the work of the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina to file
important indictments in complex cases. Discussions
between the Mechanism and the Serbian Chief War
Crimes Prosecutor are encouraging, and we remain
engaged to see whether or not they lead to the effective
implementation of Serbia’s national war crimes strategy.
We look to Croatia to demonstrate a similar
commitment to national cases in the next reporting
period and to all Governments in the region to cooperate
with one another and the Mechanism to resolve the
remaining cases. The United States shares Prosecutor
Brammertz’s concerns about the ongoing denial of
serious crimes and the glorification of war criminals in
the region. The Republika Srpska National Assembly’s
decision to annul the 2004 report on the Srebrenica
genocide was a step backwards. We call on leaders
and countries to reject efforts to deny the facts of past
conflicts or engage in revisionist history. Ensuring that
16/28

11/12/2018

newer generations share an accurate understanding of
the past is elemental to preventing the recurrence of
atrocities. The United States urges all States, especially
States in the Great Lakes and southern African regions,
to cooperate with the Mechanism and undertake efforts
to arrest and surrender the eight remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR as soon as possible. The United
States continues to offer up to $5 million for information
leading to their arrest.
The work of the Mechanism, like that of the
Rwanda and former Yugoslavia Tribunals previously,
reminds us that, in the face of terrible atrocities, we
can work together to hold accountable those responsible
and achieve a measure of justice for the victims. We
look forward to continuing to support the Mechanism
and the fight against impunity.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to express our gratitude
to President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative briefings and for the
comprehensive and exhaustive report on the work of
the International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals. We also thank the Permanent Representative
of Peru, Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, for continuing to
chair the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals in a transparent, efficient and dynamic
manner, as well as the Office of Legal Affairs.
Before delving into the issue at hand, and given
that it will be the last time we receive a report from
Mr. Theodor Meron in his capacity as President of
the Mechanism, we would like to commend and
acknowledge him for the leadership, effectiveness
and professionalism with which he has helmed the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals from 2012 to date, and for his ongoing
commitment to fighting for accountability by ensuring
that justice is served for the victims of the worst crimes
against humanity.
We once again have a valuable opportunity to
assess the work of one of the international criminal
justice institutions created by the Security Council to
uphold accountability and combat impunity, which are
essential elements for effective conflict prevention. In
that regard, we would like to make three observations
relating to judicial activities, the regulatory framework
and cooperation with States.
First, as was to be expected following the closure
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Yugoslavia in 2017 and that of Rwanda in 2015, the
International Residual Mechanism has become a fully
autonomous body. In the light of the challenges facing
it, such as the increase in the volume of its judicial
work, access to confidential information, requests for
sentence reviews, allegations of contempt of court and
the considerable reduction of its budget by the General
Assembly in December 2017, the Mechanism has proved
to be an entity capable of effectively discharging the
mandate conferred upon it by the Security Council in
resolution 1966 (2010). We note that during the reporting
period, the Mechanism handled a challenging workload
that led to the issuance of 244 decisions and orders,
continuity in the ongoing case Prosecutor v. Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović, appeals proceedings in
the case Prosecutor v. Karadžić and the case Prosecutor
v. Ratko Mladić, referral and pre-trial proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al.
and a series of other judicial matters, including orders
pertaining to sentence reviews, access to confidential
information and allegations of contempt of court, as
indicated in the report. We welcome and commend
all such endeavours and encourage the Mechanism to
resolutely continue its noble work.
Secondly, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
Mechanism’s continued efforts to improve the
harmonized rules, procedures and policies that guide
its work. In that regard, we have taken note of the
President’s review of several draft policies, including
the review of the Practice Direction on the Procedure
for the Determination of Applications for Pardon,
Commutation of Sentence and Early Release of Persons
Convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Mechanism, in response
to the concerns raised by some States, including our
own, regarding the early-release regime. We hope
that tangible measures, such as consultations with
judges and conditions for early release, will be the
genuine result of admitting to and showing remorse
for committing heinous crimes. In that regard, while
we deem it relevant to take account of the views of the
Governments concerned and those of associations of
victims and survivors, we also welcome the adoption
and recent entry into force of the Rules Governing
the Detention of Persons Awaiting Trial or Appeal
before the Mechanism or Otherwise Detained on the
Authority of the Mechanism, which is clear evidence
of the fact that the Mechanism is continuing to work

S/PV. 8416

to improve its effectiveness and streamline its internal
working methods.
We recognize that there is gender parity among
the technical staff, although there are still no women
in the Mechanism’s leadership positions. For that
reason, we want to encourage States first to strengthen
their cooperation with the Mechanism and the States
concerned on the arrest and surrender of fugitives at
large; secondly, to accept the relocation of people who
have been acquitted and released to their countries;
and thirdly, to cooperate in enforcing sentences. In that
regard, we commend Mali, Benin, Senegal, Austria,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Norway, Poland and Sweden for accepting prisoners
in their countries. With regard to this last issue, we
believe that in addition to such cooperation, in order
to truly strengthen accountability and an international
order based on the rule of law, and so that the
Mechanism can fulfil its mandate, we must continue
to build the capacity of the national institutions of the
countries concerned. That has been done in the Great
Lakes region, East Africa and the former Yugoslavia,
ensuring not only support for the principles of
complementarity and national ownership of postconflict accountability, but also the referral of cases
to more appropriate judicial bodies that can potentially
lessen the Mechanism’s workload.
My Government commends the Mechanism’s
efforts to implement the recommendations of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services and the progress it has
made in managing its own archives and those of the two
Tribunals, including preserving and ensuring access
to them. We nevertheless believe that the Mechanism,
specifically the Office of the Prosecutor, continues to
face a major challenge in the apprehension of fugitives.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea affirms its firm
commitment to strengthening the rule of law and
promoting justice by supporting the Mechanism in
every aspect of its work as an instrument of the Security
Council for administering justice and ending impunity,
thereby achieving the international peace and security
we desire. As President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Justice Meron can
take satisfaction in a job well done.
Mr. Miranda Rivero (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings by Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

18-4310017/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, and would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for their work in carrying out
their mandates. My delegation expresses its appreciation
to Judge Meron for his work during his mandate. We
also underscore our gratitude for the delegation of
Peru’s active and diligent work in chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and we
thank the Office of Legal Affairs for providing its
assistance and cooperation for the Group’s meetings.
The work done by the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia over
the past 24 years has made a significant contribution to
the fight against impunity and played a leading role in
the pursuit of justice. In that regard, given the closure of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
December 2017, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals has the major responsibility
of concluding the remaining trials transferred to
its jurisdiction in a timely and effective manner.
Accordingly, it must implement its mandate established
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010) and the provisions
of resolution 2422 (2018) as effectively as possible, not
only while continuing to uphold the jurisdiction, rights
and obligations of both Tribunals, but also while taking
on the important role of strengthening and supporting
the work of national jurisdictions, in keeping with
its establishment as a small, temporary and effective
structure whose functions and size are to be reduced
over time. In that regard, we want to highlight the
assistance and cooperation provided by the Mechanism
and the Office of the Prosecutor to national jurisdictions
to strengthen and develop their capacities. We also
emphasize and acknowledge the work they are doing to
promote and preserve collective memory, as has been
done in Sarajevo, where the first public information
centre has been inaugurated, continuing and building
on the initiative of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.
We have taken note of the progress in the
Mechanism’s jurisdictional activities during the
reporting period, as well as its conduct of appeal
hearings and sentencing review proceedings. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the holding of remote
hearings as an innovative and effective initiative that
should continue to be enhanced so as to ensure the
greatest possible interaction among judges and address
the risks that might arise in connection with securing
data and confidential information in such cases. We
18/28

11/12/2018

also want to emphasize the Mechanism’s capacity to
perform simultaneous functions in cases transferred to
it from the two Tribunals, and we urge it to continue to
harmonize and integrate its work while ensuring that
the differences in working cultures between the offices
in Arusha and The Hague do not affect it. We also note
the issues related to the Mechanism’s use of its allocated
resources and urge that they be used effectively in order
to enhance and maximize the Mechanism’s work.
Despite the progress that has been made, we are
concerned about the number of fugitives who have yet
to be tried before the Tribunal despite the Prosecutor’s
continuing coordination efforts and requests for
assistance. In that regard, we should keep in mind that
States’ cooperation is crucial to preventing impunity
from undermining the work of the Mechanism and
the international community in general. We therefore
urge States to support the Prosecutor’s efforts by
collaborating and cooperating as much as possible. We
also believe that it is important to reiterate that criminal
responsibility lies with the individual and that no
community or nation is responsible for acts committed
by private individuals. In line with the spirit of justice
that the Mechanism pursues and with the importance
of ensuring accountability and reparation for victims,
such people must always answer for their acts.
Early releases and the problems that result from
such decisions are issues that urgently demand our
attention, since there are gaps in the criteria that must
be considered in their application. In that regard, we
call on the Mechanism to take the necessary measures
through its various bodies to resolve that issue and
ensure that the legacy and work of the Tribunals
for Rwanda and Yugoslavia are not undermined or
nullified by the release of individuals who either deny
or refuse responsibility for crimes against humanity.
Similarly, reducing and commuting sentences runs
counter to their very purpose, which is rehabilitating
and reintegrating perpetrators.
We take note of the progress reported regarding
the recommendations by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the Mechanism’s functions and
work from 2016 to 2017, and we encourage its various
bodies to continue implementing them in full. Lastly,
we encourage the Mechanism to continue to develop
its jurisdictional activities with determination, while
making effective and efficient use of the resources
allocated to it, keeping its temporary status in mind and
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

taking the necessary steps to implement appropriate
measures for the short and medium term.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the leadership of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for the report (see S/2018/569) on its activities.
We have been closely following its work, including all
the judicial proceedings under way.
Going on the report, since our previous briefing
(see S/PV.8278) the Mechanism’s work has largely
come to a standstill. It is increasingly reminiscent of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) in the worst periods of its existence. We have
recently been alarmed as we have witnessed judges
being reshuffled, especially those presiding over the
Appeals Chamber. All of that chaos goes back a long
way and is specifically rooted in the irresponsible
approach to the procedure for selecting the judges in
the Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić appeal cases.
As we all know, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have added a number of new names to the
roster of judges. But the Mechanism’s leadership still
sees to it that it is those who worked under the ICTY
who have the most to do with those cases. Hence
the problems.
We have studied all the publicly available
information on the Mechanism’s recent rulings in
the Mladić and Karadžić cases. It seems that amid
the procedural skirmishing and mutual settling of
scores, the Mechanism’s leaders have forgotten that
they hold in their hands the fate of human beings who
are expecting to see justice fairly done. However, the
Council is being asked to simply resign itself to the
fact that it will have to wait several more months for a
decision on the Karadžić case while the new presiding
judge in the Appeals Chamber familiarizes himself the
case file. We hope he will not need as much time as his
counterpart in the Vojislav Šešelj case.
We have taken note of Judge Joensen’s decision
not to refer a contempt-of-court case to the Rwandan
authorities. As we understand it, he believes that
the trial will very probably begin and end faster if it
remains under the Mechanism. We would like to hope
for that. We will see how things actually pan out.
The problems of providing the accused with timely
and appropriate medical care are also still on the
agenda. We are still concerned about the casual attitude
to Ratko Mladić’s health and we have repeatedly

S/PV. 8416

demanded that he receive high-quality examinations
and treatment. We reiterate that if that task is beyond
the Mechanism’s prison doctors, Mr. Mladić should be
temporarily released for treatment in Russia or Serbia.
Our attention has once again been drawn to the
sections of the report on the Residual Mechanism’s
capacity-building assistance to national judicial bodies
that are prosecuting war-crimes cases. I feel obliged to
point out that there is no such mandate for the Office of
the Prosecutor in the Mechanism’s founding documents,
and certainly none for such work in countries that
have no relation to the situations under the Residual
Mechanism’s jurisdiction. We once again urge the
Mechanism to cease its inappropriate expenditure
of the financial and human resources allocated to it.
We expect it not to be distracted by tasks outside its
remit according to the Statute and to focus on fulfilling
the functions assigned to it as quickly and effectively
as possible.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their informative and
comprehensive briefings on the Residual Mechanism’s
semi-annual progress report.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our deep appreciation to the outgoing President of
the Mechanism, Judge Meron, for his outstanding
and invaluable work, and to wish him every success
in his future endeavours. We also want to commend
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru for his
able chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, as well as the Office of Legal
Affairs for its continued support.
Kazakhstan greatly appreciates the Mechanism’s
role and place in the administrative system of
international justice, in helping to preserve our faith
in international law and ensuring that those guilty of
grave crimes will not go unpunished. My delegation
notes with satisfaction the successful continuation of
the Mechanism’s core responsibilities inherited from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
such as the enforcement of sentences, the protection of
victims and witnesses and the management of archives.
We welcome the fact that despite the difficulties
the Mechanism has faced owing to constraints on
its resources, it has made significant progress in

18-4310019/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

establishing itself as a small, temporary and effective
structure. We are pleased to hear from Judge Meron that
the Mechanism benefited from the recommendations
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, thereby
ensuring the efficient and effective fulfilment of the
Mechanism’s mandate.
Given the paramount importance of Member
States’ cooperation with the Mechanism to ensure that
international justice is served, we call on all States to
fully engage with it and comply with its judgments.
We also encourage the Security Council to be united
in its support for the Mechanism. In the context of the
Mechanism’s task of locating and arresting remaining
fugitives, we are pleased with the Prosecutor’s more
proactive efforts in that regard and hope they will be
arrested and brought to justice as soon as possible.
We also welcome the Prosecutor’s strengthened
cooperation with the Rwandan authorities, which will
improve access to evidence.
I would like to mention the work that the
Mechanism is doing with regard to the archives of both
Tribunals, which is truly priceless for both practical and
research purposes. We support its implementation of an
integrated system for managing archives and records.
In conclusion, we affirm our firm commitment
to upholding the principles of justice, accountability
and the rule of law around the world by supporting the
Mechanism in every aspect of its work until it completes
its mandate.
Ms. Habtemariam (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for
the assessment report on the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and for
their briefings today. I would also like to join other
speakers in commending Judge Meron for his work as
presiding Judge, and we wish the incoming President,
Judge Agius, every success. I will just make four
brief points.
First, we welcome the measures taken by the
Mechanism, including the Office of the Prosecutor,
to further enhance its efficiency and streamline its
internal working methods, despite its small staff and
tight resources. We note with appreciation the work
done by the Mechanism since assuming its residual
responsibility, and the measures taken by the Office of
the Prosecutor to assist and build capacity in national
criminal-justice sectors with a view to supporting
20/28

11/12/2018

the prosecution of war-crimes cases arising from the
conflicts in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
Secondly, we have noted the challenges raised in the
assessment report in relation to the General Assembly’s
decision not to approve the Mechanism’s biennium
budget for the period from 2018 to 2019. While we
welcome the measures taken by the Mechanism to
reduce the impact of that decision, its implications for
the Mechanism’s long-term planning and operations
and the completion of its functions in a timely and
effective manner, as well as its impact on the protection
of victims and witnesses, require further attention.
Thirdly, we continue to note with concern that
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) remain at large. In that
regard, we welcome the measures taken by the Office
of the Prosecutor to track and arrest the remaining
fugitives, including by establishing a tracking team and
cooperating with relevant actors such as INTERPOL. In
our view, the cooperation of such relevant international
organizations and States remains critical to pursuing
the remaining eight fugitives. We therefore join the
call for assistance from relevant States in this task. It
is important that they continue to provide the necessary
assistance to the Office of the Prosecutor, including in
tracking those fugitives.
Fourthly, we note with concern some of the issues
that continue to be raised in relation to the early release
of people convicted by the ICTR or the Residual
Mechanism. We have particularly noted the concern
raised by the Prosecutor of the Mechanism regarding
unconditional early release, which has often led to
the denial of crimes and criminal responsibility. In
our view, consultation on early release between the
President of the Mechanism and the country concerned,
Rwanda, particularly its implications for victims and
the community at large, is extremely important. In
this regard, lessons could be drawn from the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone. We encourage the
incoming President and the Office of the Prosecutor to
look into this matter.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need
for the Council to provide continued support to the
Mechanism so it can fulfil its mandated residual
functions. I would also like to encourage Member States
to strengthen their support for the Residual Mechanism,
including in relation to the tracking of fugitives and
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

relocation of acquitted or released persons, as well as
addressing budget-related issues.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation welcomes Judge Theodor Meron and
Mr. Serge Brammertz in their respective capacities as
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their informative
briefings. We also congratulate Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of Peru, on
the work he has accomplished as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in
the work of the Mechanism with regard to its judicial
activities, including those pertaining to the enforcement
of rulings, the protection of victims and witnesses,
archive management, and the prospect of improved
conditions for the implementation of the early-release
regime following the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2422 (2018). We encourage the Mechanism
to continue and complete the implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS), as set out in the progress report
issued by the OIOS in March, in order to achieve
the objectives set by the United Nations in line with
resolution 1966 (2010).
Notwithstanding the progress that has been made
by the Mechanism in the fulfilment of its mission, Côte
d’Ivoire is concerned by the persistence of challenges
yet to be overcome, particularly with regard to Member
States’ cooperation with the institution and judicial
cooperation between the countries of the former
Yugoslavia. In this regard, my delegation reaffirms the
importance of States’ cooperation with the institution
in implementing the Mechanism’s mandate, especially
in connection with the search, arrest and transfer
of fugitives and the implementation of the rulings
handed down. We therefore encourage all Member
States to further strengthen their cooperation with the
Mechanism, and we appreciate the contribution of those
countries providing multifaceted support.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the opinion that judicial
cooperation among the countries of the former
Yugoslavia is essential for the search and arrest of
perpetrators of war crimes who are no longer present
in the territory where they are presumed to have
committed such crimes. My delegation therefore urges

S/PV. 8416

national authorities to play an active role in the fight
against impunity by adopting concrete measures to
improve judicial cooperation in the region.
In conclusion, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Theodor Meron, President
of the Mechanism, who will step down from his post
on 18 January 2019, following several years of tireless
work in the service of international justice. I would also
like to wish Judge Agius, who will succeed President
Meron in January, every success.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister of Justice of Serbia.
Ms. Kuburović (Serbia): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it today on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.
Since the establishment of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), in 1993,
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals after the ICTY completed its work, Serbia
has, for the last quarter century, been travelling on a
path of cooperation with the institution. Much has been
done in this time. Speaking in this very Chamber in
December 2017, I said that
“[f]ighting impunity for the most serious
international crimes and efficiently prosecuting war
crimes were the key reasons for the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.” (S/PV.8120, p. 30)
Regrettably, the Tribunal has not realized the purpose
for which it was established, nor has it provided answers
to many important questions.
Serbia’s cooperation with the Mechanism has
been successful, and my country has fulfilled all its
obligations. The results are also noticeable within
its national legislative system, and its cooperation
with the Mechanism has run unimpeded. The Office
of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism has been given
free access to all evidence, archives and witnesses.
Requests have been attended to, and responses are
being provided to the Office, Chambers and Secretariat
of the Mechanism, including those related to classified
Government and military documents. Witnesses have
been cleared of the obligation to keep Government,
official and/or military secrets.

18-4310021/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As early as last June, a single Judge of the
Mechanism ruled that the contempt-of-court case
Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta be referred
to Serbia, and the decision on the appeal of the Amicus
Curiae Prosecutor is still pending. If the case is referred
to the Serbian judiciary, it will be a step forward in my
country’s relationship with the Mechanism. As a State
with an independent judiciary, Serbia can — and is
willing to — comply with the obligation to try the case
in accordance with the highest standards of judicial
independence and the rule of law. In this context, let
me point out that, during the case-referral process,
the Amicus Curiae made comments in its submissions
that were inappropriate and not founded on the legal
facts or evidence, which accounted for the delays in the
procedure. Considering that a small number of cases
are before the Mechanism, we might conclude that not
much work remains for the Mechanism to carry out.
However, the legacy of the ICTY includes important
questions that still should be addressed, lest they
remain unresolved.
Ten years ago, Serbia launched an initiative
to have its citizens who had been sentenced by the
Tribunal serve their sentences in Serbia. When the
initiative was launched, my country was motivated by
a firm commitment to assuming the responsibility for
enforcement of sentences. The purpose of punishment
includes, inter alia, the social reintegration of sentenced
persons. I believe that we can hardly expect this purpose
to be fulfilled if sentenced persons serve their sentences
in faraway countries where they do not understand the
language, where the possibility of enlisting the help of
a translator or receiving visits from and maintaining
contact with friends and relatives are limited, and
where medical treatment is inadequate. After all, nine
persons of Serbian nationality have died during trials or
while incarcerated.
Let me highlight the particularly difficult situation
of Serbian nationals Milan Martić and Dragomir
Milošević, who are serving their sentences in Estonia. I
have already spoken of them on a number of occasions
in this Chamber and with Judge Meron, President of
the Mechanism. The International Committee of the
Red Cross has also reported on their case. The position
taken by the Secretary-General in his report to the
Security Council on 3 May 1993, namely, that, given the
nature of the crimes in question and the international
character of the Tribunal, the enforcement of sentences
should take place outside the territory of the former
22/28

11/12/2018

Yugoslavia, can hardly continue to be taken as valid. It
made some sense while the war went on in the country.
However, the situation today is altogether different, and
my country insists that the question be reconsidered.
During his visit to Belgrade in November, President
Meron gave his assurances that there were no obstacles
to realizing this initiative. He advised that it be brought
to the attention of the Security Council, under whose
resolutions the Tribunal and the Mechanism have been
established. I therefore take this opportunity to call
on the Secretary-General to instruct the Mechanism
to assess the initiative and make it possible for the
Security Council to consider the current practice
relative to the enforcement of sentences and decide on
how to approach change.
Serbia is ready to accept strict international
monitoring and provide guarantees that sentenced
persons will not be released without a decision by
the Mechanism. We invite its representatives, as well as
representatives of other relevant institutions appointed
by the Secretary-General, to visit Serbia and tour its
prisons to assess the capacities and conditions of the
facilities themselves. Let me reiterate that my country
will continue to advance the initiative, all the more so
as the sentenced persons are advanced in age and the
majority of them are not in the best of health.
In February 2016, Serbia adopted a national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes for the period
2016-2020, thereby demonstrating its commitment to
building up its national judiciary and supporting all
judicial and administrative investigative agencies, as
well as other independent monitoring and reporting
organizations. Since the decision of the Government to
establish a working body to monitor the implementation
of the strategy in August 2017, four reports have been
submitted on the progress made so far, the most recent
of which was submitted on 21 November.
The adoption of the Prosecutorial Strategy for
the Investigation and Prosecution of War Crimes in
the Republic of Serbia in the period 2018 to 2023, in
accordance with the Action Plan for Chapter 23 and the
National War Crimes Prosecution Strategy, accentuated
the importance of greater efficiency in processing
war crimes. The funds to enhance the capacities of
the Prosecutor’s Office have been provided by the
Government, while the number of the employees
of the Office, in particular of Deputy Prosecutors,
has been increased. Five new Deputies have been
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

appointed since the last meeting of the Security
Council on this agenda item, in June (S/PV.8278). The
Prosecutorial Strategy has also been commended by the
Prosecutor’s Office of the Mechanism. During the visit
of Prosecutor Brammertz in October, agreement was
reached on organizing a prosecutors’ training course
in March 2019, in cooperation with the Belgrade’s
Judicial Academy and as part of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism’s support for Serbia. Mr. Brammertz will
be one of the lecturers.
The progress report of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism notes that regional judicial cooperation in
war crimes matters between the countries of the former
Yugoslavia is at its lowest level in years and faces
increasingly immense challenges. The report goes on to
say that decisive action is needed to reverse the current
negative trends and ensure that war criminals do not
find safe haven in neighbouring countries.
It is important to note that, ever since the Tribunal
was established, it adopted a selective, ethnicallytainted approach when it came to the number of both
indictments in and case referrals to the judiciaries of
the successor States of the former Yugoslavia. It turns
out that, in the past, the Tribunal had the greatest
confidence in the judicial institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In more literary parlance, those courts
used to be i favoriti della regina. This conclusion is
borne out of the following data. The largest number
of cases have been referred to courts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for trial: 6 out of 10 persons indicted by
the ICTY. Most of them were Serbs. In contrast, Serbia
and Croatia have received one case each, and none of
those referrals concerns persons indicted for crimes
against Serbs. Does that mean that no crimes have
been committed against the Serbian population and
that no one is responsible for the killing, torture and
persecution of Serbs?
Notwithstanding the selective approach by the
Tribunal, we can hardly agree with the assessment
in the Mechanism’s report that cooperation among
countries of the region has been inadequate and that
there has been equal refusal to cooperate. My country
has made every effort to cooperate with the Mechanism
and expects inter-State cooperation in the region to be
at an appropriate level. Serbia has concluded bilateral
agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
while cooperation among regional judiciaries is based
on the agreements concluded among the relevant
Offices of the countries of the region and the Office of

S/PV. 8416

the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia.
We are fully committed to the full implementation of
the agreements and relevant protocols. Unfortunately,
not all of the countries in the region share this position.
Let me point out in this context that my country’s
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
provision of legal assistance is at a very high level. It is
our hope that we will achieve this level of cooperation
with Croatia.
Last March, a meeting between the Ministers
of Justice of the Republic of Serbia and the Republic
of Croatia was held in Belgrade. As a result, two
commissions were established, one to exchange lists
of persons indicted or sentenced for war crimes, and
the other to draft a bilateral agreement relative to the
processing of war crimes. The first commission has
completed its task, while the second has been continually
working on its assignment; a meeting of the latter
commission’s members is expected to be convened this
month. We firmly believe that this is an important step
forward in addressing outstanding bilateral issues, even
though Croatia continues to try Serbs in absentia and
without facts or sufficient evidence and, in the opinion
of many, passes judgments lightly, thereby deliberately
preventing Serbs expelled from Croatia from being able
to return home. Serbia does not try cases in absentia;
indeed, dozens of cases have simply been suspended.
From 1 January to 30 November, eight new
indictments were confirmed by the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia against 12
persons. Six of the indictments were transferred from
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and one, against two persons, from the Prosecutor’s
Office of the Republic of Croatia. In 24 cases, the
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic
of Serbia received no response from the Prosecutor’s
Office of the Republic of Croatia on requests for
evidence and information, despite the terms of the
cooperation agreement.
Some 103 persons, most of them of Serbian
nationality, have been tried in 23 cases in the War
Crimes Department of the Higher Court in Belgrade;
judgments in two cases were handed down right before
the convening of today’s meeting. That is eloquent proof
that Serbia is ready to try all war crimes, irrespective of
the citizenship of the perpetrator, which is not, I regret
to say, the practice in the other countries of the region.

18-4310023/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Unlike in a number of previous years, bilateral
meetings of the Ministers of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of
Croatia were held this year. I therefore see no reason
why the efforts of the countries of the region, aimed at
reconciliation, should not be given their due.
The progress report notes that judicial cooperation
between Serbia and the self-declared State of Kosovo
in war crimes matters had broken down. However, I
would like to point out that cooperation is taking place
through the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). UNMIK’s competencies
in the judicial field were set forth in the joint document
signed by UNMIK and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in November 2001. All along, however,
the judicial authorities of Serbia have been prevented
from undertaking proceedings in cases of war crimes
committed in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija.
In addition to the refusal by Pristina to respond to
cooperation requests by the Office of the War Crimes
Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, UNMIK now
makes INTERPOL notices related to Albanian terrorists
from Kosovo and Metohija invisible for no apparent
reason. UNMIK has not been mandated by the Security
Council to act in this way. Yet still more serious
consequences for the Serbian people in Kosovo and
Metohija could result from recent irrational decisions
taken by Pristina, and a humanitarian catastrophe of
unprecedented proportions is possible. I hope that the
international community will not remain silent and
tolerate these blatant violations of basic human rights.
At the Western Balkans Summit in London on
10 July, the countries of the European Union and
summit participants from the Western Balkans signed a
joint declaration on missing persons, the key document
upholding the rights of all families of the missing
persons to truth, justice and compensation. The
declaration, which was signed by the Prime Ministers
of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Austria,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Germany, Italy, Poland, Slovenia and
the United Kingdom, and the professed Prime Minister
of Kosovo, expresses support for the efforts to find
the 12,000 persons still listed as missing in conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia. Of particular significance in
the context of regional cooperation is the fact that, on
6 November, the Commission on Missing Persons of
the Republic of Serbia signed the Framework Plan to
Address the Issue of Persons Missing From Conflicts
on the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia, at the
24/28

11/12/2018

headquarters of International Commission for Missing
Persons in The Hague.
It is particularly worrisome that the progress report
points to the publication of the memoirs of General
Pavković. The publication of memoirs of one participant
in the war — and not the only participant — cannot by
itself be construed as a glorification of the position of
one side. Memoirs are personal views of the events, and,
under article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, everyone has the right to freely express his or
her opinions. It is not clear how the memoirs of Serbian
convicts are the only ones to have found their way
into the progress report of the Mechanism presented
to the United Nations, whereas the memoirs of others
of different nationalities have not. The progress report
states that a key tool for ensuring continued cooperation
with the Mechanism is the policy of conditionality
of the European Union, which links membership
progress to full cooperation with the Mechanism. The
Mechanism’s position of asserting pressure on Serbia
as we undergo European Union accession negotiations
goes against the theme of cooperation with my country.
That position has always illustrated that the Mechanism
is of a political nature, not a legal one. That has been
the Mechanism’s principal shortfall from the time it
was established.
In conclusion, let me point out that, notwithstanding
that shortfall, the cooperation between Serbia and
the Mechanism has been successful. There are no
outstanding issues in our cooperation, and I trust and
believe that the efforts invested by my country will be
acknowledged and presented in the coming reports.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Dronjic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December. It is nice to see an African country
presiding over the Council. I would also like to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism of the Criminal Tribunals, and
its Prosecutor, Mr. Baron Serge Brammertz, for their
reports. It seems as if Judge Meron has been a part
of the Mechanism forever, and therefore it is hard to
believe that he has just delivered his last report to the
Council. I understand why he feels relieved to complete
his mandate, and I wish him all the best in his future
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

endeavours. His legacy will be safe within the archives
of the Mechanism.
We join others in taking note of the progress
achieved by the Mechanism during the reporting period,
as well as the additional advances it has made with
regard to its residual functions. We also take note of the
intensive efforts to strengthen its activities and improve
its operations, procedures and working methods. It
remains crucial to provide the necessary support for
the work of the Mechanism and align together all the
elements necessary for the successful conclusion of the
its mandate within a reasonable period of time. It is of
the utmost importance to highlight that, throughout
the years, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s cooperation with
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
has been steadfast and full, as stated in the reports
of the Tribunal. Accordingly, we remain committed
to contributing actively to the Mechanism’s efforts to
accomplish its mission. Furthermore, we encourage
the Mechanism to continue to seek ways to maximize
the effectiveness and efficiency of its work in order to
fulfil its mandate.
We appreciate the continued support and assistance
of the Office of the Prosecutor to our national judicial
authorities in charge of prosecuting war crimes cases,
as that remains vital for us to pursue and fulfil our
commitments. We are also fully aware that the main
burden to ensure accountability for all the crimes
committed lies primarily on us. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains committed to the fight against impunity.
The precondition for that is to have accountable and
independent judicial institutions that enjoy public
trust throughout the country. That goes not only for
prosecuting and punishing individual perpetrators
of war crimes but also for achieving reconciliation
among Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, who are constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s assessments on
the progress in achieving accountability for crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia, although
national jurisdictions still face a significant backlog
of war crimes to process. In that regard, Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches great importance to the promotion
of stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
among prosecutors’ offices. It is necessary for Member
States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism in order
for justice to be done. Likewise, judicial cooperation
in the region remains essential to ensure accountability
and bring about reconciliation. In that regard, the

S/PV. 8416

cooperation between the State Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the
War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia is
recognized as a productive example of that. Genuine
reconciliation strength lies in our joint efforts to deliver
justice to the many victims within our region. As noted,
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made steady improvement in prosecuting war crimes
cases. During the reporting period it filed 16 new
indictments, and more are expected by the end of the
year. That includes indictments in complex cases. As
for the so-called category II cases, it has been noted
that they have all been processed, and trials and appeals
are under way. Overall, significant progress has been
achieved, and we remain committed to proceeding in
the same manner.
We are continuing our overall efforts to strengthen
the national justice systems at all levels. We are currently
in the process of identifying and defining further
activities necessary to advance the implementation
of our national war crimes strategy in order to bring
to justice persons responsible for war crimes. In
that regard, we also rely on the continued support of
the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Development Programme in order to strengthen the
human and material resources of judicial institutions to
process war crimes cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and for general capacity-building, which is important
for the full implementation of the measures and goals
set out in our national war crimes strategy.
The fight against impunity in a complex,
multinational State such as Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a precondition for achieving reconciliation and
sustaining peace. In that regard, prosecuting war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious affiliation
of the perpetrators or victims, is of crucial importance
for long-term stability in the country and the region.
Once again, we confirm our strongest commitment
to accountability and the delivery of justice without
selectivity or hesitation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I welcome the honourable
President of the International Residual Mechanism of
the Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, as well as
its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and I thank them
for today’s briefings on the work of the Mechanism. At

18-4310025/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the outset, let me express our gratitude to and praise for
Judge Meron for all he has accomplished as President
of the Mechanism, and prior to that at the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would
also like to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius on his
appointment as President of the Mechanism as of
19 January 2019 and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.
Croatia fully supports the Mechanism in its mission
to bring to justice the most prominent perpetrators
of the horrible crimes committed during the 1990s in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia. A significant
number of victims and their families still have not
received long-awaited justice, and we hope that the
work of the Mechanism will contribute to that. It is
therefore important to avoid any delays or setbacks
in the implementation of the Mechanism’s mandate.
Croatia has not hesitated to do its part in ensuring
accountability. Many trials have been completed to
date and some are still ongoing. However, there are
war crimes cases that have not been fully investigated
or prosecuted yet. We owe it to the victims of those
atrocities to leave no judicial stone unturned. Croatia
thus continues to investigate and prosecute war crimes
committed in its territory since 1991 onwards.
At the same time, Croatia continues to pay great
attention to the remaining cases before the Mechanism.
They are of the utmost importance to the legacy of
accountability for aggression against Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the last decade of twentieth
century. We expect all of them to be completed within a
reasonable period of time, without any delays.
When it comes to the efficiency and time
management of proceedings, the work of ICTY, which
closed its doors a year ago, is not the best case to follow.
The Residual Mechanism must draw the necessary
lessons from the ICTY’s shortcomings and ensure the
steady and unimpeded progress of all its proceedings.
The Mechanism’s functions are clearly defined
and include the tracking and prosecution of remaining
fugitives, appeals proceedings, review proceedings,
retrials, trials for contempt and false testimony,
monitoring cases referred to national jurisdictions, the
protection of victims and witnesses, the supervision
of the enforcement of sentences, assistance to national
jurisdictions upon request, and the preservation and
management of archives. These are important tasks and
Croatia extends all its support to Mechanism’s efforts
26/28

11/12/2018

to meet them in full. At the same time, we expect the
Prosecutor, in fulfilling his functions, to focus squarely
on cases and tasks assigned to him by the Mechanism’s
agenda and mandate.
Cooperation with the Mechanism, as previously
with the ICTY, as well as regional cooperation among
the States concerned pertaining to war crimes issues,
have no alternative. Croatia also attaches great
importance to continued constructive cooperation
with other States of the region. Nonetheless, it has to
be emphasized that meaningful regional cooperation is
not a one-way street. It requires trust among the States
concerned and goes hand in hand with the willingness
and sincere commitment of all States to prosecute war
crimes, without any double standards or exemptions
in relation to their nationals or members of certain
national groups.
We are deeply concerned over the spreading
practice of denial of past wrongdoings throughout
the region. That revisionism goes hand in hand with
the glorification of war criminals and the crimes
committed. All of this evokes the traumas of the past
and has destructive effects on the stability of the region.
The issue of missing persons remains at the top
of our agenda, with many cases remaining unsolved.
Cooperation among States of the region is a necessary
precondition for the successful completion of the
process of clarifying the fate of missing persons and
providing relief to their families. Certain small steps
forward have been made, but much more needs to be
done, and there is not one justified reason to delay the
identification of a thorough solution to this problem.
Serbia still shows no readiness to open its archives,
which would be a crucial step forward. We welcome
the role of the Mechanism in supporting the search
for missing persons, and in this regard we note the
cooperation established between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the International Committee of the Red
Cross following their recent signature of a memorandum
of understanding.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, as I
have on many occasion before, that Croatia remains
firmly committed to development of good relations
and cooperation with neighbouring States, and we
strongly support their aspirations towards the European
Union, based on strict and full compliance with the
membership conditions.
18-43100

11/12/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank
you, Sir, and Côte d’Ivoire for organizing today’s debate.
Since the beginning of Côte d’Ivoire’s presidency last
week, this is the third debate you have organized and
the third time I am addressing the Council this month.
It is a testament both to your productive presidency and
to the vital pertinence to Rwanda of the issues you have
focused on.
I thank Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. I also take this opportunity to thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for the cooperation between
his Office and the Office of the Prosecutor General of
Rwanda and other judicial authorities, particularly with
regard to recent judicial activities relating to cases of
contempt of court and incitement to commit contempt
of court in which five Rwandan nationals, including
a former investigator on one of the genocide convicts
defence team, have been charged with participating in
a joint criminal enterprise to overturn the conviction of
Augustin Ngirabatware, a genocide convict who was a
Minister in the Government that abetted the genocide
in 1994. Many others who have spoken before me have
referred to that case.
In another recent development in Rwanda, in
September more than 2,000 inmates convicted of various
crimes, including genocide denial, were granted early
release. That is further evidence of Rwanda’s choice
to pursue restorative justice rather than retributive
justice. These developments remind us that the pursuit
of justice for crimes of genocide requires a long-term
commitment — a commitment that necessitates resolve,
consistency and an understanding of the essential
contribution of justice to ending a culture of impunity.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, let us all remember that
it is not for lack of legal frameworks that the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda was perpetrated.
Frameworks are only frameworks; they do not
implement themselves; institutions and people do. They
require consistent implementation and enforcement by
national institutions.
We also note that this is the final briefing by Judge
Theodor Meron. This is a time for us to look at what
has been achieved, but more importantly this is a point

S/PV. 8416

of transition that provides us with an opportunity not
only to take stock of the work done by the Mechanism
but also offer the incoming President recommendations
that Rwanda believes can strengthen the work of
the Mechanism.
Of pivotal importance, we expect the next President
to improve the methods of work of the Mechanism
by making them more transparent, accountable and
inclusive of all stakeholders’ views. The point we are
making here seems like very basic common sense;
however, recent years have shown us that common
sense has at times eluded the Mechanism, not least in
its treatment of early releases of genocide convicts. The
lack of consistency is the widest avenue to partiality.
We find it strange that our consistent demands
for consistency and accountability have at times
been considered as carrying political connotations.
Consistency and accountability have never undermined
the independence of judicial processes; if anything,
they actually protect it. As a Member State and
a stakeholder in the Mechanism, Rwanda cannot
overstate the importance of improved transparency and
accountability in the Mechanism.
I wish to make four simple recommendations, all of
which my Government has consistently articulated but
are yet to be implemented.
First, the force and effect of international
criminal law must be strengthened by instituting a
comprehensive provision for conditional early release
of genocide convicts who are deemed eligible for early
release. Secondly, we must combat genocide ideology
in all its manifestations and forms, including genocide
denial by those who have been convicted of genocide
and have benefited from early release. Thirdly, we must
step up our efforts and collaboration among States to
apprehend fugitives that remain at large. Fourthly, we
must send the genocide convicts still in the custody
of the Mechanism to serve out the remainder of their
sentences in Rwanda. Those are the four simple
recommendations that my Government wishes to make.
At this stage, we commend the leadership of the
Permanent Representative of Peru as the Chair of
the Informal Working Group on the International
Tribunals. My Government takes note that, as an
initial result of the implementation of resolution 2422
(2018), conditions for early release have been applied
by the Mechanism to one convict seeking early release.
That is encouraging, but, again, we note the lack of

18-4310027/28

S/PV.8416

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

consistency. What is the justification for this ad hoc
approach? Why only one? We urge the Mechanism to
put in place comprehensive, consistent and rigorous
provisions for all grants of conditional early release,
based on clear eligibility requirements. We once again
point to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone as
a best practice.
Having a comprehensive and rigorous approach to
conditional early release would ensure that the Court
grants conditional release only to those who have
demonstrated adequate rehabilitation, and avoid the
repeated occurrence of what has been reported by the
Prosecutor, that “those granted early release often deny
the crimes and their criminal responsibility immediately
upon release” (S/2018/1033, annex II, para. 30).
The Mechanism should also step up its efforts
aimed at monitoring the activities of genocide convicts
who have benefited from early release, and who are
nevertheless indulging in activities that propagate
genocide ideology and genocide denial. We continue
to witness groups purporting to speak on behalf of
genocide convicts, sometimes involving individuals
who once worked with the Tribunal. We will gladly
share details with whomever is interested.
Sending genocide convicts to serve out the
remainder of their sentences in Rwanda would be
beneficial to the Mechanism, to Rwanda and to the
broader membership. It would help alleviate the
funding constraints faced by the Mechanism, but more
importantly, the rehabilitation of convicts would be

28/28

11/12/2018

accelerated by serving out their sentences in Rwanda,
where they committed their crimes.
The success of Rwanda’s restorative justice system
has been well documented. Our focus on restorative
justice, rather than retributive justice, has enhanced
our ability to reconcile and live together in unity, even
after the genocide and after such horrible crimes. In
addition, Rwanda’s capacity to ensure high standards
of justice is seen in a number of cases from other States
being successfully referred to Rwanda for trial. It is now
evening in Kigali. As we speak, a Rwandan genocide
suspect, Mr. Wenceslas Twagirayezu, who sought
refuge in Denmark, is being extradited to Rwanda to
face justice. He is landing in Rwanda now, as we speak.
Finally, we take note of the Prosecutor’s progress
in tracking genocide fugitives. We join him in calling
on Member States to cooperate with the Mechanism in
order to locate and apprehend the remaining fugitives.
These fugitives have not left for outer space; they are
living peacefully and quietly in host countries, many of
which are members of the Council, and some of which
are incoming members of the Council starting early
next year. We expect all Council members — current
and incoming — to lead by example by matching
their pronouncements of commitment to international
justice with tangible steps, either by prosecuting
fugitives themselves or by fulfilling their international
obligations through effective cooperation with the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

18-43100
