Resolutiom adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3369 (XXX). Observer status for the Islamic
Conference at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the States members of the Islamic
Conference for co-operation between the United
Nations and the Islamic Conference,
1. Decides to invite the Islamic Conference to participate in the sessions aind the work of the General
Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity
of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
2 383rd plenary meeting
JO October 1975

3375 (XXX). Invitation to the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
efforts for peace in the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Having considered the it.em entitled "Question of
Palestine",
Reaffirming its resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, in which it recogrl!ized the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people,
Recognizing the necessity of achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East at the earliest possible
time,
Believing that the realization of the ina1ienab1e rights
of the Palestinian people in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is a prerequisite to achieving a just and lasting
peace in the area,
Convinced that the participation of the Palestinian
people is essential in any efforts and deliberations aiming at the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East,
1. Requests the Security Council to consider and
adopt the necessary resolutions and measures in order
to enable the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable national rights in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX);
2. Calls for tlle invitation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, to participate in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East which are held under the
a'!5pices of the. United Natiions,. on an equal footing
With other parties, on the basis of resolution 3236
(XXIX);
.
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the CoChairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle East
of the present resolution and to take all necessary steps
to secure the invitation of the Palestine Liberation Organization to participa,re in the work of the Conference
as well as in all other efforts for peace;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this matter to. the General Assembly as soon as
possible.
2 399th plenary meeting
JO November 1975

3376 (XXX).

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974,

3

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of that resolution, 13
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem
of Palestine has yet been achieved,
Recognizing that the problem of Palestine continues
to endanger international peace and security,
l. Reaffirms its resolution 3236 (XXIX);
2. Expresses its grave concern that no progress bas
been achieved towards:
. ('!) The exercise by the Palestinian people of i,ts
mahen~bl~ right~ in Palestine, including the right to selfdetermmatton without external interference and the right
to national independence and sovereignty;
. ( b) The exercise by Palestinians of their inalil nab le
nght to return to their homes a:nd property from which
they have been displaced and uprooted;
3. Decides to establish a Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
composed of twenty Member States to be appointed by
the General Assembly at the currenit session;
4. Requests the Committee to consider and recommend t? the G~neral Assembly a programme of implemen~hon, d~signed to e~able the Palestinian people to
exercise the nghts recogmzed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) and to take into
accoun~, in the formulation of its r~endations for
the implementation of that programme, all the powers
conferred by the Charter upon the principal organs of
the United Nations;
. 5. Authorizes the Committee, in the fulfilment of
its mandate, to establish contact with and to receive
and ~onsider suggestions and proposal; from, any State
and mtergovemmental regional organi2Jation and the
Palestine Liberation Organization;
6. J_?.eques~s the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee ~th all the necessary facilities for the performance of its tasks;
7. Requests the Committee to submit its report and
recommendations to the Secretary-General no later •than
1 Jun~ 1976 and requests ~he Secretary-General to
transmit the report to the Security Council;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider as
soon !3.5 possible after 1 June 1976, the question of the
exercise by the Palestinian people of the inalienable
rights recognized in paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution
3236 (XXIX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
~ommittee of t~e action taken by the Security Council
m accordance with paragraph 8 above;
_10. Auth_orizes the Committee, taking into conside' _
atton the action taken by the Security Council, to subJt
to the General Assembly, at its thirty-first session
report containing its observations and recommendati~ns··
11. Decides to include the item entitled "Questio~
of J>:alestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-first
session.
2399th plenary meeting
JO November 1975

a

*

*

*

At its 2443rd plenary meeting, on 17 December 1975 the
Genera_/ Assemb~y, in pursuance of paragraph 3 of the dbove
resolution, appointed the following twenty Member States a.s
members of the Committee on the Exercise of :he Inalienable
18 A/10265.
