TWKNTY-TlIlRD

YEAR,

MEETING: 5 MARCH 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1396) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add, l/Rev.1 and Add.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

s/PV. 1396

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 5 March 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algei-ia, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 396)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter, dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania!
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saud1
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,

Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the Security Council’s previous decision, if
there are no objections, I shall invite the representatives of
Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the
United Arab Republic, Zambia and Colombia to take the
places reserved for them at the sides of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that when one of them
wishes to speak he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. A. Braithwaite,
(Guyana), Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. J. Huneeus (mile},
Mr. H. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. A. Vratu,&z (Yugoslavia), Mr. A. Clark (Nigeria), Mr. M. R. Abdul- Wahab
(United Arab Republic), Mr. I. R. B. Manda (Zambia) and
Mr. A. Herrcin Medina (Colombia) took the places reserved
fbr them.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The
Security Council will now resume consideration of the
question on its agenda.
3. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to extend to you the warm congratulations of
my delegation on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. My delegation and
my country have very high regard for the sister nation of
Senegal and for its outstanding leader, President Se&or. It
is a matter of great satisfaction to us that the Council will
be led by you this month. We have already been impressed
with the qualities of leadership that you have displayed in
the numerous and difficult informal consultations that have
been held so far. We have no doubt that under your wise
guidance the Council will deal with its tasks expeditiously
and effectively.
4. May I also associate my delegation with those delegations which have taken the floor before me in paying a
sincere tribute to the outgoing President, Ambassador
Lopez of Paraguay. Ambassador Lopez has more than
justified our expectations by his tactful and very able
handling of the issuesfaced by the Council last month.
5. It is not my intention to comment at length on the
draft resolution contained in document S/8429 and cosponsored by India, among others, but merely to lend my
delegation’s support to the explanations given by Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan, Ambassador Bouattoura of Algeria

and Ambassador

Silos of BraziI at our meeting on 4 March
These three distinguished colleagues of
mine have very ably presented our point of view to the
Council and I congratulate them on the effectiveness of
their presentation.

/1395th

illegal trial of eight more South West Africans under the
same discredited Terrorism Act,’ Furthermore, we have
received disturbing reports that there are about 150 more
South West Africans detained by the South African
Government whom it plans to bring to trial in batcheswith
a view to terrorizing the African people of South Africa and
South West Africa. In the circumstances my delegation
hopes that all the members of the Security Council,
conscious of their obligations and responsibilities, will
support the objectives of the draft resolution. As has
already been stated here in the Council yesterday, the
co-sponsorsare ready to engage in further consultations
with a view to arriving at mutually acceptable formulations.
It is in this spirit that we shall examine any and all
proposalswhich have been and may be made.

meeting/,

6. I have explained the position of my delegation on the
question of the illegal trial in Pretoria of thirty-five South
West Africans
at our meeting on 19 February
1968
[.2392nd meeting]. I shall, therefore, be extremely brief.
My delegation was and is of the view that it is imperative
for the Security Council to take urgent and adequate steps,
not excluding sanctions, to deal with the situation created
by South Africa’s defiance of the Security Councii’s own
resolution 245 (1968) of 25 January 1968. These steps will
necessarily have to be of such a nature as to convince South
Africa of the futility or persisting in its stubborn arrogance.

10. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Allow me first of all,
Mr. President, to congratulate you upon your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council. We are pleasedindeed
that our deliberations during the month of March will be
presided over by such an eminent representative of a great
African nation, and we offer you our entire co.operation.

7. It has been said within and without these chambers that
our draft resolution,
by referring to Article 25 of the
Charter, necessarily commits the Council to take action
under Chapter VII. In general, India is among those
Members of the Organization which believe that Article 25
of the Charter has very close and perhaps exclusive links
with Chapter VII. However, I am tempted to agree with
Ambassador
Bouattoura’s
statement
yesterday
in this
.Conncil that allusion to Article 25 does not necessarily
imply a mechanical reference to a specific chapter of the
Charter. This I do because the case we are considering
today is sui generic We are not now dealing with the usual
situation envisaged under Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter. This is not a dispute between two or more Member
States of the Organization. It is a dispute, although that is a
mild word for it, between the Organization and a Member
State which has persistently
defied the Organization. In
such a situation it is necessary to warn the Member State
concerned that, any further defiance of the United Nations
will not bc tolerated by the Security Council. Hence the
reference to Article 25 of the Charter. Such a clear warning
is desirable so that the Government of South Africa nTay
know what the position of the Council will be the next
time we consider this case.

11. I wish also to pay tribute to Mr. Solano L6pez of
Paraguay for the tirelessly patient and friendly manner in
which he conducted our activities during the month of
February.
12. In our deliberations on the illegal trial and sentencing
of the South West African patriots we have been confronted with problemsof a moral, legal and political nature.
The violation by South Africa of fundamental principles
embodied in our Charter, in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and in the International Covenants on
Human Rights had to be consideredin our discussions.
13. The Hungarian delegation has examined the problem
before us with a desireto find urgent and efficient meansof
helping the illegally imprisoned patriots. We have been
guided in this approach by the fact that the question is not
merely one of local friction, and that South West Africa is a
United Nations responsibility so that, in a way, it is the
authority and prestige of the Organization which is at stake.

8. We have agreed to co-sponsor the draft resolution
contained in document S/8429 even though it does not
fully conform to the position of my delegation. We have
done so in a spirit of compromise
and with the clear
understanding
that this is only the first essential and
immediate step. If South Africa refuses to comply with the
provisions of the present draft resolution, the Council, in
terms of operative paragraph 4 of the draft, will have to
meet immediately to decide on the application of effective
measures envisaged in the Charter. My delegation, for one,
has no doubts about what those effective measures should
be and when the time comes we shall press for their
adoption. While, therefore, fully backing the draft resolution now before us, which is the very minimum of action
which the Council can take at present, my delegation hopes
that when the time for effective action comes ail delegations will leave aside their reservations and join their efforts
in the common cause.

14. It was gratifying to hear the representative of Pakistan
say that the co-sponsorsof the draft resolution appreciated
our efforts to contribute to the solution of this problem.
We most certainly appreciate the fervent efforts of the
African and Asian Members of our Organization and others
that are co-operating with them, and we feel that the draft
resolution on the whole adequately responds to the
situation brought about by the defiance of South Africa. It
reflects the good intentions and the goodwill of these
delegations and the high hopes they attach to this draft
resolution. In saying this, I do not wish to hide the fact that
we are not entirely happy with certain provisions of the
text before us.
15. To refer to only one of these provisions, paragraph3
does not face the issuesquarely when it “calls upon the
1 Acl No. 83 of 1967 to Prohibit Teuoristic Activiti..s and to
Amend the Law Relating to Criminal Procedure; and to Provide for
Other Incidental Matters.

The situation
is very grave and urgent, asis emphasized
by the decision of the Pretoria rCgirne to hold another
9.

2

Members of the United Nations to co-operate with the
Security Council . . . to ensure that the Government of
South Africa complies with the provisions of the present
resolution”. It would be more just and, what is more
important, much more efficient to point the finger at those
who have consistently refused to co-operate with the
United Nations, instead of equating them with those who
have consistently co-operated.

the necessary determination, we shall have to consider more
effective measures to bring about the release and repatriation of the illegally imprisoned South West African patriots.
As of today, we have to say that, knowing the officially
stated position of South Africa, we have some doubts about
the effect of the present draft resolution.
21. The South African Government says, for instance, that
it &‘. . . has no intention of abdicating its responsibilities
towards
the people of South
West Africa.”
[S/835 7/Add.9.1 In this document, issued as recently as 19
February 1968 and included in the report of the
Secretary-General on the position of South West Africa, the
Government of South Africa once again openly repudiates
the decision of the General Assembly putting an end to
South Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa.

16. WC feel that the contrast is too glaring between the
conduct of such States as the United Kingdom, the United
States and the Federal Republic of Germany-to name only
a few-which
continue to maintain close economic, diplomatic and military links with South Africa in spite of valid
United Nations resolutions, and States such as mine which
have acted in accordance with those resolutions. The
Hungarian People’s Republic and other States, including the
German Democratic Republic, have in effect taken steps to
meet the provisions listed in Article 41 of the Charter. I
mention the German Democratic
Republic expressly
because the Foreign Minister of that country, who has had
no opportunity to present his views before our Council and
our Organization, has set out the views of his Government
in a telegram sent to the Secretary-General:with
the
request that its content be conveyed to the Government of
South Africa-condemning
this illegal trial and calling for
the liberation of the prisoners who have been sentenced

22. It is for this reason that we were surprised to hear
some suggestions put forward by members of this Council
advocating a larger role for Red Cross operations, the
sending of some representatives from this body to South
Africa, etc., measures which on countless occasions have
been ignored by South Africa. This time, in addition, we
are witnessing a further repugnant defiance of the United
Nations by the Pretoria regime by placing eight other South
West African patriots on trial. Thus lhe time for such
measures is long past. Even if such representatives were to
be permitted to visit South Africa, that action would hardly
produce any concrete results. Only truly effective and
specific measures can compel the racist Government of
South Africa to heed world public opinion.

17. This attitude is in sharp contrast with the opinion of
certain other countries, including the Federal Republic of
Germany, which is often described by some as the bulwark
of freedom in the Western world and which wholeheartedly supports the racist colonial rigime in Pretoria. We
thus feel that the blanket appeal contained in paragraph 3
enables the supporters of South Africa to pose as if they
had acted in the past in accordance with the United Nations
resolution--which
is not the case.

23. South Africa is fully aware of this and clearly counts
on the continued support of leading members of our
Council, It goes to great lengths to underline their
community of interests and thus makes rather revealing
statements. Allow me, Mr. President, to quote only one of
them from the South African report mentioned earlier:

18. With regard to the differing positions concerning the
applicability of Article 25 of the Charter, we wish merely
to state that, in our view, South Africa has already provided
a solution in this connexion. It has refused to implement
resolution 245 (1968) of the Council and, by so doing, has
clearly violated the obligations which it had undertaken
under the Charter.

“Being responsible for the welfare of all the inhabitants
of South West Africa, the South African Government
cannot allow a group of trained terrorists to create a
Viet-Gong-like reign of violence.” (Ibid.)
Small wonder that those who try to suppress the struggle
for freedom and independence of the peoples of South
West Africa and that of the people of Viet-Nam regard their
adversaries as terrorists, But is it really too much to expect
that some of them will marshal at least a fraction of the
energy they expend in waging war on peoples fighting fqr
their independence and use that fraction of energy this time
to face the white supremacists in Pretoria?

19. In these circumstances my delegation feels that what
the Council should be seriously concerned with is not
legalistic exercises in some abstract concepts. We have to do
everything in our power to achieve the required resultsthat is to bring about the release and repatriation of the
South West African patriots. If the allies of South Africa
can influence the Pretoria regime so that it implements our
resolution, we shall be content with that. But to achieve
that political objective it is absolutely essential for the
countries maintaining close economic, military and political
relations with South Africa to act resolutely. That is what
our present draft resolution invites them to do and it is
what our previous resolution invited them to do.

24. The Hungarian delegation understands and fully supports the intentions of the sponsors which were SO
eloquently explained to this Council at the 1395th meeting
by the representative of Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi. We
expect that all members of the Security Council will
concentrate their efforts not on further weakening the draft
resolution contained in document S/8429 by advancing
semantic arguments, but on fully implementing it without
delay, That is the only manner in which we shall live up to
the principles of the Charter and achieve freedom for the
South West African patriots.

20. Thus, in our view, the results obtained will show to
what extent these countries are ready to use their considerable influence in Pretoria. Should they fail to act with
3

25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
further speakers on my list. If there is no objection, I shall
adjourn the meeting in order to allow members of the
Council to continue their consultations. The next meet%?

Of the Council will take place after &e
corMlltations.

COINA

The meeting rose at 4.5 p. 112.

4
