General A11embly-Twenty-third Senion

64

(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia,
the return of exiles to the Territory;
h
I
(b) To take all the necessary step~ to ensure.it_ at on_y
the indigenous people of the Territory participate m
the referendum;
(c) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sahara ;
(d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to
participate actively in the organization and holding of
the referendum ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co~sultation
with the administering Power and the S~ecial ~o_mmittee. to appoint immediately the special m1ss1on
provided for in paragraph 5 of Gen~ral_ Ass~mbly resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite its dispatch. to
Spanish Sahara for the p;1rpose of _recommendm_g
practical steps for the full implementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and in particular
for determining the extent of United Nations participation in the preparation and superv}sion of the ~ef~rendum and submitting a report to him for transmission
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of
Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2429 (XXIII).

Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Gibraltar,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power 18 and the representative of Spain,19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling also its resolution 2353 (XXII) of 19
December 1967,
1. Regrets that the administering Power has failed
to comply with General Assembly resolution 2353
(XXII);
2. Declares that the continuation of the colonial
situation in Gibraltar is incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Requests the administering Power to terminate
the colonial situation in Gibraltar no later than 1 October 1969;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to begin
without delay the negotiations with the Government
of Spain provided for in resolution 2353 (XXII) ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Governments of Spain and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland any assistance they may
require for the implementation of the present resolution,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
t wenty-fonrth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.
18 Ibid .. paras. 98-11 \.
19 /l,id.,

p.,ras. 47-97 and 114-125.

2430 (XXIII). Question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands,
Grenada, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides,
Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question _o_f Am':ri~an Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, Bnttsh V1rgm Isl~ds,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Domm1ca,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. _Helena, St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos
Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having exa,mined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
other relevant resolutions.
Deeply concerned at the policy of some of the administering Powers in establishing and maintaining
military bases in some of the Territories under their
administration, in contravention of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions,
Deploring the attitude of the administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations
visiting groups to visit the Territories under their
administration,
Conscious that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to these Territories ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement without delay the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories i, incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of General Assemblv resolution 1514 (XV);
20 Ibid .. Twenty-third Session, Annexes, addendum to aa:enda
item 23 ( A/7200/Rev.l), chapters XII, XVIII to XXI, XXIII

and XXVI to XXIX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

5. Urges the administering Powers to allow United
Nations visiting groups to visit the Territories and to
extend to them full co-operation and assistance ;
6. Decides that the United Nations should render
all help to the peoples of these Territories in their
efforts freely to decide their future status;
7. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session
on the implementation. of the present resolution.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

Noting with concern -that the voluntary contributions
in 1968 have been inadequate and sharing the SecretaryGeneral's concern over the future of the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa,
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is essential and that it is therefore
desirable to strengthen and expand the Programme,
I. Appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions to the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish an
Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training- Programme for Southern Africa
composed of representatives of Member States to
advise him:
(a) On the strengthening and expansion of the Programme, including, in particular, the promoting of
contributions ;
( b) On the granting of subventions to educational
and training institutions in Africa in order to enable
them to provide places for persons who come under
this Programme ;
( c) On any other matters concerning the Programme
on which the Secretary-General may seek advice;
3. Decides that as a further transitional measure
provision shall be made under section 12 of the regular
budget for the financial year 1969 of an amount of
$100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme
pending- the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on
the progress of the Programme.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2431 (XXIII).

United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 by which the special educational and training
programP-Ies for South West Africa, the special training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training pro~ramme for South Africans were consolidated and
11].tegrated, and its resolution 2372 ( XXII) of 12 June
1968 on the question of Namibia,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral,21
Recalling paragraph 14 of its resolution 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968 concerning the question
of the Territories under Portuguese administration, in
which it invited the Secretary-General to develop and
expand training programmes for inhabitants of these
Territories, and chapter II, section D, of the report
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 22
21 Ibid., agenda item 70, documents A/7284 and Add.1.
22 [bid., Twenty-third Session, agenda item 64, document

A/

7338 and Corr.I.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantii1,,, of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peopfos

(Item 23)
At its 1692nd plenary meeting, on 11 October 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee, 23 adopted the following text as
representing the consensus of the members of the Assembly:
"l. Having considered the chapter of the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Equatorial Guinea, 24 including the report of the United Nations Mission for
the Supervision of the Referendum and the Elections in Equatorial Guinea
(1968), 25 the General Assembly takes note of that report and expresses its
appreciation of the work done by the Mission.
"2. The General Assembly also expresses its appreciation to the administering Power for making it possible for the United Nations presence to
be established in the Territory as called for in General Assembly resolntion
2355 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and to the Secretary-Gener;il for the
action taken by him in this regard.
23 [bid., Twenty-third Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/7265, para. 5.
24 Ibid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/7200/Rev.l ), chapter IX.
25 Ibid., chapter IX, annex VI.

65
