S/PRST/2023/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2023
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 9298th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 2023, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its mission to Kinshasa and to Goma,
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), from 9 to 12 March 2023.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity, and territorial integrity of the DRC, emphasises the need
to fully respect the principles of non-interference, good-neighborliness and
regional cooperation and encourages the Government of the DRC to continue
the efforts undertaken to ensure its primary responsibility to protect civilians
within its territory and for the safety and security of United Nations personnel
and assets. The Security Council commends the stabilising actions of
MONUSCO, reiterates its call on all parties to continue their efforts to ensure
full cooperation with MONUSCO, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide MONUSCO with all necessary capacities to fulfil its mandate.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the increase in attacks by the
23 March Movement, also known as M23, in North Kivu during recent months
and the advances of M23 which are worsening security and stability in the
region and further exacerbating an extreme humanitarian situation. The Security
Council takes note of indications of initial steps towards disengagement. The
Security Council demands the immediate and full implementation of
commitments on the cessation of hostilities, the end of any further advances by
the M23 and its withdrawal from all occupied areas as agreed through the
African Union-endorsed Luanda Process. The Security Council further demands
that all external parties immediately cease their support to Security Councilsanctioned M23 and withdraw from the DRC.
“The Security Council expresses concern over the tensions between the
DRC and Rwanda and, in this regard, calls for calm and increased dialogue
between the two countries in furtherance of durable peace in the region. The
Security Council encourages the DRC and Rwanda to prioritise peaceful means
of addressing the challenges between them and reaffirms the importance of
building confidence and trust in the region, in line with the objectives and
commitments of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the DRC
and the region. The Security Council calls on stakeholders to ensure an
atmosphere conducive to constructive debate and dialogue.

23-05919 (E)

310323

*2305919*

S/PRST/2023/3

“The Security Council strongly condemns the increased attacks by the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Cooperative pour le development du
Congo (CODECO) against civilians in Ituri and North Kivu and the activities of
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). The Security
Council demands that all members of armed groups immediately and
permanently disband, lay down their arms, reject violence, end and prevent
violations perpetrated against women and children, and release children from
their ranks. The Security Council stresses that those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law or violations and abuses of human rights must
be held accountable.
“The Security Council reiterates its support to regional efforts through the
East African Community (EAC)-led Nairobi Process and the Luanda Process to
rebuild trust, resolve differences through dialogue and to continue to make use
of existing subregional organisations and mechanisms. The Security Council
urges the expeditious implementation of the outcomes of the Luanda and
Nairobi processes, as well as the Communiqué of the Mini-Summit of Luanda
of 23 November 2022. The Security Council takes note of Angola’s intention to
deploy Angolan Armed Forces to eastern DRC, after consultations with the
Government of DRC.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts to advance the two-track
approach of the EAC-led Nairobi process. The Security Council acknowledges
the deployment of the EAC Regional Force to the eastern DRC and recognises
the efforts of the Troop Contributing Countries to the EAC Regional Force. The
Security Council encourages support to the EAC Regional Force, as appropriate,
to promote regional peace and security. The Security Council calls for
complementary efforts to ensure that these initiatives are mutually reinforcing,
including with support from the Secretary-General, MONUSCO and the office
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of a political resolution
of the current crisis. In that regard, the Security Council urges all Congolese
armed groups to participate unconditionally in the EAC-led Nairobi Process to
seek political conditions in preparation for the disarmament, demobilisation,
community recovery and stabilisation programme, in view of a return to civilian
life, and for foreign armed groups to return to their countries of origin.
“The Security Council underlines its readiness to designate individuals
and entities engaging in or providing support for acts that undermine the peace,
stability or security of the DRC, including by providing financial, material, or
technological support for, or goods or services to, a designated individual or
entity.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the humanitarian
crisis and calls on Member States and international and regional organisations
to respond swiftly to the humanitarian needs identified in the Humanitarian
Response Plan through increased contributions and to ensure that all pledges are
honoured in full and in a timely manner.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continuing violence and
abuses of human rights by all armed groups, including summary executions,
sexual and gender-based violence and large-scale recruitment and use of
children, and remains deeply concerned by the intensification of misinformation
and disinformation. The Security Council further calls upon all actors to comply
with their obligations under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, as applicable, and to
ensure accountability for violations, including sexual violence in conflict and
2/3

23-05919

S/PRST/2023/3

post-conflict situations. The Security Council welcomes further steps taken by
the Government of the DRC towards the establishment of a national transitional
justice process.
“The Security Council encourages the DRC authorities to continue to
work, with the support of MONUSCO, toward peaceful, transparent, inclusive
and credible processes for the presidential and legislative elections scheduled in
2023, in accordance with the Constitution and the Electoral law, throughout the
DRC, to facilitate free and fair elections, to ensure the full, equal, effective and
meaningful participation of women at all stages, as both candidates and v oters,
and reaffirms the important role of youth in electoral processes.”

23-05919

3/3
