United Nations

S/PV.6016

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6016th meeting
Friday, 14 November 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Urbina / Mr. Ballestero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Costa Rica)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2008/688)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-60200 (E)

*0860200*

S/PV.6016

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008)
(S/2008/688)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation, under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/688, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1830 (2008).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent Representative of
the United States of America, on behalf of the
Multinational Force.

2

I now give the floor to Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq.
Mr. De Mistura: I am pleased to appear before
the Council today, just over a year since I assumed my
duties in Baghdad, to present the fifth quarterly report
on behalf of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688).
With a robust mandate reconfirmed by resolution
1830 (2008) and at the request of the Government of
Iraq, the focus of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in 2008 has been in the
areas that could support Iraq’s efforts towards political
dialogue and national reconciliation. That was largely
achieved in recent months by supporting electoral
preparations, sowing the seeds for a resolution to
disputed internal boundaries, supporting the national
development strategies and facilitating Iraq’s
partnership with the international community and,
indeed, its neighbours.
The past year was dedicated to identifying
opportunities in the priority areas where we would
most likely be able together to achieve timely results.
Next year will be the time to consolidate the progress
that has been made so far. We have to move forward
from the initiatives that, as a matter of urgency, have
served as an entry point for those in going forward to
solidifying longer-term gains.
Let us for a moment look at the context in Iraq
these days. The summer and fall have witnessed,
despite some occasional spikes — and we have again
seen some in the past few days — a steady reduction in
the levels of violence in Iraq. That is unquestionable,
in spite of the spikes, and we may see more in the
forthcoming months, but we should look at the broader
picture, which is that security has improved. A handful
of rockets have impacted on the International Zone
since last May, whereas in May there were 30 blasts a
day. The truce declared by Moqtada al-Sadr has been
observed and extended. The reported Iraqi casualties
for October 2008 throughout Iraq were the lowest since
March 2003 — and, of course, they are never too low.
Any level of civilian casualty will always remain
condemnable, regrettable and sad, but the fact remains
that it is now at its lowest.
The Government of Iraq has taken over
responsibility for many issues in Iraq, including the
Awakening Councils and payment of tens of thousands
of their members. Some sectors of the Iraqi security

08-60200

S/PV.6016

forces have greatly improved — we have seen it with
our own eyes when we have been travelling in Iraq —
in their professionalism and performance. However, the
reporting period saw also some political tensions as a
result of the initial stalemate over the provincial
elections law in July and the issues of minority
representation in the elections.
Iraq is now entering a very delicate electoral
period, in which every small security gain likely to
give space to political dialogue should be built upon, in
order to avoid any violence linked to the provincial
elections of 31 January 2009. The confrontation in
Khanaqin during the summer months and the spike in
anti-Christian violence in Mosul are only two examples
of a situation that could have undermined the hardearned progress made by the Iraqi leadership to bridge
their differences and further an Iraqi-owned and Iraqiled democratic process.

With the aim of reducing growing tension and the
temptation to resort to intimidation or to force
displacement of minority populations, UNAMI put
forward a proposal on the allocation of seats for
minorities in provincial councils. The proposal also
provided for political recognition of some groups
which have undergone severe campaigns of targeted
violence and assimilation in the past. It is important to
remember what happened to the Yezidis in 2007 or to
the Christians very recently.
Following several rounds of consultations over
the span of two weeks, the Council of Representatives
decided on 3 November to allocate specific seats for
representatives of Iraq’s minority components on the
provincial councils in Baghdad, Ninawa and Basra.
The decision to secure minority representation in Iraq
is a positive achievement in its own right. Although it
must be admitted that the adopted amendment to the
electoral law did not entirely reflect UNAMI’s
formulation of numbers, it did include some of its
crucial elements. Its adoption by a majority open vote
was a demonstration of democracy in action — in Iraq
that is a very positive development — and contributed
to furthering respect for human rights and democracy.
Both principles are strengthened through the
commitment of Iraqi institutions to recognize and
guarantee minority representation in their elected
governing bodies. That is only a “seed representation”
which can open the door for improved guarantees of
minority rights in the future; but the door has been
opened.

Electoral assistance has been our flagship in
recent months, and, of all our activities, is likely to be
so in the forthcoming ones. It is our firm duty as the
United Nations and an integral part of our mandate to
assist the Iraqis and the Independent High Electoral
Commission, the Iraqi institution responsible for
preparing and conducting the elections, with a series of
electoral events, starting with provincial elections in
the immediate future — January 2009 — and
culminating in the parliamentary elections between the
end of 2009 and early 2010. The elections law,
providing for countrywide elections in 14 out of 18
governorates, is the most important piece of legislation
enacted in that period. The law was adopted on
24 September and required a major push by UNAMI to
break the impasse in Parliament over the inclusion of
an amendment on Kirkuk. Finally, it was possible to
broker an even-handed resolution.

The Presidency Council’s green light — a
decision taken recently — completed the elections law
without either compromising or endangering their
overall timetable. In other words, the electoral law is
confirmed, including its minority component.

The Government of Iraq and the Parliament of
Iraq should be commended for that, because it is a
major achievement. Even following its ratification, the
election law suffered a second difficult moment when
the article accounting for minority representation of
Christians, Yezidis, Shebek and Sabean Mandeans in
some provincial councils was dropped at the last
minute. That unfortunately produced intimidation and
tension — particularly in the context of the volatile
area of Mosul — and risked unravelling both the
electoral law and the electoral timelines, and ultimately
jeopardizing the principle of minority rights, which in
Iraq is an important principle recognized by everyone.

Public interest in the voter registration update in
September and general satisfaction with the passage of
the elections law appear to confirm a grassroots desire
to have a say on who should be represented on the
provincial councils. The Iraqi people want the
elections. The forthcoming elections are rightly viewed
as an opportunity to establish a more inclusive
sectarian balance and shape a new political landscape.
They represent the most significant political event in
the forthcoming months. It is therefore all the more
important to ensure that they be perceived as free and
fair, and that the Iraqis, with the support of the United
Nations and the international community, will be able

08-60200

3

S/PV.6016

to ensure respect for operational timelines and that the
Electoral Commission will be free of political pressure.
The good news is that the electoral timelines are
now broadly on track, with candidate nomination
concluded on 2 November and the swift inclusion of
minority candidates in the Electoral Commission ballot
lottery having taken place on 6 November. UNAMI
continues to support the Electoral Commission in
technical preparations, including the printing and
procurement of materials, planning and logistics,
public outreach, consultations with security forces to
ensure that governorate elections are conducted in
safety, putting anti-fraud measures in place, and
training national staff. We are working to remove any
outstanding operational hurdles, and that will be done.
Our job is to assist in those efforts together with the
Iraqi authorities.
All sides should be encouraged to avoid the
temptation to manipulate the electoral process or to
create any incentives for intimidation before or during
the polling day. The Electoral Commission, supported
by UNAMI, has trained 42,785 local observers and is
working with the Minister of Education to employ
approximately
270,000
teachers,
clerks
and
headmasters to assist on polling day. The Prime
Minister has wisely decided to postpone school
examinations in order to allow the schools and the
teachers to be available on that important day.
Mitigating measures to reduce the potential for
electoral fraud should ideally be matched by some
form of close monitoring, particularly in sensitive areas
of the north, and we are currently exploring some
feasible options. Security, of course, will also be an
element we cannot ignore. However, the main burden
for ensuring transparency of the elections rests with the
Iraqi national observers and party agents. They have
been invited to be present at polling stations on the day
of the elections.
Concerning Kirkuk and the so-called disputed
internal boundaries or territories, the recent targeted
killings and the displacement of Christians in the area
of the northern faultlines illustrate the complicated
connections between minority rights, the electoral
process and disputed boundaries. UNAMI is pursuing
its work on those issues in accordance with the
mandate given to it by the Security Council.
In Kirkuk, which has been under relative calm in
recent weeks, our activities have been wide-ranging.

4

They comprise research on conditions in the area and
include various possible options for its future
administrative status, humanitarian, reconstruction and
human rights programmes and, at the request of the
Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Mashhadani, technical
assistance to a Committee that has just been
established by Parliament to make recommendations
on special arrangements for future Kirkuk elections.
Those elections will not take place in January with the
other elections, but later on after the Committee has
finished its job, which is expected to be at the end of
March. At that time UNAMI will assist with the Kirkuk
elections at the request of the Iraqi Parliament.
In parallel, we have advanced our analysis on the
last phase of all of the other 15 faultline districts in
northern Iraq — from the Syrian to the Iranian border —
concluding our community consultations in the Ninawa,
Diyala and Salahaddin governorates.
We believe that UNAMI’s analysis will provide
options for intercommunal confidence-building
measures. We are probably now considered, through
that research and in that context, to be the most
detailed experts on those areas because there has been
a lot of work. Seventeen of my colleagues have been
working on a full-time basis for the last eight months
on that project. Confidence-building measures should
be in place in order to facilitate an overall political
agreement between the various affected communities.
This is not a referendum or a fait accompli, but a
political agreement.
UNAMI supports renewed efforts by the
Constitutional Review Committee to enshrine an
agreement dealing with competing visions of Iraq’s
federal framework, as well as with hydrocarbons and
viable revenue and water-sharing agreements. While
we remain poised to present our work to the Iraqi
leadership, we are mindful not to complicate matters
by presenting the results of our work prematurely,
since the elections are drawing closer and are a
priority. Later we can come up with our proposals. Let
us first complete the elections.
As to human rights, the UNAMI Human Rights
Office continues to balance its ongoing monitoring and
protection activities with emerging human rights
challenges arising from elections, the resolution of the
disputed territories, including the recent displacement
of Christians, the forcible sale of property in Ninawa,
or minority representation. We will continue to devote

08-60200

S/PV.6016

significant attention to the legislative process related to
human rights and the rule of law, and to establishing
important institutions related to human rights, such as a
national human rights commission in Iraq. We will also
maintain our strong support, in the form of capacitybuilding, for the work of the Ministry of Human Rights
of Iraq, led by a very courageous woman.
In the area of international partnership, Iraq has
made important strides in its re-engagement with the
international community, primarily through the
International Compact with Iraq — which is strongly
supported by my friend and colleague Ambassador
Gambari — and the ad hoc support mechanism within
the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Both are
facilitating venues for cooperation on concrete issues,
such as refugees, the resumption of diplomatic
relations and anti-corruption measures, in a spirit of
partnership and equal standing.
The very successful Stockholm meeting — and
we should thank the Government of Sweden for having
facilitated it — ended with a message on the need for
partnership and co-financing. Greater Iraqi ownership,
the fact that the Compact has drawn the attention of the
Prime Minister — who attended the meeting and, I
understand, was impressed by its results — and the
Prime Minister’s appointment of his own Adviser as
part of the Advisory Committee have created additional
impetus to the follow-up to the Compact. Iraq has also
become a signatory to the Paris Declaration, signalling
its desire for more transparent management of its aid
strategy. Meanwhile, donors are increasingly focusing
on reducing aid budgets — Iraq is a rich country, a fact
of which it is aware and proud — in favour of
capacity-building aimed at Iraqi self-reliance.
The regional dialogue front is a promising area
for 2009 and has seen signs of very promising
movement in 2008. We have seen considerable
progress in view of the fact that several Arab countries
have reopened their embassies in Baghdad and that a
number of high-level visits have taken place in recent
months. UNAMI continues to be engaged through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ ad hoc support mechanism
unit, which is building its institutional capacity to
support those processes. Planning is under way for
ministerial meetings in the coming weeks. Meetings of
the working group on energy and of the ministers of
the interior have taken place in Istanbul and Amman,
and preparations are under way for meetings of the
working groups on refugees and border security, to be

08-60200

held in November
respectively.

in

Amman

and

Damascus,

Good-faith initiatives to support Iraq’s bilateral
relations, on issues such as technical border
demarcation, security, de-mining and missing persons,
go a long way, in terms of political mileage, towards
restoring a spirit of cooperation. UNAMI has been and
will continue to be proactively involved in assisting
and facilitating such goodwill measures.
Iraq is reaching a critical point in its recovery and
reconstruction. Unavoidably, with improved security
comes a growing demand from the people to meet the
basic needs of ordinary Iraqis, including jobs and
services. It is on that basis that the Iraqi people will
judge their own authorities and that the electorate will
hold local representatives accountable.
Across Iraq, signs of normal daily life are
increasingly visible; I myself see them every time I
cross into what we call the “red zone” in Baghdad. In
Baghdad, once the site of some of Iraq’s worst
violence, we see shops and businesses reopening and
even remaining open at night. More than 60,000 Iraqis
have returned home this year. Food insecurity has
declined from 15 per cent in 2005 to 3 per cent in 2007
and 2008. In other words, there is much less food
insecurity now than there was just one year ago.
However, let us also be frank: life is not
improving equally for all Iraqis. Many still feel the
impact of the past conflict and of chronic neglect
dating back to the 1990s. Major infrastructure and
service delivery problems are still challenging.
Employment opportunities have not grown along with
oil revenues, keeping some Iraqis in poverty. In
pockets of Iraq today, less than a third of the
population receives basic water services and not
enough children attend school. But we know that the
Government is seriously focusing on those areas and
planning to use its increased resources for them.
A rising number of internally displaced
persons — increasing from 16,000 in June to 35,000 in
August — are beginning to return home, signalling
increased confidence in Iraq’s stability. However,
Government action is still required in order to make
sure that conditions are in place to guarantee safe
returns, in which case we will probably see more of
them. In order to fill critical humanitarian gaps incountry and to support Iraqi refugees abroad until the
necessary conditions exist for returns in safety and

5

S/PV.6016

dignity, a subregional humanitarian appeal for Iraq in
2009 will be launched next week.
Better security and high oil revenues mean that
the Iraqi Government is increasingly able and willing
to address national development issues. I would
therefore urge the Government to continue its effort to
allocate national resources in 2009, even in the current
uncertain financial climate worldwide — which also
applies to Iraq — in order to maintain the momentum
for recovery. Iraq has entered into a new cooperation
framework for United Nations assistance through 2010,
shifting the focus from investing in infrastructure to
helping to mobilize its own substantial resources.
Whereas the Government of Iraq is hindered by a
large public sector, which has grown from 1 million to
2.5 million people since 2005, the private sector, which
could become a thriving backbone for the Iraqi
economy, is still dormant and requires assistance, and
there continues to be an insufficient budget execution
capacity. In other words, there is a lot of money, but it
is not percolating into operational projects. The
remainder of the funds of the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq will therefore be
specifically invested in three United Nations
initiatives, aimed at public sector reform, private sector
development and the decentralization of essential
services. The United Nations is also supporting Iraq in
reforming its costly public distribution system — food
coupons — which consumed $5.9 billion in national
resources in 2008 and can be reformed.
In terms of its footprint, UNAMI has explored
ways to increase its level of support for provincial
authorities by applying the principles of integrated
United Nations missions and an enhanced presence
throughout the country, starting with new presences in
Najaf, Ramadi, Mosul, Kirkuk and Basra. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Health Organization, the World
Food Programme, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for
Project Services and the International Organization for
Migration are the latest agencies to have a permanent
senior-level international presence within the country,
bring the number of agencies there to more than nine.
That is complemented by national staff whom we have
appointed as Governorate Liaison Officers and
co-located in governors’ offices in 10 locations.

6

In order to pursue and sustain the level of its
presence and the extent of its activities, UNAMI
obviously requires both security support and protection
from the host country and sustained financial and
logistical backing from Member States, because
security is costly.
The construction of a new integrated compound
in Baghdad is key to the continued presence of the
United Nations in Iraq. I would therefore like to thank
the Government of Iraq for providing a site for the new
integrated United Nations compound in Baghdad and
particularly welcome the decision taken by the Prime
Minister and the Iraqi Council of Ministers on
2 November to make what I understand to be an initial
contribution of $25 million for 2009 towards an
estimated total cost of $89 million for the compound.
Finally, where does all this leave Iraq and its
friends? Iraq faces some critical months ahead. In spite
of a reduction in the levels of violence, the potential
for a flare-up remains a possibility, particularly with
regard to the January elections in a year of elections.
Iraqis should not relent in seizing the momentum in
order to build on the gains attained in 2008.
The Government of Iraq should be commended
for the progress achieved so far. It will now be called
on to deliver services, security guarantees, conditions
for free and fair elections, credible and independent
institutions, and to resolve tensions among its various
communities. The international community — all of
us — should stand firm in its support and constructive
re-engagement in this critical period. The United
Nations will continue — as the Secretary-General has
confirmed — if the Council allows it, to be by the
Iraqis’ side in this delicate and challenging transition
towards stability.
This year is the fifth year since what happened at
the Canal Hotel. Many of my friends — our friends —
and colleagues died. I think that, for us, it is a matter of
principle to prove that we are back and that Iraq is not
alone.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
information that he has provided to the Council and for
the excellent quality of that information.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I am
pleased to report to the Security Council on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I). I would like

08-60200

S/PV.6016

to begin by thanking Special Representative de Mistura
for his briefing on the important work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). Mr. de Mistura’s work and the work of his
colleagues are critical to cementing the gains we have
seen in Iraq, and I wish to extend our appreciation to
him and his staff for their hard work and sacrifices. We
remain committed to ensuring that UNAMI receives
the support necessary to carry out its mission.
This year has been one of significant
achievements in which the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi
people and the international community can take pride.
Yet a lot of work remains to be done. Progress in Iraq
is fragile and reversible. It is critical that Iraq receive
the continued support and encouragement of the
international community as it faces the next set of
challenges in rebuilding the country: legitimate and
peaceful provincial, district and national elections in
2009; restoring essential services for its people;
humanitarian efforts to support the return of
approximately 4 million refugees and internally
displaced persons; peaceful resolution on the status of
disputed internal boundaries, most notably Kirkuk;
and, of course, the constitutional review.
Today, I would like to update the Council on the
progress that has been achieved.
As mentioned by Mr. de Mistura, the security
situation has significantly improved since June 2007.
The number of overall attacks has decreased by 86 per
cent. Civilian deaths due to violence have decreased by
80 per cent. Iraqi Security Forces deaths have
decreased by 84 per cent. United States military deaths
in Iraq have decreased by 87 per cent. Coalition
military deaths in Iraq have decreased by 88 per cent,
and ethno-sectarian deaths have decreased by 95 per
cent.
Coalition and Iraqi Security Forces have
degraded the capabilities of Al-Qaida in Iraq and
militia groups, as is evidenced by the 81 per cent
decrease in improvised explosive device (IED)
explosions and the 72 per cent decrease in suicide
explosions.
A reduction in violence across northern Iraq can
be attributed in part to the removal and displacement of
key Al-Qaida leaders as a result of Iraqi-led security
operations. But some political and factional tensions
that have affected the delivery of services remain. The
Government of Iraq, with coalition assistance, has

08-60200

begun addressing the complex underlying ethnic and
religious tensions that contribute to violence by
ensuring adherence to the rule of law and by
establishing reconstruction operation centres to bring
much needed essential services and economic
investment.
Coalition and Iraqi Security Forces have
maintained those security gains even with the reduction
of coalition forces to pre-surge levels. Joint operations,
in concert with the Awakening movement, have
improved the security situation such that, even as a
number of coalition countries depart the theatre, the
United States has announced the early withdrawal of
the Second Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division
from Baghdad, bringing the number of brigade combat
teams to below pre-surge levels.
Ongoing security operations have produced
encouraging results, with arrests of significant
Al-Qaida targets in Diyala, Mosul and Baghdad, as
well as leaders of other armed groups in Baghdad,
Basra, Maysan and Wasit provinces. The Iraqi people’s
increasing trust of the Iraqi Security Forces has also
led to a number of record-breaking seizures of weapons
caches, including several hundred IEDs in the Mada’in
area and two tons of explosives in Ninawa. Primarily
as a result of successful operations against Al-Qaida
facilitation and support networks inside of Iraq, we are
also beginning to see a decrease in the number of
foreign fighters crossing into Iraq.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned by the flow
of foreign fighters and lethal aid into the country. Syria
remains the primary gateway for foreign terrorists
moving into Iraq, and Damascus has taken insufficient
action to combat the terrorist facilitation networks
based in Syria. We urge Syria to take additional steps
against these networks.
For all this progress, Al-Qaida in Iraq remains a
significant threat, as do Iranian surrogate militants and
Jaysh al-Mahdi militia forces. All retain the intent and
capability of carrying out lethal attacks against the
Iraqi people, such as the multiple bombings that
occurred this week. Al-Qaida in Iraq’s use of personborne improvised explosive devices and its increasing
shift towards female suicide bombers remain a
particular challenge.
In countering the continued extremist threat, the
increased capability of the Iraqi Security Forces has
substantially
improved
the
overall
security

7

S/PV.6016

environment. More than 601,000 personnel now serve
in the Iraqi Security Forces — an increase of over
21,000 personnel since our last report to the Council in
August.
There are now 165 Iraqi Army combat battalions
conducting operations, an increase of four since our
last report. Nearly 70 per cent, or 115 of those Iraqi
Army combat battalions, are assessed now to be in the
lead for operations. The expansion of the Air Force and
the Navy lags behind that of the Army. There is
nothing surprising about that fact, given the technical
platforms that the Air Force must acquire and learn to
sustain. While the Air Force and the Navy possess
limited capabilities, comprehensive force development
strategies are being implemented.
The Air Force is now flying over 300 sorties a
week and playing an increasingly active counterinsurgency role, flying surveillance and reconnaissance
missions in support of the Iraqi Security Forces and
providing important logistics support with its mobility
aircraft. The Iraqi Air Force recently graduated its first
initial entry pilots, who are now flying, and there will
be many more to follow.
The Navy is conducting three times as many
patrols as it did last year, with increasing amounts of
boarding and searching of vessels coming into Iraqi
territorial waters in the northern Arabian Gulf. The
Navy has just taken delivery of the first six of 26
modern patrol craft and is expecting the delivery of
four large patrol ships in 2009.
The National Police also continues to increase its
effectiveness and is now staffed at over 41,000
personnel. The Police continues to stress better ethnosectarian balance within the force both through
recruiting and assignments.
With regard to the coalition role, in September,
on the margins of the General Assembly, President
Talabani noted with thanks the role of those countries
that have contributed to the coalition and NATO
Training Mission-Iraq. Currently, coalition members
other than the United States contribute over 6,000 force
members to the Multinational Force and some 300
personnel to UNAMI. Since our last briefing,
approximately 3,000 coalition personnel departed the
theatre and others will return home soon.
At the same time, the continued political and
economic support of the coalition and the international

8

community will remain critical to the success of Iraqi
efforts to build a stable and secure country. MNF-I is
continuing to progressively transfer responsibility for
security to the Iraqi Government. This process of
transitioning security responsibilities to the Iraqi
security forces is increasingly being led by Iraqi
officials. Thirteen out of 18 provinces are now under
provincial Iraqi control. Al-Anbar province — once a
stronghold of Al-Qaida in Iraq — transitioned on
1 September,
Babil
province
transitioned
on
23 October and Wasit province transitioned on
29 October.
A joint coalition-Iraqi effort is anticipated to
assess conditions in and facilitate transition of the
remaining provinces: Salahaddin, Tamim, Diyala, and
Ninawa within the next several months, culminating
with the planned transfer of security authority for
Baghdad in June 2009.
The improvement in security has helped to foster
political reconciliation. Since our last report, the Iraqi
Council of Representatives unanimously passed a
provincial elections law that will provide for local
elections in 14 of Iraq’s 18 provinces early next year.
The provincial elections are a major step toward
political stabilization. Sunni Arabs, who boycotted the
2005 provincial elections, will compete for political
power in provinces that once were the heartland of the
insurgency. UNAMI also remains deeply engaged in
elections preparation. Indeed, UNAMI’s work with the
Iraqi Government proved critical in achieving this
elections law and we congratulate Mr. de Mistura for
that.
We commend UNAMI’s plans to expand its
footprint in Iraq and will dedicate ourselves to
providing assistance, as necessary, so that UNAMI can
continue to assist the Iraqi Government with other
critical issues, such as the relocation and reintegration
of Iraqi refugees and the internally displaced. We
strongly support the construction of the proposed
United Nations compound in Baghdad and commend
the Government of Iraq on its initial pledge of
$25 million so that planning for this facility may
proceed.
UNAMI is heavily involved in assisting with the
resolution of the disputed internal boundaries between
the Kurdistan Regional Government and the
Government of Iraq. The resolution of this dispute is a
key step in creating stability for all of Iraq. We

08-60200

S/PV.6016

appreciate UNAMI’s efforts and assistance on this very
important issue.

Iraq and New York for their tireless work to assist the
Government and people of Iraq.

Iraq has made significant diplomatic gains, with
most of the countries in the region normalizing their
diplomatic presence in Baghdad. Since our last report,
Syria and the Arab League have joined Iraq’s other
neighbours in naming ambassadors to Iraq — and
many of these ambassadors are now on the ground in
Baghdad. Other neighbours, including the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon, have
sent high-level delegations to Baghdad. We encourage
others in the region to follow their example.

My delegation took note of the report of the
Secretary-General and the work of UNAMI in
document S/2008/688 and would like to present the
following comments.

Finally, I want to highlight that negotiations
continue between the United States and the Iraqi
Government on transitioning our relationship, with a
goal of a strong and strategic relationship with Iraq,
which respects both countries’ sovereignty and serves
both countries’ interests.
The report of the Secretary-General, which is
before the Security Council today, highlights the
sustainable progress that has been achieved by the Iraqi
Government, with the assistance of the United Nations
and the support of the MNF-I and Iraqi security forces.
The United States supports a free, democratic,
pluralistic, federal and unified Iraq, and I call upon all
parties to renew their commitment to assist the Iraqi
Government in continuing the hard work to overcome
the challenges that remain.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, the representative of China, for his
distinguished efforts during his presidency in the
month of October.
I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Zalmay
Khalilzad for the briefing he presented to the Council
on behalf of the multinational force in Iraq (MNF-I)
and for its efforts to support security and stability in
Iraq.
Our thanks also go to His Excellency Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq, as well as to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in

08-60200

On the political and security levels, my
Government,
according
to
its
constitutional
responsibilities to guarantee security and stability for
all Iraqi citizens, continues to execute these
responsibilities all over Iraq through several security
operations in Baghdad and other provinces.
This has led to a tangible security improvement
by decreasing the insurgents offensive abilities to
target civilians and the Iraqi security forces (ISF). The
last security report mentioned that security in the
country during the last two months indicates that there
were ten activities conducted by the ISF versus one
activity by the insurgents.
Furthermore, there has been an 89 per cent
decrease of violent activities during the month of
August 2008 in comparison to 2006 and 2007. This
clearly reflects the Iraqi security forces’ ability to
control events on the ground.
My Government recognizes that to maintain the
security achievements on the ground, it must continue
its plans to train the ISF and to provide them with
needed weapons and equipments in the best possible
way.
The number of officers in the army has increased
from 9,800 to 13,911 and the number of soldiers from
116,135 to 217,176. As for the police force, during the
most recent period 4,047 officers and 40,004
policemen have also been trained.
The most recent period has witnessed many
significant developments in relation to the transfer of
security responsibilities from the MNF-I to the Iraqi
security forces. The Iraqi Government took over
security responsibilities in Al-Anbar Province in
September 2008 following the security improvement
achieved in that province, which was one of the most
violent provinces in western Iraq.
Such violent activities have decreased by
approximately 90 per cent. The Iraqi security forces
also took over security responsibilities in Babil and
Wasit provinces in October 2008, in accordance with

9

S/PV.6016

the timetable agreed upon by the Iraqi Government and
MNF-I. In total, the Iraqi Government has now taken
over security responsibilities in 13 out of 18 Iraqi
provinces. This accelerating security improvement in
Baghdad and other provinces has assisted a return to
normal life for people in most areas of Iraq.
The number of Iraqi displaced families who have
returned to their homes in Baghdad has reached
22,442, including 431 Christian families, in October
2008. This improvement is taking place in conjunction
with the Iraqi Government’s efforts to consolidate
national reconciliation between all components of Iraqi
society.
Having said that, the Iraqi Government has
transferred 98,223 officers and soldiers from the
former army to the military service, and the
Government has also integrated 51,135 members of the
awakening Forces in the civilian and security
institutions to bring them to normal life and to play a
positive role in the reconstruction in Iraq.
Owing to the terrorist attacks targeting the
Christian community in the Mosul province, the Iraqi
Government has sent security forces to protect civilians
from those attacks. For that purpose, the Interior
Ministry sent two brigades to protect families and
churches in the city and sent special investigation
teams.
Prime Minister al-Maliki announced that
Christians in Iraq are an important component of Iraqi
society and stressed his commitment to sending
emergency assistance and security forces to ensure the
protection and safe return of the Christian families to
their homes. Accordingly, more than 300 Christian
families have returned to their homes after security and
stability were restored in their neighbourhoods.
The adoption of the provincial council election
law on 24 September 2008 is one of the most
significant legislative developments to have taken
place in Iraq during the past two months. According to
this law, 427 political entities, representing all Iraqi
components, will participate in local elections. Article
50 of the provincial council election law has been
amended and adopted in order to guarantee equal
representation to all minorities in Iraq.
As regards the social and economic situation,
tangible improvement in the political and security
situation has had a positive effect on the National

10

Development Strategy. Iraqi economic indicators have
witnessed a clear improvement during the past few
months. The rate of economic growth is expected to
reach 8 per cent by the end of 2008, according to
International Monetary Fund estimates. The inflation
rate has decreased from 16 per cent in 2007 to 12 per
cent in the most recent quarter, and the unemployment
rate has decreased from 22 per cent in 2007 to 17 per
cent during the most recent quarter. These economic
indicators reflect a comprehensive improvement in the
Iraqi economy.
Investment is a priority for the Iraqi
Government’s national financial and economic
policies. The Government has allocated $19 billion of
the national budget for investment activities for all
Iraqi ministries and has established a national
monitoring mechanism to encourage Iraqi ministries to
spend the allocated investment funds on their projects.
This has led to an increase in the spending percentage
of the ministries’ budgets from 24 per cent to 63 per
cent.
The Iraqi Government has established a social
security network to support various social segments of
Iraqi society, including orphans, widows and the
unemployed. The Government allocated $812 million
to this project, including $76 million for displaced
families. This network has witnessed a 25 per cent
expansion in the number of individuals included and in
the funds allocated to it during November 2008.
Within the framework of economic policies
aimed at reconstructing the Iraqi industrial sector, the
Ministry of Industry recently signed a number of
investment contracts with local, Arab and foreign
companies to the value of $1 billion in order to
diversify the sources of national income.
The Iraqi Government has adopted new policies
to reconstruct and develop the oil industry field. Oil
production has increased by 11 per cent, according to
the latest reports issued by the Iraqi Oil Ministry, and
the Iraqi Government has joined the international
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative to place a
monitoring mechanism on oil revenue and on ways of
spending it.
In the area of basic services, the Iraqi
Government has reduced the number of people
deprived of water and sewage systems to 10 per cent in
the urban areas and 30 per cent in the rural areas. The
production of electricity has risen significantly during

08-60200

S/PV.6016

the past three months, and the Iraqi Government
increased the funds allocated to building new power
stations.
Within the framework of Government efforts to
combat financial and administrative corruption, Iraq
ratified the United Nations Convention against
Corruption in 2008. The Iraqi Government started
cooperating with the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to implement the new anti-corruption
programme in Iraq, which was adopted by the United
Nations in September 2008 to strengthen the
Government’s anti-corruption activities in the next five
years.
The Iraqi Government is keen to promote a new
culture of respecting human rights in Iraqi society,
based on the concepts of tolerance and mutual
acceptance among the various components of Iraqi
society. The Government achieved significant progress
in establishing a national system to monitor human
rights violations through professional teams in the
Ministry of Human Rights. This mechanism revealed
many cases of human rights violations and, to
guarantee a high level of commitment to human rights
within the Iraqi security institutions, the Ministry of
Interior dismissed 27,690 officers, and another 4,012
are to be put on trial for their involvement in cases of
human rights violations.
On the regional and international levels, the Iraqi
Government continues its efforts within the framework
of the support mechanism, which was adopted at the
expanded meetings of Foreign Ministers of
neighbouring countries of Iraq, held in Sharm elSheikh and Istanbul, to monitor and coordinate the
work of the committees on refugees, energy and
security. The energy committee held its last meeting on
11 October 2008, and the refugees committee plans to
hold its next meeting in Amman on 15 November 2008.
The security coordination committee meeting will be
held in Damascus on 22 and 23 November 2008. In this
regard, I would like to stress my Government’s
commitment to full cooperation with the neighbouring
countries to reach solutions on all issues of mutual
interest.
The last few months witnessed several important
official visits to Iraq, such as the visit on 8 July of the
Turkish Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, to promote cooperation between Iraq

08-60200

and Turkey and which established a High-Level
Strategic Cooperation Council between the two
countries. Other visits were made to Iraq by His
Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, on 11 August; the
Lebanese Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Fouad
Siniora, on 20 August; the Egyptian Foreign Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit on 5 October;
and His Highness Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed
bin Zayed al-Nahayan of the United Arab Emirates, on
7 October. These visits highlight the significance of
continued cooperation with Iraq’s regional partners in
securing common interests.
Following the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
encourage Arab States to reopen their embassies in
Baghdad, several Arab ambassadors arrived in
Baghdad for that purpose, including those of Jordan,
Bahrain, Kuwait, Syria and the United Arab Emirates.
The League of Arab States appointed a new
representative to Baghdad on 6 October. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference has also
reopened its offices in Iraq.
With regard to the International Compact with
Iraq, the Iraqi Government, following the first review
conference, which was held in Stockholm, took many
steps to enhance national policies to meet all the
requirements through the shared monitoring matrix. In
this regard, my delegation would like to encourage all
Arab countries to help their brothers in Iraq by
forgiving Iraq’s debts and reducing the percentage of
the compensation imposed on Iraq due to the invasion
of Kuwait in 1990, a crime committed by the former
dictatorial regime. My Government welcomes the
agreement of the Kuwaiti Government to address the
issue of compensation through bilateral negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations Compensation
Commission.
With regard to cooperation between Iraq, the
United Nations and our brothers in Kuwait, the Iraqi
Government invited Mr. Gennady Tarasov, High-level
Coordinator for missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property, to visit Baghdad from 12 to 15 October 2008.
The visit was successful, and Mr. Tarasov met with
high-level Iraqi official to address this issue.
As a demonstration of my Government’s
keenness to facilitate UNAMI’s execution of its
mandate, the Iraqi Government has decided to allocate
$25 million from this year’s budget to contribute to the
cost of building the UNAMI headquarters in Baghdad.

11

S/PV.6016

This reflects our great appreciation of UNAMI’s role in
Iraq and our readiness to cooperate with the United
Nations. I would like also to confirm my Government’s
readiness to provide the needed protection to the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for UNAMI’s role in Iraq and
for Mr. de Mistura’s support, which is offered upon the
Government’s request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms. I would like to reiterate our thanks to the
support of the multinational forces in Iraq for the
people and the Government of Iraq.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his valuable briefing and to extend our high
appreciation for his efforts. We would also like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, the
representative of the United States, for the useful
presentation he made on the work of the Multinational
Forces. We welcome the presence of our brother,
Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, the Permanent Representative of
Iraq, and thank him for his briefing as well.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expresses its
satisfaction with the continued improvement of the
security situation in Iraq. The decrease in the instances
of violence in the country has already been highlighted
by Mr. de Mistura in his briefing and by the figures
cited by Mr. Khalilzad in his presentation. There has
been an increase in the Iraqi forces’ assumption of
security tasks from the Multinational Force. Additional
United States forces have withdrawn without affecting
the security situation. Internally displaced persons
returned to their homes in growing numbers during the
three months of June, July and August. All of those
facts are, without a doubt, indicators that the security
situation is moving in the right direction, as we
continue to hope it will.
We also welcome the political developments and
progress in other sectors in the fraternal country of Iraq
during the period under discussion. The electoral law
for the governorates was adopted, as the hurdles that
had earlier prevented its adoption were overcome.
There have been positive developments in terms of the
voter registration update, a date set for elections in
14 governorates, the situation with regard to the
“awakening councils” and support for the rule of law
and justice in Iraq. In addition, there have been
improvements in the level of social services provided,

12

particularly in the provision of food supplies. As
indicated by Mr. Al Bayati, economic indicators have
improved. Other positive issues are highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688).
All these developments provide reason for
optimism; we are confident that they have had a
positive impact on the direct and indirect bilateral
relations of Iraq with its neighbouring countries. We
have witnessed the return of foreign ambassadors to
Iraq, in addition to high-level visits, continued regional
dialogue and attempts to address pending issues
between Iraq and some of its neighbours. All those
elements are positive indications that the situation in
general is moving in the right direction.
However, Iraqis and the international community
must still overcome certain challenges. Critical issues
now lying dormant must be addressed through a
comprehensive approach. For example, the security
situation, despite a relative improvement, remains
fragile. Events have taken place in Mosul targeting
Christians. Some Iraqis are still reluctant to return to
their homes. Between 1,000 and 2,500 Iraqis per month
refuse to return, and some 20,000 have sought asylum
in other countries during the first eight months of this
year — the highest number in the world to do so.
Internally displaced persons returning to their homes
have faced real difficulties in terms of stability, which
has led the head of a committee on forcibly displaced
people to claim that the Government and the security
forces have had a hand to play in the situation. The
explosions that have occurred this week in Iraq are
disheartening and disquieting. They highlight the
vulnerability of the security situation.
We have said many times before in this Council
that the situation in Iraq will never become stable
without achieving national reconciliation, the three
most important aspects of which — all requiring
immediate and urgent progress — involve first, an end
to foreign occupation. The people of Iraq have always
rejected and resisted occupation. Continued occupation
in any form will be a divisive factor, thereby
contributing to instability and possibly causing a
setback in the security situation.
Secondly, an agreement on the constitutional
review process must be reached. The current Iraqi
Constitution, in the words of Mr. al-Maliki, the Iraqi
Prime Minister, might have been drawn up in an
atmosphere of fear. Unfortunately, we have entrenched

08-60200

S/PV.6016

those fears and compromised our aspirations. To quote
paragraph 17 of the report of the Secretary-General:
“In mid-July, the Constitutional Review
Committee of the Iraqi Parliament submitted its
second report to the Presidency of Iraq. The
report outlined a number of key issues within the
constitutional review process on which the
Committee has, thus far, been unable to reach a
political consensus.”
We hope that all parties concerned will work on
promoting dialogue in the spirit of the sincere national
desire that we have always known to be prevalent
among Iraqis, so that they can draft a constitution that
reflects the national and legitimate realities and
aspirations of Iraq, thus establishing Iraq as a
democratic Arab country that guarantees the rights of
all its social groups and minorities.
Thirdly, there are issues that, in our view, are
considered hallmarks of any national reconciliation
process. In the case of Iraq, these include the
demarcation of the internal boundaries among the
governorates. Such efforts should be buttressed by a
true and continuous effort in the field of development,
covering all the Iraqi regions and resulting in a positive
impact on the Iraqi people.
Paragraphs 40 to 45 of the report of the
Secretary-General address the question of human
rights. The report points to some improvements in the
field of human rights as a result of the overall
improvement in the security environment. However,
the report also stresses that serious and systematic
human rights violations persist. By way of example,
the report cites the assassination of journalists and
political activists and the arbitrary attempts to impact
the demographic composition of some Iraqi
governorates. These include, of course, the recent
events targeting Christians in Iraq. The report points
out that the number of detainees has decreased from
24,000 in 2007 to 18,000 currently. While we welcome
and encourage that trend, we hope that the
Multinational Force would positively respond to the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in respecting the provisions of
international humanitarian law.
It is also regrettable that the report confirms that
many of those released by the Multinational Force have
been rearrested by the Government of Iraq. According
to the report of the Secretary-General, there are

08-60200

currently more than 27,000 detainees in Iraqi
Government prisons. We also share the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 43
and 44 of his report.
It is also disquieting that the Multinational Force
in Iraq crossed the Syrian border for the first time since
2003. On 26 October, those forces attacked the village
of Sukkariyah, within Syria’s borders, resulting in
many civilian casualties. Not only is that a violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, but it will no doubt
raise tensions in a region that should be spared any
further causes of tension. We do not believe that such
an act can in any way contribute to Iraq’s stability.
In conclusion, my country highly appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and its positive contributions to the political
situation, to national and regional dialogue and to
supporting constitutional processes and human rights.
We also welcome the signing of a strategy between the
United Nations and Iraq’s Government concerning the
assistance to be provided by the Organization to that
country.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak also on behalf of the European Union
(EU).
First, I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing and, above all, the efforts he is
making on the ground with his team. He is putting all
his determination, tenacity and courage into these
efforts, for which we are grateful. I also wish to thank
the Permanent Representative of the United States for
his briefing, as well as our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his statement.
The European Union would like to see a secure,
stable, democratic, prosperous and unified Iraq in
which human rights are respected. The EU is
committed to Iraq’s independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity.
The European Union welcomes both the progress
achieved in improving the security situation and the
steps taken towards national reconciliation with the
adoption of the law on provincial elections, the holding
of which is essential to strengthening democracy and
the rule of law. The European Union takes note of the
adoption of an amendment to that law that stipulates
the conditions for the representation of persons

13

S/PV.6016

belonging to minorities. We hope that the elections will
be held as planned in early 2009. As the SecretaryGeneral has indicated in his reports, the priority
challenge to be met is that of the national
reconciliation and constitutional review process. All of
us in the international community have an important
role to play in helping the Iraqi people.
The European Union approves of the central role
taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and welcomes the progress achieved in
implementing resolutions 1770 (2007) and 1830
(2008). The European Union encourages further close
cooperation between UNAMI and the Iraqi authorities.
In that regard, the European Union would like UNAMI
to continue advising and supporting the Iraqi
Government on its political reforms, which, as I have
just mentioned, represent the major challenge.
The European Union remains concerned about the
human rights situation, in particular that of women,
children and persons belonging to ethnic and religious
minorities. The EU welcomes the commitment made by
the Iraqi Government to take action in that area. The
EU also supports the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and reiterates the need to
provide special protection to all vulnerable groups.
The European Union commends the work of the
United Nations with regard to the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. The European Union is concerned
about the situation of displaced Iraqis inside Iraq and
Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries, in particular
in Jordan and Syria. Those countries deserve our
gratitude for the hospitality and solidarity they are
providing. We reiterate that the Government of Iraq
and the international community have an obligation to
protect and assist displaced Iraqis inside Iraq and in
neighbouring countries by addressing their immediate
and foreseeable needs and ensuring their safety. We
encourage the Iraqi Government to use its resources to
help neighbouring countries to cope with the additional
burden of refugees.
Lastly, notwithstanding the decisions to be taken
with regard to the mandate of the Multinational Force,
the European Union underscores the importance it
attaches to maintaining an adequate level of security
that, as called for by the Secretary-General, enables the
effective functioning of the United Nations in Iraq.
The European Union thus notes with satisfaction
that a number of neighbours and partners in the region

14

have honoured the commitments undertaken in the
final communiqué of the Ministerial Conference of the
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq, which was held in
April 2008 in Kuwait, and have increased their
representation in Baghdad. Constructive engagement
by Iraq’s neighbours and partners in the region remains
essential for peace and stability. The EU encourages all
of Iraq’s neighbours and partners to do the same. The
European Union continues to support the process that
Iraq’s neighbours have initiated and is ready to
participate in the forthcoming expanded ministerial
conference.
The European Union would like to actively
participate in efforts to further stabilize Iraq. In
particular, I would like to emphasize the importance of
our renewed commitment as regards the rule of law
through community assistance efforts by the European
Security and Defence Policy Rule of Law Mission and
the bilateral programmes of member States. In that
regard, at the General Affairs Council meeting held on
10 November 2008, European Union member States
agreed to extend the mandate of the European Union
Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq, with effect
from June 2009. That will enable the Mission to
conduct progressive and experimental pilot activities,
where security conditions permit, in the area of the rule
of law on Iraqi territory.
The European Union also welcomes the major
progress made in the negotiations on a cooperation and
trade agreement and expresses its determination to
conclude those negotiations as quickly as possible.
Such an outcome will help to establish the first
contractual relations between the European Union and
Iraq and allow us enter into a structured and regular
political dialogue that is both technical and political.
Finally, the European Union remains committed
to develop its partnership with Iraq in compliance with
the principles of the International Compact with Iraq.
The EU welcomes the meeting held last May in
Stockholm for the first International Compact with Iraq
Annual Review Conference. The EU encourages the
progress made in its implementation and invites all
parties to honour the commitments made on that
occasion.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by
joining
colleagues
in
thanking
Special
Representative de Mistura for his briefing on the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2008/688). I would

08-60200

S/PV.6016

ask him through you, Mr. President, if he could pass on
our thanks to the United Nations team working in Iraq.
They continue to do excellent work and have played a
really key role in the progress we have seen, and which
was so fully reported in Mr. de Mistura’s briefing. I am
also grateful to Ambassador Khalilzad for his
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I), to which the United Kingdom continues
to contribute over 4,000 troops.
While Iraq still needs to overcome some serious
challenges, it is with pleasure that we note the
continued progress over the past quarter. We have
heard about it in some detail from previous speakers,
but it is worth recalling some of the key steps forward.
In terms of security, this period has seen a further
decrease in reported incidents of violence to a level as
low as it was five years ago. The Iraq security forces
have demonstrated increasing capability, as reflected in
the fact that Iraq now has lead responsibility for
security in 13 out of the 18 provinces. Further process
in national reconciliation is required in order to ensure
that those gains are sustained, and in that respect the
Iraqi Government’s assumption of responsibility for
support to the Awakening movement is an important
step.
The United Kingdom shares concerns about the
intimidation and violence towards Iraq’s minority
communities, for example the Christian community in
Mosul. We welcome the swift action taken by the
Government of Iraq and are encouraged by the reports
from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees this week that, as a result of that action,
many families are now returning to the area.
On the political front, the passage of the
provincial election law in September was a significant
step forward, as Mr. de Mistura said. The holding of
the elections will mark another milestone in democratic
progress in Iraq and should also contribute to the
causes of reconciliation and good governance by
giving those who boycotted previous elections the
chance to be represented in local administrations.
While the details of the quota for guaranteed seats for
minorities have proved to be contentious, it is welcome
that Iraq’s political leaders have acknowledged the
principle that minority rights should be protected in
that way. We value and commend the work undertaken
by United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq

08-60200

(UNAMI) in terms of both electoral assistance and in
facilitating final agreement on the election law.
The United Kingdom has consistently urged
increased regional and international engagement with
Iraq and we warmly welcome the recent arrival of
ambassadors from five regional countries. We also
welcome the important support provided by UNAMI to
the Iraq Neighbours Group process. As a participant in
that process, the United Kingdom hopes that it can
deliver concrete improvements in cooperation between
Iraq and its neighbours on security, energy and
humanitarian issues. Increased trade and investment
between Iraq and its neighbours can also make an
important contribution to stability and prosperity in the
region, and that should be one focus for further
engagement.
We take this opportunity to reiterate that external
support for illegal armed groups outside the political
process in Iraq is unacceptable. We continue to
encourage all those who have influence on the parties
who provide such support to press for it to come to an
end.
As the European Union presidency has indicated,
the European Union attaches importance to a
constructive and forward-looking relationship with
Iraq. The recent decision to extend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission for Iraq, which offers training
and capacity-building in the criminal justice system,
shows the European Union’s continued commitment to
support the rule of law in Iraq.
I would like to close by outlining my own
Government’s support for the Government of Iraq. As
set out by the British Prime Minister on 22 July this
year, our armed forces in southern Iraq remain focused
on two remaining key commitments: to train and
mentor the Fourteenth Division of the Iraqi Army and
to prepare Basra International Airport for transfer to
Iraqi control. We remain on course to fulfil those tasks
in the coming months, following which our military
mission will change fundamentally to a normal
bilateral defence relationship of the kind we have with
other friends and partners in the region. We are in
discussion with the Government of Iraq over a bilateral
agreement that will provide the legal basis for both the
fulfilment of those outstanding commitments and for
the longer-term defence relationship. We look forward
to its successful conclusion before the end of this year.

15

S/PV.6016

The transition in our presence will mark a new
chapter in our relationship with and our support for
Iraq. We look forward to having a close and
substantive bilateral relationship, while continuing to
offer political and practical support to Iraqi-led efforts
to build State capacity, improve security and the rule of
law, and deliver economic opportunity for the Iraqi
people.
As conditions in Iraq improve, a close and
productive relationship between it and international
organizations becomes increasingly important to allow
Iraq to achieve its full potential. The United Nations
has led the way in that area and we remain strongly
supportive of the role that UNAMI is playing on a
range of issues in Iraq. We welcome the Government of
Iraq’s decision to provide the United Nations with
financial support to build a permanent mission in Iraq,
and we believe that this reflects the United Nations key
role in the future development of a stable, secure and
prosperous Iraq.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I, too, would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his very
informative briefing today. I would also like to
commend his efforts towards the significant results that
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
is achieving in supporting the Government of Iraq, as
he described. I would ask him to please also pass on
our congratulations and best wishes for the
continuation of their important work in Iraq to all
UNAMI staff. UNAMI, as underlined by the Special
Representative, has an essential role in addressing a
number of very complex and significant questions.
Therefore, ensuring the safety of the United Nations
presence in Iraq remains a high priority for the United
Nations and the Security Council.
I would like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for
his briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I) and Ambassador Al Bayati for his
statement. Let me also associate myself with the
statement delivered by Ambassador Ripert on behalf of
the European Union.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment of
the situation in Iraq in his latest report (S/2008/688).
The Government of Iraq has made substantial progress
in the security situation. The increasing autonomy of
the Iraqi Security Forces is also a positive
development. In that regard, I would like to note that

16

Italy remains committed to helping Iraq build its
security capacities through the NATO Training
Mission. At the same time, I agree with the SecretaryGeneral that this progress will remain fragile unless it
is backed up by a national reconciliation process. All
the Iraqi political forces should be encouraged to
continue the political dialogue in order to solve
outstanding issues and reach agreed solutions on such
fundamental questions as the structure of the Iraqi
institutions and the sharing of power and resources.
The ongoing constitutional review is of the utmost
importance.
The Iraqi political situation seems to be moving
in the right direction. I refer in particular to the
adoption of a new provincial electoral law, a major step
forward that shows once again the commitment of the
Iraqi political forces to democracy and dialogue. We
look forward to the holding of provincial elections,
another step in building a democratic Iraq that will
empower representative local leaders and give a chance
to all Iraqi political forces to remain engaged. The
elections must take place in a fair and transparent
manner, free of interference or intimidation from
armed groups.
I would like to welcome in particular the
adoption of a law that provides for reserved seats for
Iraqi minorities. The representation of minorities is a
key element, especially in a country as diverse and rich
in cultures and communities as Iraq. The affirmation of
such a principle is of great importance.
Another top priority is the issue of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Their safe and
voluntary return home must be a priority. The
international community should support the Iraqi
Government’s actions as well as that of the host
countries in that endeavour. There are encouraging
signs, with some refugees and IDPs starting to return
voluntarily. That progress must be consolidated.
A few days ago, my Government organized a
conference on the issue of militias, attended by
representatives of all the major Iraqi political forces.
The message from that meeting was clear: There is no
place for militias and armed groups in a democratic
society. The disbandment of those armed groups that
still exist in Iraq outside State control and the
integration of their members into Iraq’s legitimate
security forces and civilian life are therefore essential
to the stabilization of the country.

08-60200

S/PV.6016

The development of a viable private sector is not
only an economic priority but also a political one. It
would diversify the economy and provide the
alternative revenue sources needed to break the State
budget’s dependency on fluctuations in the oil market.
The approval of a hydrocarbons law is thus a clear
priority. A vital private sector is a central element of a
democratic system and, in that regard, Italy is
committed to cooperating with Iraq within the
framework of the International Compact with Iraq and
of the bilateral friendship and cooperation agreement
signed in 2007.
My country has been at the side of the Iraqi
people and institutions in their efforts to build a
democratic State that is at peace with itself and with its
neighbours. I should like to conclude by affirming that
commitment.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to thank the head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. de Mistura, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Iraq and the
work of the United Nations there (S/2008/688), and
also for his leadership of the United Nations Mission in
the very complex conditions of today’s Iraq.
We also note the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Mr. Al Bayati, who talked about
the work of his Government to stabilize the situation in
the country, the progress achieved and the remaining
problems. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America,
Mr. Khalilzad, for his briefing on the activities of the
Multinational Force.
Overall, we think that the report of the SecretaryGeneral objectively reflects the general political,
security and socio-economic situation in Iraq, and we
agree with most of its conclusions. We note with
satisfaction the drop in violent incidents undermining
stability in the country and the consolidation and
improved performance and effectiveness of the Iraqi
Security Forces, as shown by the United States military
command’s transfer of control of Babil and Wasit
Provinces and their capitals, Hilla and Kut, to Iraqi
forces in October.
The fact that only 5 out of 18 governorates are
under the control of the coalition forces reflects the
positive dynamic in the country’s security situation.
What has been achieved is, to a large extent, the result

08-60200

of the measures taken by the Government of Iraq, led
by the Prime Minister, Nuri al-Maliki. Nevertheless, it
is a little early to toast victory, because there are still
sources of tension that continue to have an impact on
strengthening stability in the country.
In that regard, we would like to express our
concern with respect to the flare-ups of violence that
have occurred recently in Mosul, Baghdad, Baqubah
and other Iraqi towns, causing the deaths of dozens of
peaceful civilians. That seems to confirm the view of
the Secretary-General on the fragility of the situation
in the country. We strongly condemn those acts of
violence. We emphasize that it is impossible to achieve
the long-term stabilization of Iraq by force alone. Steps
are needed to strengthen inter-Iraqi dialogue among all
forces that reject terrorism as a way to solve political
problems.
In that context, the amendments to the provincial
election law adopted on 3 November are of particular
importance. They guarantee national and religious
minorities a mandatory quota of representation in local
councils, as well as an increase in the number of
women in Government structures.
We note the active role of UNAMI in achieving a
consensus among the different political forces in Iraq
on that important issue. We believe that elections to the
local councils will be an important step towards
retaining the unity and territorial integrity of the
country and achieving national harmony and
reconciliation among all Iraqis.
Together with the Secretary-General, we call on
the Iraqi forces to take decisive steps to enhance the
system of human rights protection in the country so as
to guarantee respect for the rights of all Iraqis. We
welcome Baghdad’s ratification of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. We welcome the efforts of
UNAMI to solve the problem of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Unfortunately, that
situation in that respect remains difficult, and we
would like to thank the Governments of Syria and
Jordan for having welcomed many tens of thousands of
Iraqi citizens on their territories.
We welcome the efforts of UNAMI to encourage
the development of relations between Iraq and its
neighbouring countries, which has led to the opening
of several embassies in Baghdad and, in a broader
context, encouraged contact between the leaders of Iraq

17

S/PV.6016

and their counterparts in the countries of the Near and
Middle East.
Against that background, we consider that the
recent operation undertaken by United States forces in
Iraq, which violated the borders of Syria and conducted
a raid on the outskirts of Abu Kamal, considerably
undermined efforts to achieve stabilization in Iraq and
the Middle East as a whole.
Iraq faces the serious challenges of nationbuilding and national reconciliation. In the near future,
it will have to decide on the future nature and status of
the presence of international forces on its territory. In
that regard, the Russian Federation is sympathetic to
the legitimate demands of Iraq for guaranteed
sovereignty over its territory.
We support the efforts of the international
community to provide economic assistance to Baghdad
in the context of the International Compact with Iraq. It
is well known that Russia is providing bilateral
assistance to Iraq in rebuilding its economy. I would
like particularly to emphasize that Russian experts are
currently present on the ground in Iraq, despite the
very complicated conditions and risks in the country,
and are working on building and rebuilding Iraqi
energy facilities.
At the same time, we are convinced that any
plans of the international community to promote Iraq’s
economic recovery will face serious difficulties unless
they are bolstered by additional political steps aimed at
ensuring sustainable normalization of the situation in
the country.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Representative de
Mistura for his presentation, which was very clear,
comprehensive and, I would add, very convincing. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
briefing on the Multinational Force. In addition, I
welcome the participation of Ambassador Al Bayati in
our debate and would like to associate my delegation
with the statement made by Ambassador Ripert of
France on behalf of the European Union.
The past two years have been marked by
considerable progress in the situation in Iraq. There has
been progress in the security, political and
humanitarian situations, from which the population is
beginning to benefit and which, in particular, has led to
a welcome normalization of the relations of Iraq with

18

its neighbours. That progress has required the support
of the international community and regional actors, but
it has been brought about above all by the Iraqis
themselves and their elected Government, led by Prime
Minister al-Maliki.
However, that progress should not blind us to the
problems that remain or lead us to forget our
responsibility towards the outstanding challenges. In
that regard, I would like to mention three points.
First, with regard to the security situation,
Belgium welcomes the improvement in security and
the increasing role played by the Iraqi Security Forces
in ensuring public order. First and foremost, that is
reflected in the direct control that they now exercise
over security in 13 of the country’s 18 provinces, as
well as by their resolute action against militia activity
and the move to integrate the Sons of Iraq into the Iraqi
security forces — two changes that should strengthen
the prerogative of the rule of law to exercise the
monopoly of the security forces over the use of force.
However, the bloody attacks of recent days in
Mosul, Baghdad and elsewhere remind us that, for
Iraqis, daily security is still often very relative and
remains an obstacle to the return of thousands of
people who have been forced to flee their homes.
Moreover, there is a real fear that the upcoming
provincial elections could be an additional motive for
violent attacks by criminal gangs who are still rampant.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue
their efforts and to complement their achievements
with robust action in protecting fundamental human
rights, including in detention. Just as important as reestablishing order is guaranteeing the rights of each
citizen, which will earn the authorities the essential
confidence and support of the population.
Secondly, with regard to political reconciliation,
Belgium welcomes the political agreement that made
possible the adoption of the law on the upcoming
provincial elections. Following the constitutional
referendum and the 2005 elections, those elections will
represent a new step in the consolidation of a
democracy open to all Iraqis. In that spirit, we
welcome in particular the inclusion of provisions for
the representation of women and minorities. Of greater
concern is the discussion on the distribution of power
and the sharing of assets, which have been slow in
coming about. An agreement on those issues is,
however, an essential foundation for the stable

08-60200

S/PV.6016

coexistence of all of the different Iraqi communities
and for a prosperity that is as genuine as it is equitably
distributed. We thus call upon all parties to show the
will necessary to achieve a compromise.
In that context and given the tension and
increased violence in the areas of the disputed internal
boundaries, we welcome the technical assistance
provided by UNAMI that was mentioned by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his
briefing. We encourage all sides to make use of that
assistance.
Thirdly, on the issue of human rights, Belgium
encourages the Iraqi authorities to increase their efforts
to take advantage of the improved security situation to
combat the serious violations of human rights that
continue to affect the most vulnerable populations. In
response to the events of the past summer, we reiterate
our unequivocal condemnation of the campaign of
violence against the Christian community of Mosul,
while we also note with satisfaction measures taken by
Prime Minister al-Maliki.
In the few weeks remaining until the end of the
mandate of the multinational force in Iraq, Belgium
reminds the Council that it is the Council’s task to
ensure that the mandate of the United Nations be
carried out under secure conditions. We also welcome
the decision by the Government of Iraq to facilitate the
construction of a new United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad by providing land, and the announcement of a
substantial financial contribution.
Finally, Belgium must reaffirm its appreciation
for the excellent work — courageous and professional
and carried out under difficult circumstances — by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and by
Mr. de Mistura personally. Mr. de Mistura will
continue to benefit from the full and unequivocal
support of Belgium in completing his mandate.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to
begin by joining previous speakers in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his comprehensive
briefing and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2008/688). My delegation also thanks the
representative of the United States for his statement on
behalf of the multinational force in Iraq. We also
greatly appreciate the information provided by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.

08-60200

We are encouraged by the overall improvement in
the security situation in Iraq. We believe that this
accomplishment will provide Iraq with the opportunity
to make further progress in its political processes and
economic development. It is critical that the
encouraging
achievement
be
maintained
and
strengthened. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the continued efforts by the Government of Iraq to
build the capacity of the Iraqi security forces. The
recent transfer of security responsibilities from the
multinational force to the Iraqi army in some
governorates is a sign of the increased capacity of the
Iraqi security forces.
My delegation also recognizes that, despite the
improvement, Iraq continues to face serious security
challenges. We believe that addressing the persistence
of security threats will require not only military
measures but also the promotion of dialogue and
national reconciliation across political, ethnic and
sectarian lines. Peace and stability in Iraq could also be
underpinned by tangible progress in socio-economic
reconstruction, strong steps to bolster the human rights
protection system to guarantee the rights of Iraqi
citizens and the promotion of good governance and the
rule of law.
Electoral democracy is an important part of
political stability in Iraq. My delegation, in that regard,
is particularly encouraged by the adoption of the
provincial election law in September 2008, which will
serve as the legal basis for the conduct of the
forthcoming provincial elections in early 2009. We are
hopeful that those elections will advance political
dialogue, establish representative provincial councils
and empower community leaders to meet the needs of
local citizens in cooperation with the Government of
Iraq.
In ensuring political stability and economic
progress, Iraq will continue to require the support of
countries in the region. In that regard, we welcome the
increasing cooperation between Iraq and other
countries as well as institutions in the region. We are of
the view that the sustained work of the working groups
on Iraqi border security, refugees and energy could
further enhance such cooperation.
We continue to attach primary importance to the
International Compact with Iraq, serving as a new
partnership between Iraq and the international
community in order to achieve peace, consolidation

19

S/PV.6016

and comprehensive development. We recognize the
importance of the increased presence of international
agencies in Baghdad and at the provincial level, in
order to support various initiatives within the
framework of the Compact. We therefore commend the
United Nations agencies, such as the World Food
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Health
Organization for establishing a permanent presence in
Iraq.
The humanitarian situation of the Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) remains a
matter of concern to my delegation. International
support aimed at meeting their urgent needs remains
critical. The United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq signed in August 2008 by the United Nations and
the Government of Iraq should provide a framework
not only for enhancing economic development but also
for mitigating the difficulties that Iraqi refugees and
IDPs continue to face. We welcome the fact that
increasing numbers of refugees and IDPs are returning
to Iraq and the measures taken by the Government of
Iraq to facilitate their return.
We remain concerned over the continued
incidence of civilian casualties in Iraq. In that regard,
my Government underlines the importance of respect
for international humanitarian and human rights law
and for appropriate measures to ensure the protection
of civilians.
Indonesia continues to attach primary importance
to UNAMI’s role and contribution to the efforts of the
Government of Iraq in reconstruction and development,
conducting elections and promoting human rights,
good governance and the rule of law. We commend
UNAMI for its continued support for the enhancement
of relations between Iraq and the countries of the
region with a view to promoting an agenda of mutual
collaboration and partnership.
Finally, in light of the fifth anniversary of the
heinous terrorist attack on the United Nations office in
Baghdad in 2003, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the staff members and others who became the
victims of the heinous attack. Their dedication and
sacrifices will always be remembered.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): May I begin by extending
our welcome to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. de Mistura, and expressing our

20

appreciation for the ongoing efforts and commitment
that he and his team are devoting to fulfilling the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). Allow me also to take the opportunity
to thank Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States for
his presentation on behalf of the multinational force
and Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq for his presentation
today.
While Croatia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by France on behalf of the European Union,
allow me to make a few additional observations. The
gains achieved on the political and the security fronts
this year, with the assistance of UNAMI and the
support of the multinational force, underpin a
remarkable process of transformation of Iraq towards a
democratic, stable, secure and prosperous country. The
democratically elected Government of Iraq is
extending its authority and security presence in a
growing number of provinces. The socio-economic
situation is improving, while microeconomic indicators
point to an expanding economy.
The recent adoption of the provincial election law
has opened the way for provincial elections to take
place in early 2009. That would be an excellent
opportunity to further consider the progress achieved.
It is important that the elections be well-prepared as
well as fair and inclusive. We salute the important
contributions that UNAMI has been making in that
regard, including its facilitation role on the issue of
minority representation in the provincial councils.
A secure environment is critical to the holding of
successful elections. The recent incidents of violence,
including an intimidation campaign against Christians
in Mosul, are unsettling. We deplore all attempts to
reignite the conflict, and we express our condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives in the recent
attacks.
However, that should not be allowed to
overshadow the overall security gains witnessed over
the past year. We are encouraged to observe a
continuing period of improved stability, and we
welcome it. We are also pleased to hear that the
responsibility for security has been handed over to the
Government of Iraq in more than two thirds of its
provinces. The Iraqi Government has demonstrated its
increasing capabilities, including the ability to address
security challenges. We welcome the beginning of the
integration of ex-combatants into Government

08-60200

S/PV.6016

functions and recognize that that is a long-term effort
that is essential in order to create impartial and nonsectarian security forces that enjoy the trust and respect
of all Iraqi communities.
We have taken note of the belated discussions
under way between Iraq and the United States, and we
hope that they will lead to the rapid conclusion of a
status-of-forces agreement before the end of this year,
leaving no security gaps.
Security is also a precondition for the
reconstruction and development of the country. Last
May in Stockholm, the international community
reaffirmed its commitment to continuing to work in
partnership with the Iraqi Government within the
framework of the Iraqi Compact. We welcome the
signing of the United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq, notably its focus on mobilizing Iraq’s resources
and on capacity-building.
Iraq has vast economic potential, which will be
translated into improvements in infrastructure and in
essential services for all Iraqi citizens. To echo the
Secretary-General’s remarks, the mobilization of Iraq’s
abundant economic and human resources can provide
further impetus to the national reconciliation effort.
Dialogue with and the constructive engagement
of Iraq’s neighbours are other critical components in
the long-term stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.
We salute and encourage the growing regional
diplomatic engagement, including through the
reopening of embassies of regional countries in
Baghdad.
National reconciliation remains a priority in Iraq.
In order to overcome sectarian violence, crosscommunity cooperation efforts should be encouraged at
all levels. Iraqi leaders have demonstrated the ability to
work together and move beyond sectarianism. A
number of important legislative milestones have been
reached this year. We hope to see similar progress on
the issue of hydrocarbon resources, the implementation
of article 140 of the Constitution and the constitutional
revision process.
We encourage the extension of UNAMI’s
presence in Iraq. UNAMI has proved to be a positive
force in advancing national reconciliation, facilitating
political consensus, engaging with the issues of
minority representation and disputed internal
boundaries, promoting regional dialogue, offering

08-60200

substantial electoral assistance, promoting human
rights and supporting reconstruction and development.
It has our full and continuing support.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
my delegation, I would like to thank Mr. de Mistura,
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for his detailed briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States for his
report on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We
welcome the participation of the delegation of Iraq in
this debate and thank Ambassador Al Bayati for his
statement.
We are approaching the end of 2008 amid
intertwining achievements and challenges with regard
to the situation in Iraq. My delegation notes with
encouragement Iraq’s continued and measured progress
across a vast spectrum, including a further decrease in
security incidents and violence, the long-awaited
adoption of the provincial council elections law, the
general observance of Moqtada al-Sadr’s ceasefire, the
formal transfer of security responsibilities to the Iraqi
army in 13 governorates and the accelerated return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. We are also
heartened to see the incremental macroeconomic
improvements in domestic consumption, public
expenditure, budget execution, private sector reform,
foreign and local investment and external debt
settlement.
The aforementioned progress, however, has not
eclipsed the magnitude of the challenges that remain
pertinent. While the Iraqi economy continues to grow,
thanks in large part to oil revenues, there are still
pressing demands to devote more resources and
capacity to generating employment, ensuring food
security and better access to public services, promoting
social welfare and environmental protection, advancing
the legislative agenda and constitutional review,
curbing the illicit use of weapons and combating
organized crime, promoting disarmament and
demobilizing and reintegrating ex-combatants. The
latest series of incidents involving sectarian violence
and suicide bombings in Baghdad, Kirkuk and a
number of other provinces reminds us that security
gains are still fragile. As reported by the SecretaryGeneral, the deteriorated living conditions of
vulnerable groups, most of whom are women, children,
refugees or internally displaced persons, deserve the
continued attention and cooperation of all relevant
stakeholders in order to serve the legitimate interests of

21

S/PV.6016

Iraqi civilians in compliance with international human
rights and humanitarian law.

respect for the political independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

As in any other country emerging from a
devastating war, the quest for durable peace and
sustainable development in Iraq should be a nationally
owned process relying on a harmonious combination of
various political, security and socioeconomic
parameters and requiring the united efforts of all
segments of the population. My delegation calls on all
parties in Iraq to accord the highest priority to national
interests, to renounce all potentially destabilizing acts
and to jointly shoulder the national agenda of
reconciliation and dialogue, political stabilization and
socioeconomic reform, thus creating the most
conducive environment possible for the provincial
elections scheduled for January 2009, as well as for the
country’s long-term peace, stability and prosperity.

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation greatly appreciates the briefing given by
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for which we thank him. We
also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his briefing on
the activities of the Multinational Force. We also thank
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Iraq for
the very useful information that we have received.

In order to help Iraq to maximize its internal
strengths and to fully integrate into the world
community, United Nations agencies, neighbouring
countries and the international community can and
should play a more incisive role. In that connection,
while we welcome the signing of the United Nations
Assistance Strategy for Iraq 2008-2010, my delegation
supports every United Nations effort to truly become a
promoter of development, a coordinator of
international contributions and a catalyst for
improvements in the living conditions of the Iraqi
people. We commend the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
since the renewal of its mandate, notably in helping the
people of Iraq to advance political dialogue and
confidence-building, to resolve the status of Kirkuk
and other contested internal boundaries, to extend
electoral assistance, to support the constitutional
review process and to facilitate the regional dialogue
process.
In concluding, my delegation notes with
appreciation the continued engagement of regional
countries and the international community in
leveraging Iraq’s reconstruction, development and
reintegration, especially through the normalization of
external bilateral relations and within broader
frameworks such as the International Compact with
Iraq, the expanded ministerial meetings and the
regional working groups on energy, refugees and
security. We hope that all parties concerned will take
further concrete steps to consolidate and contribute to
that mutually beneficial partnership on the basis of

22

From all of these briefings, we can conclude that
the overall situation in Iraq continues to improve, even
though it is still fragile; a certain degree of hope is
therefore warranted. We welcome in particular the
progress made in the political area, with the adoption
by the Council of Representatives of the provincial
election law as well as the updating of the electoral
rolls by the Independent High Electoral Commission.
These actions are important steps to strengthening the
political dialogue.
Even though significant efforts remain to be
made in the area of human rights, including with
respect to the protection of women and children, we
should welcome certain interesting decisions, among
them the ratification by the Iraqi Government of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We encourage
the Iraqi Government to maintain this momentum by
adopting the bill on the establishment of an
independent human rights commission, a crucial tool
for a rational and equitable treatment of human rightsrelated issues.
Another significant and reassuring aspect that is
worth noting is the intensity of diplomatic activity that
we have seen in Iraq, including with the restoration of
the diplomatic representation of several countries; this
offers real prospects for intraregional cooperation.
We have a highly positive view of the important
contribution made by the United Nations to Iraq’s
national reconstruction effort. In particular, the
personal commitment of the Special Representative
and the prominent role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) have been
decisive for the improvement of the political and
institutional process; here, we must not overlook their
contribution to the organization of free, democratic and
transparent elections.

08-60200

S/PV.6016

The monitoring and elimination of systematic
human rights violations is also at the heart of the
Mission’s concerns, even though in this area the role of
the Iraqi Government and of the Multinational Force is
crucial. We hope that the project to support the rule of
law and justice in Iraq, supported by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations in partnership with
the European Commission, the implementation of
which will extend until 2010, will help to further lay
the basis for a true democracy in Iraq.
As for economic concerns, we are pleased with
the signing by the Iraqi Government and the United
Nations of the United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq for the period 2008-2010. Along with the national
strategy, the International Compact with Iraq and the
Development Group Iraq Trust Fund, the Assistance
Strategy will make it possible to better coordinate
assistance and development initiatives and to build
national capacity in the area of governance.
With respect to the violence that we have seen in
the past, in particular against certain Christian
communities, and above all, looking ahead to the
upcoming provincial elections that are planned for the
beginning of 2009, we believe that the presence of the
Multinational Force and the strengthening of the
UNAMI’s operational, logistic and security capacities
are still necessary.
In conclusion, we would say that more than ever
the solidarity of the international community must be
affirmed in order to support Iraq in its national
reconstruction efforts in an environment of peace with
its neighbours and in a stable and secure region.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, the Chinese delegation thanks you for
organizing this debate. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing. We welcome the briefing
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, Ambassador Khalilzad, on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We also
welcome the presence of the Iraqi Ambassador,
Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, at today’s debate, and we thank
him for his briefing.
The process of peace and recovery in Iraq is now
at a critical juncture. We welcome the continuous
progress achieved by Iraq in the political, security and
reconstruction fields. Objectively, however, the overall
security situation in Iraq remains fragile. We are

08-60200

especially concerned about the large number of civilian
casualties caused by military operations and violent
attacks. We call once again on the parties concerned to
do everything possible to avoid civilian casualties
while carrying out military operations.
We hope that the Government of Iraq will
continue to lead all factions to agree on a common
vision for the future of the country by placing national
interests above everything else and by strengthening
dialogue and unity. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to continue its
positive role in that regard.
We believe it is essential that political dialogue
and the national reconciliation of Iraq be promoted in
order to consolidate progress already achieved in
various fields. We welcome the recent adoption of the
provincial election law, as noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2008/688). This law
constitutes an important milestone in the political
process in Iraq. Provincial elections conducted
smoothly in a secure environment will further increase
the inclusiveness of the political process in Iraq. We
support UNAMI in its continued efforts to provide
every possible support to Iraq in this regard.
For progress in the security and political fields to
be effectively consolidated, economic and social
reconstruction must move ahead. We call upon the
international community to truly honour its pledges of
aid to Iraq by helping Iraq speed up its process of
reconstruction and development. We support a larger
role for the meeting of foreign ministers of
neighbouring countries and other mechanisms.
Under the leadership of Mr. de Mistura, UNAMI
has achieved positive progress in all its activities under
difficult circumstances. We express our great
appreciation in that regard. We support UNAMI in its
continued efforts to accomplish its mission as
mandated by the Security Council. UNAMI’s close
consultation with the Government of Iraq and
extensive outreach to all components of Iraqi society
are indispensable for the smooth conduct of its
activities.
Safety and security have always been the top
priority of UNAMI. It is a concern that China shares.
We are confident that the Government of Iraq will
honour in good faith its commitments in this regard.

23

S/PV.6016

Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
briefing on behalf of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Through him, I would like
also to thank the entire Mission and express the
gratitude of Panama for the work it has been doing. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of the United States, Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, who spoke
on behalf of the Multinational Force, for his briefing.
Finally, we would like to welcome the Ambassador of
Iraq, Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, and to thank him for his
important statement to the Council.
We are pleased to see that, in spite of the serious
security situation that persists in Iraq, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/688) gives some signs of
justified optimism. Those signs of optimism are based,
first and foremost, on a drop in acts of violence
throughout Iraq. That is due in no small measure to the
political agreements and understandings achieved
among the parties in conflict, with the necessary
participation of UNAMI and the leadership of the
multinational forces.
The holding of provincial elections in Iraq has
been a pending topic for many months, due to a lack of
the necessary political agreement on establishing laws
and on a suitable institutional framework in which to
hold the elections. This is why we note with
satisfaction the national voter registration update by
the Government of Iraq, as well as the adoption of the
provincial elections law, which includes the
fundamental issue of the representation of minorities.
My delegation recognizes the importance of those
achievements for the establishment of democracy in
Iraq. It is essential to continue to pay particular
attention to those issues.
In spite of those advances, thousands of Iraqis
continue living in very adverse humanitarian
circumstances. An increase in the presence of
humanitarian personnel on the ground is crucial for
progress.
That is why we recognize the importance of the
fact that the United Nations staff have begun to
broaden their presence and activities and that different
offices, agencies and programmes involved in this
matter have got together to establish a permanent
international presence in Baghdad. We believe that that
initiative will contribute to the implementation of the

24

goals established in the United Nations Assistance
Strategy for Iraq 2008-2010.
On the other hand, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons continues to be cause for concern.
We recognize the incentives provided by the
Government of Iraq for the return of thousands of
displaced persons, as well as the measures so that those
individuals can recover their property. We urge the
Government of Iraq to continue those measures.
No less important is that, as mentioned in the
UNAMI report, human rights in Iraq continue to be
violated regularly. In that context, we should make
special mention of the thousands of people in various
detention centres who continue to call for the
application of international human rights standards,
while they suffer ill treatment and humiliation and
while basic procedural guarantees are denied them.
That is why the Council should pay more attention to
that serious situation and support the efforts of the
United Nations bodies that are involved in this matter.
Finally, the main goal of the efforts of this
Organization must be to achieve an Iraq that can live in
prosperity and peace, both with itself and with its
neighbours, an Iraq where human rights are promoted
and respected, an Iraq that is free of occupation by
multinational forces.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We also thank the representative of the
United States, Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, for
briefing us on the activities of the multinational force
in Iraq.
We welcome the relatively positive developments
that have taken place over the last few weeks in Iraq.
They include enhanced cooperation among political
groups in Iraq and between Iraq and neighbouring
countries, as well as an extension of the authority of
the Iraqi Government. The recent adoption of the
provincial election law is also encouraging.
However, fundamental challenges remain. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688) indicates,
high levels of violence continue and some important
groups remain outside the political process. The
Secretary-General also reports on the humanitarian
plight of refugees and the serious human rights

08-60200

S/PV.6016

situation, particularly the violations of human rights of
civilians and detainees. That continues to be a grave
concern of my Government, and we call on all parties,
including the multinational force, to ensure that human
rights and international humanitarian law are respected.
Persistent reports of high civilian casualty rates in
military operations and of thousands of civilians being
detained without being charged or afforded legal due
process highlight the urgent need for greater
compliance with international and Iraqi law. Moreover,
the dire humanitarian situation, particularly that
experienced by refugees, continues to have a negative
impact on Iraqi and regional stability.
It should be emphasized that the multinational
force operates in Iraq under a United Nations mandate.
Consequently, its actions have a direct bearing on the
credibility and reputation of this body and its ability to
act as an honest broker in facilitating national
reconciliation and an all-inclusive political process in
Iraq, as well as constructive dialogue with its
neighbours.
My delegation remains concerns about recent
incidents in Syria and elsewhere where the national
borders of sovereign nations are violated and innocent
civilians are harmed and sometimes killed in
contravention of international law.
We are pleased that the United Nations is able to
play a positive role in assisting with national
reconciliation, internal and regional political dialogue,
resolving
boundary
disputes
and
providing
constitutional and electoral support, as well as
humanitarian,
reconstruction
and
development
assistance. Therefore, South Africa continues to
support the presence of UNAMI in Iraq under its
current mandate, in line with our commitment to
multilateralism and conflict resolution.
South Africans, for their part, have been sharing
their experiences in conflict resolution and national
reconciliation with their Iraqi counterparts through the
Helsinki II process. We hope that our national
experience could offer hope for a better life for the
million of Iraqis during this difficult time of their
history.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that the
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
the powers it grants to the multinational force are
exercised in a manner consistent with the decisions of

08-60200

the Council and that Iraq’s natural resources and the
funds in the Development Fund for Iraq are used for
the benefit of its people.
Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
will now speak in my national capacity. Like the other
delegations that have spoken before me, I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador Zalmay
Khalilzad for the presentations of the reports on the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) and on the multinational force in Iraq.
Likewise, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati, for his
statement. For me it is always a personal pleasure to
see him in this Chamber.
My delegation is pleased to take note of the
positive news contained in the Secretary-General’s
report on UNAMI (S/2008/688) concerning the
progress made in the country’s reconstruction and the
establishment of a federal, pluralistic and unified Iraq.
In particular, we are pleased at the holding of
provincial elections next year, because we believe it is
important that Iraqi authorities strengthen their
legitimacy in the eyes of the all Iraqi people through
the consolidating of democratic processes. We urge
UNAMI to continue to contribute, through technical
assistance and advice, with a transparent election
process that offers representation guarantees for Iraq’s
citizens.
My delegation supports UNAMI and, in
particular, the efforts by Mr. de Mistura in the very
positive role they have played in offering the necessary
electoral assistance. We believe it is fitting to remind
all political players of the Security Council’s support
for UNAMI, to counter any attempt to manipulate in
any way the results of the elections.
We are also pleased by the news of the increase in
diplomatic contacts between Iraq and neighbouring
countries, a process that will make possible better
integration of Iraq into the regional framework and that
helps to strengthen the mechanisms of dialogue and
cooperation. Costa Rica believes that the stability of
Iraq depends to a great extent on cooperation with its
neighbours and a stable and secure relationship with
them.
My delegation is also pleased to see the progress
made in the development of institutional capacity in
Iraq, in particular with regard to the management of

25

S/PV.6016

public budgets for the delivery of local services. We
note the importance of implementing initiatives, such
as the United Nations Assistance Strategy for Iraq
2008-2010, recently signed by the Government of Iraq
and the United Nations. My country also observes that,
thanks to progress in the field, as stated by the
Secretary-General,
“the Government of Iraq is increasingly able to
fund its own reconstruction agenda thanks to
greater stability and oil revenues, which have
been rising through 2008.” (S/2008/688, para. 59)
Costa Rica certainly is pleased to note this.
In the midst of this positive picture, we continue
to be concerned by the ongoing political violence, by
terrorist attacks, as well as the deaths of civilians,
which take place within the context of military
operations.
Lastly, we would like to point out the SecretaryGeneral’s statement in paragraph 40 of the same report,
to the effect that, “systematic human rights violations
remain constant, but are less visible and less widely
reported”. The protection and promotion of human
rights necessarily require reliable and effective
reporting mechanisms. For this reason, we urge the
Iraqi authorities to continue to fight this culture of

impunity, as well as the culture of silence, through the
implementation of legal mechanisms to this end.
In this context, my delegation also believes that it
is important that the Iraqi authorities adopt the bill to
establish an independent human rights commission.
Lastly, we are concerned by the delay of the sixmonthly report of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq on human rights. We hope that we can
soon have it before the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I have the honour of giving the floor to Mr. de
Mistura to respond to the comments and questions that
have been raised.
Mr. De Mistura: I will be very short in thanking
every member of the Council and His Excellency the
Ambassador of Iraq for the words of support and
encouragement for what the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the Secretary-General’s team are
trying to do in Iraq. What we have been able to achieve
together with the Iraqi Government has been also
because the Security Council expressed trust in the
Secretary-General and his team in Iraq eight months
ago, and we will need that trust and support in the next
coming months, because there are challenges ahead.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

26

08-60200
