318th

United Nations

PLENAf~Y ME~tING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Monday, 4 December 1950,

ft' !J p....

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records

CONTENTS
Page

Admission of new Members to the United Nations, including the advisory
Qpinion of the International Court of Justice (A/1353) (concluded).
565
< ••

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).
4. Quite apart from the substantive arguments, which
speak loudly for a prompt and satisfactory solution of
this impasse, I should like to mention a psychological
argument. The whole world is looking fora break in
the deadlock between the great Powers. It seems to
me that we have here a matter of disagreement between East and West which could easily be approached
and solved and which, if settled, could-at least' in
some degree-contribute to the easing of the tension
in the world today.
5. I cannot sum up our position in this vital matter
better and more ek.quently than by quoting. from a
recently published book written by a prominent member of the United States delegation. Speaking about
the problem we are now discussing-~ the author ,expresses his personal opinion in the foHowing terms:
"I have now come to believe th~t the United- Nao tions will best serve the cause of llf;ac,~ if its Assembly
is representative of what the world actually is, and
not merely representative of the parts which we like.
Therefore, we ought to be willing that all the nations
should be Members without attempting to appraise
closely those which are 'good' and those vhich are
'bad'. Already that distinction is obliterated by the
present membership of the United Nations.''l
6. The Swedish d~leg-ation invites the Members of
the Genera! Assembly to vot,~ in favour of the draft
resolution of which Sweden is one of the five spGnsors
[A/1S?1].
7. Mr. LAPOINTE (Canada): My governtnent has
studied with great care the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice [A/1353]. This opinion
confirms the interpretation of the Charter to which the
United Nations had previously conformed and to which
my government had subscribed. In view of this opinion,
it is clear that no step can be taken by the General
Assembly to admit new Members in the absence of a
recommendation by the Security Council.

Admission of new Members to the United Nations,
including the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (A/1353) (concluded)

[Agenda item 19]

1. Mr. SANDLER (Sweden): The Swedish delegation heartily welcomes the in,ti~tivt:; taken by the
delegation of El Salvador, although we do not find
ourselves in a position to be able to vote in favottr of
the draft resolution which it has submitted [A/1S851.
Through the initiative taken by the delegation of El
Salvador, attention has again been drawn to the question of admission of new Members. All efforts on the
part of the General Assembly to arrive at a fair and
reasonable solution of this problem have so far failed.
By 'i a fair and reasonable solution", we understand
an arrangement which would not exclude from the
right to membership sovereign States wishing to become Members and possessing the necessary qualifications for membership in accordance with the provisions
of our Charter.
2. We all know why the General Assembly has failed.
States which have indicated their desire to obtain
membership have not been accepted into membership
because of the absence of a favourable recommendation on the part of the Security Council as provided
for in Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Charter. Those
States which have obtained a majority vote for a
favourable recommendation have failed to obtain membership because of the veto; on the other hand, those
States ag~inst which no veto has been cast have not
succeeded in obtaining the necessary majority for a
favourable recommendation.
3. Ever since its own admission into the United Nations, Sweden has made known, over and over again,
the reasons why it favours a generous attitude to the
question of the admission of new Members. I am not
going to repeat our arguments all over again, but I
beg leave to ask whether it is not high time that the
Security Council should take the necessary steps to
bring about a change in a state ef !J:ffairs which has
become almost untenable?

1Ik.7

-.;c.:&.= ~,~~ , ~..~~ _.,._.•....~...•_....................... _·~ 'o.~·

'11lriiIIiiit.ii.
""ioioIii<i!;:'

'I

1 See Dulles, J. F., War or P eaceJ New 'y",rk, The llltlnilIu
Co., 1950, page 190.

565,
• •-

-_. ·

"·.·,,.-c~,,=~==c-"="~"=··"<'C"" ""~"~·.,,~,,,.,,,,=",",.~'''''-'''''"''"'''·'-'''·''·'''''''-·'Y··· ".~_.. ~l:f.Y .J18

- -••--.._._"..

566

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

8. Unfortunately, the Security Council has been unable to ma!:e cert~in recommendations for reasons which
are well known. W lile my delegation accepts this situation, it must once more express its profound regret
that so many counti'ies which could make a substantial
contribution to the work of the United Nations are
being excluded ~IY the action of the Soviet Union for
reasons which h~~'e nothing to do with the Charter
and are not in conformity with the interpretation of
Article 4 of the Charter given by the International Court
of Justice. This is a situation which cannot continue
indefinitely.
9. The present moment, we must recognize, is perhaps not pro~itious for a general review of the question
of membership. I know that there are some delegations
which consider that membership in the Organization
should MIW be based on the principle of universality
without L:'e qualifications on that principle which are
embodied in Article 4 of the Charter. My delegation
hopes thai as soon as circumstances permit, it will be
possible to examine the whole question of membership, in the General Assembly, with particular referen~e to the relationship between Article 4 and the desire
for unive~sality of membership.
10. With these considerations in mind, in C'ompany
~>jth the de1~~tic!ls of Brazil, the Phi11pplrtt:J, Sweden
and Syria, m)" delegation has sponsored the draft
resolution stibmiti:ed in documt::nt A/1571. This draft
resolution accepts the situation in which the General
Assembly finds itself in the absence of any recommendations from the Security Council. It also reaffirms the
positive recommendations which were made a year ago
by the General Assembly [296 (IV) j in :~egard to the
member8hip of certain States, recomnienJations upon
which the Security Council, unhappily, has been unable
to act. I do not see how th~ General Assembiy could
tJvssibly do less this year than to reaffirm these recommendations.
11. This draft resolution also reaffirms the request
by the General Assembly to the Security Council tQ
keep under review the a::;plications of all States whicll
have indicated a desire for membership. You will notice,
therefore, that the five-Power re~{)lution includes the
request to the Security Council contained in the Soviet
Union draft resolution [A/1S77] for a review of all
applications, but it also reaffirms previous recommendations of the General Assembly which is not done in
the Sovkf Union draft resolution; am! it includes the
application of Korea, which has been omitted from the
list given in the draft submitted by the USSR.
12. -As for the draft resolution submitted last Saturday, 2 December 1950, by the delegation of El Salvador,
my delegation considers that this involves important
changes in the structure of the United Nations which
should not be ~Ji>ted hastily. We are by no means
certain that th~ J>roposals contained in the operative
par~s of that draft are compatible with the Charter and
we would not, wish, therefore, to support these proposals.
13. We are not at all sure, furthermore, that the suggestion of observer status for the applicant countries
is compatible with their dignity or in any sense adequate for sovereign States and we have doubts, therefore, .whether the proposal would be acceptable tc the
cou:ltries whose interests it is intended to aerve. My

delegation, therefore, will not support the draft resolution proposal by El Salvador.
14. For these reasons I commend to representatives
in the General Assembly the five-Power draft resolution as the more adequate and comprehensive form in
which to record our views on this subject.
15. Faris EL-KHOlTRI Bey (Syria): As my delegation is a co-sponsor of one of the draft resolutions
which are now before the General Assembly for discussion, I should like to make a few remarks on the
subject in connexion with a principle which I have
advocated ever since I represented my country in the
Security Council, namely, the principle of universality.
16. My o~;'nion is that the United Nations was established for the purpose of comprising all the nations of
the world. If there are some objections to the admission
of one country or another, these objections should be
surmounted. For instance, I believe the Security Council now has fourteen applications for membership waiting for its recommendat ;rHl of admission. Of these fourteen applications eight ~4ave obtained seven affirmative
votes, but because of the Soviet Union use of the veto,
the Council has been unablt: to adopt a favqurable
decision. It appears that the fourteen applications ca,n
be divided intu two sections, one comprising eight
States which are friends or adhc ents of the westerr.t
bloc, the other five friends or adherents of the eastern
bloc, the Soviet Union and hs allies.
17. We understand from the Soviet Union that it
will never consent to admission of anyone of the other
eight applicants unless the five whicp. they su ~port are
also admitted. Th, Soviet Union advocates ~he adoption of one resolution covering the admis!:iion of all
fourteen applicants, which would mean that it would
be impossible to admit Italy, Ireland, Portugal, Austria,
Finland, the Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan, Ceylon
2.11d Ncoal unless we admitted at the same time Albania,
the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria, Romania,
and Hungary. In other words, the admission of the
former group of nations would depend on the admission
of the latter.
18. Some members of the General Assembly, whose
view I did not share, thought that we should be able
to find a way out which would enable us to admit applicants which obtained seven votes in the Security Council if we sought a legal opinion from the International
Court of Justice. The International Court of Justice
was asked whether, if a majority of any seven votes
in the Security Council was obtained in favour of recommending the admission of an applicant, the General
Assembly could take a stand and decide to admit the
applicant despite the absence of a normal recommendation by the Security Council owing to the imposition
of the veto by one of the permanent me..rnbers.
19. We M-le received the reply of the International
Court of Justice, which has been distributed to all
Members, and I have a copy here. Unfortelately, the
Court does not confirm the hopes of those who sponsored the transmission of the question to it, but says,
"N0, so long as the Security Council doe~ not agree
to make the recommendation by seven votes, including
the concurring affirmative votes of the permanent members, the General Assembly can do nothing"..

f1 1"I·!'IIIII·r'II"!II
.,,1/.11
""I1

I· IIfI1If'~

I

~

318th Meetin~--4
December 1950
e

20. What is the result of this reply? The result is
clearly that the dOQr is closed for ever to the appli~
cants concerned and that the General Assembly will
not be able to take any action under the Charter as it
now exists or while the Security Council is constructed
as it is at present. Unless the permanent members
agree on a particular recommendation we shall be
paralysed and shall not be able to do anything about
it, and those na~: 'ns which have been applying for
membership for a period of years now and are still·
awaiting replies to their applications will continue to
wait for ever. They cannot receive a reply unless a
compromise is reached by the permanent members of
the Security Council so as to make a solution possible.
21. I consider that it is very important that this
problem should be solved. In my view, the non-admission of these applicant States and the failure to recognize the new Government of China in this A~sembly
has given rise to-or has helped to give rise to-the
present strained situation in the world. It is high time
that strong steps should be taken towards the solution of this matter. It is not difficult: on the contrary,
it is very easy. If we do not wish to admit Bulgaria
or Romania what prevents us from admitting Italy,
Ireland, Austria and the other applicant States who
are suffering as a result? Why do we not want to admit
Bulgaria, Romania and the others? What have they
done? Is it that they do not submit to or carry out
the principles of the Charter? How can we make them
submissive, and how can we make them yield to those
principles? Article 2, paragraph 6 of the Charter says:
"The Organization shall ensure that States which
are not Members of the United Nations act in accordance with these Principles . . ."
22. Thus it is our duty to try to make States which
are not members of the United Nations act in accordance with the principles of the Charter. Would it
not be much easier to do this if those States were here
with us as Members instead of being applicants whose
requests for membership have been rejected? This is
a matter which touches upon the dignity of the States
whic.h h.ave been awaiting an affirmative reply to their
applications.
23. You all know what the effect would be if one of
you were to ask to be admitted to the membership of
a certain club, and you had to wait for a reply fo!' a
month or two or even longer. What would your position be in such circumstances? What would you feel
like? Yo~ would undoubtedly consider it an insult.
24. There are now fourteen States which have applied
for membership; they have waited months and years
and no reply has even been given to them except a
negative reply. That certainly must have hurt their
feelings, anrJ may even have made them enemies in~tead of friends of the Organization. That kind of thing
IS ~ikely to increase animosity and hostility amongst
nations.
25. We are here to establish and strengthen friendly
relations among t he peoples of the world and between
nation~. Why sI\QuId we erect barriers in order to
crea~e ellatni~s? j~ ~o not see any sense or any justificatIOn for the attitude we are taking. By doing so,
~e are not serving the principles of the United Nations
In any way; we are just going against the principles

567
_

to which we are all pledged, namely that we should
be loyal to and act in accordance with the principles
and purposes of the Charter. We should be very careful
about that and find some solution or way out of this
situation in which we find ourselves. Are we going to
leave this question aside and not find any solution to
it? What is the meaning behind it all and why?
26. I advocated the principle of universality. The
proposal which I sponsored, together with some other
representatives, does not refer to universality. It simply
keeps the applications which are mentioned in the resolution [296 (IV)] of the General Assembly of 22
November 1949 on record, and keeps them on the
agend~ of the Security Council whose duty it is to
consider th~m. It narrows the request from the General Asserr~~ly to the Security Council to those eight
or nine applications, while alienating the others.
27. The draft resolution submitted by El Salvador
also attempts to do the same thing. It confines the request or the recommendation of the General Assembly
to those eight or nine States who adhere to the principles of the Western Powers, and it excludes the others.
28. But my dear friends, what is the result of that?
Suppose the General Assembly were now to ask the
Security Council, or any member in the Security Council, to place these applic::ttions on the agenda and have
them voted upon. The result would be to add eight
or nine vetoes to the vetoes which already exist and
have been exercised by the Soviet Union. One application after the other would be vetoed, vetoed, vetoed.
Thus, the nine applications would be vetoed. Therefore, instead of forty vetoes, there would be forty-nine
vetoes. What would be the result ? Nothing. We w01,11d
be in the same position.
29. The only way out of this situation is to have the
permanent members of the Security Council adopt the
principle of universality. Let us admit all these applicants. We have fourteen applicants now; they should
be recommended for membership by the Security Council all together.
30. Let this General Assembly, at this session, before
we adjourn, finish with this sub;~ct. After that, let
the Security Council meet tomorr~w and do as I have
suggested, if they wish peace and harmony' for the
world. They would soften, they would attenuate the
present tension. This would be a step .which would
certainly postpone this tension, at le8st for a consider..
able period of time.
31. We should not be obstinate. We should be tolerant. We should take a step forward. What harm would
there be in that?
32. What have Romania an<Jl ~. .garia done for which
they can be blamed? These two countries were oppressed by Hitler. They were attacked and came under
Nazi domination. Now,' they have adopted the communist doctrine; they are communist States. What harm
is there in that? Why should we t~ot allow tt.em to have
the form of government which they want? But let us
admit them into the United Nations.
.
33. What difference can it make to the Western
Powers? At present, the Eastern bloc has five votes.
If we were to admit these five othet States, that would
make ten votes. The other side now has fifty-five 'Votes.

!S~68~

G:::::en=e::1'=a1:...:::A::8Ie::Jn::=b~1'~-.-.::.;Fi::.fth,;:.;;.:...,.:..::.Se,.:..I.:..:,ll__o_D_-_P
.....I_eD__a_'r1..::.._M
__
ee_ti_D..;;,8.-.8

If we were to admit the applicants which they support, that would give them sixty-four votes. T~e
balance would be sixty-four to ten; there would ~ttll
be a majority. WhY." the:efo~e, oppose th~~e apphcations and cause this ammoslty and hostthty 10.the
wodd? Why obstruct the development of the Umted
Nations in this respect? In ",!hat respect are ~ta!y)
Ireland, Portugal, AustriaJ F1O~and, the Hashlmlte
Kingdom of the Jordan, Ceylon and .the ?ther States
guilty that they should be prevented m this way from
entering through this door? vyhy are t~ey not a~­
mitted? Because we do not WIsh to admit Bulg~rta,
Romania, Hungary and the .oth~rs at t~e same t}m~.
But is that their fault? I~ It right ~r. Just? If It IS
possible 'to admit them WIthout admlttmg the others,
let us do so. We have been trying, however, for years
and have not succeeded in doing anything. We shall
not be able to do anything so long as .we are und~r
the rule of this Charter. The Charter IS a tyrant m
this case; we cannot move.

34. The Assembly resorted to req?esting an opinion
of the International Court of JustIce. We were defeated there too. The Court told US, uNo, yo." cannot
effect the admission of a State to membership of !he
United Nations in the absence of a recommendation
by the Security Council. You must abide by the rule
of the Charter. You must do nothing until you ~ave
a recommendation from the five permanent memDers
of the Security Counci1." What can we do? Are we
to ignore the Charter and the opinion of the Internatio~l Court of Justice? It is true that the~e "~aS a
minority of two judges in the Court who said, Yes,
the General Assembly cat.t do something"! an~ .that
they presented argum~nts In support of their opinion?
This minority, however, represented two out of fourteen judges. The other twelve agreed on the c0!ltrary
opinion. The two judges presented their revolutIOnary
idea as a minority opinion, ~u~ the Gener~l Assembly
certainly cannot a~opt the oplmon of two Ju~ges when
the contrary opinIOn has been expressed oy twelve
judges. \fter all, the General Assemb;y established
the International Court of Justice, and It ca~r~(.\t now
reject its opinions. The Court is our consultative body,
and we should follow its advice. The Assembly is,
therefore condemned to do nothing unless the permanent me~bers of the S\~curity Council agree on a compromiSt1 solution.
35. Another matter which is similar to but not exactly
the same as the c..1.se I have been discussing concerns
the recognition of the new Government of China. We
must be realistic. Who can maintain that the present
Government of China does not exercise de facto authority over the whole of China, with the except of the
Island of Formosa? The status of Formosa has not
yet been determined; we do not know whether it is
Chinese or international territory. Authority over the
bulk of Chinah however, is exercised by a certain government, which has proved its capacity to carry out
its international obligations. It is taking ac!ion .iu~t
like any other government. At the present ttm~ It IS
attacking in Korea. If that government were With us
in the United Nations, however, the General Assembly
could judge its actions. If we were to admit that government and allow it to take a seat in the General
Assembly, we could deal with its actions. If they are

__

guilty, we could tell them so and ask them to rectify
their errors.
36. These things ought to be settled..No",! we do
not know what is being thought or what IS bemg done
throughout the world because of this tension and because of the international situation. All people are afraid.
Fear of a general war now dominates the whole world.
Do we have to have a general war? We must attentuate the causes that have brought about this tension
in the world. We have no right to act in this way. We
have no interest in war. I do not believe that any State
really wants war or wants to go to war. War would
be destructive and detrimental to our entire civilization. It might be that, after many decades have passed
and those who have suffered in the last war are dead,
a new generation will appear which, not knowing the
misery of war, might attempt it. But we have seen
two wars, and we know the horrors of war. Do you
expect us to vote for a war or accept a third world
war now, after all the terrible experiences we have had
in the very recent past? We cannot do it.

37. I think the world would be very happy to hear
of an understanding being reached among the great
Powers. A few days ago, this General Assembly unanimously adopted2 a resolution [A/1481]-even the five
permanent members of the Security CaUl! dl voted
for it, and pledged themselves to do as the resolution
suggested and meet together in an effort to find a
solution to these difficulties. But let us understand these
things. Have they met? Did they execute their promise
and their pledge which was made before the whole
world and all the delegations of the sixty nations rept:'esented here? I do not know; I have not heard that
they have met or that they have started discussions.
Were those promises only a matter of form? Was it
simply a matter of having it in black and white that
a resolutiun was unanimously adopted? Was it adopted
only to be neglected and thrown into a corner, to be
shelved without further attention? That is not in
accordance with the principles of the United Nations.
If resolutions are adopted here, they should be implemented in some way.
38. Perhaps I have gone too far, but I think the S!t~­
ation compels me, you and everybody to tackle thiS
matter. We cannot be silent now; we cannot be quiet
and listen to what is being said, to get our news from
here and there, and from the Press. We have to deal
with the matter and find a remedy for it. All the aspirations and hopes of the world are directed here. An
the pl<oples hope that this great Organization of t~e
United Nations will be able to secure peace and aVOId
a ge1"eral world war. If we cannot do that, why are
we sitting here? Is it simply to make speeches .and
adopt resolutions? It is shameful for us to contmue
to make speeches and declarations for the movies, television and radio. We do not want to speak, we do not
want our figures shown on television and our voices
heard on the radio or anywhere, if we are not able to
produce results. What would be the use of that?

39. I apol~gize to the President. I have gone too far
on the subject, but I think he will pardo~ me.
2 See Official Records of the Gtneral Assembl:v, Fifth SI'"
sion, Plenar:v Meetings, 302nd meeting, .

"

I

-_. _---------------"

SlOth Meet~ng-4 December 1950

569

is, in our opinion, objeCtive and comprehensive. My
delegation therefore intends to vote in favour of it.
Not at alt. I quite agree with you.
41. Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): The question of the lld- 47. If, as 1 hope, this draft resolution is adc;. ~ed, I
see no reason for the General Assembly to consider the
mission of new Members constitutes one of the sadde:1t
Soviet Union draft resolution [AIlS??] which oschapters on the history of the United Nations. Year
tensibly covers the same ground. I say "ostensibly"
after year, the General Assembly is confronted with
because, in fact, it does so in a much less satisfactory
the impossibility of admitting into our midst countries
which fulfil the requirements set forth in the Charter
way. To our mind, it is neither objective nor indeed
and whose presence here would add great prestige to
complete. It purports to invite everyone to the United
our deliberations.
Nations, when we all know that it is the Soviet Union
veto which has so far prevented recommendations being
42. It is simply incredible that the United Nations
made by the Security Council to the General Assembly
should shut its door to so many countries and thus
in
respect to nine of the applicants. Moreover, one of
deprive itself of their collaboration. We feel particuthe
applicants, namely Korea, has even been omitted
larly sorry that this happened to two Latin nations,
from the draft resolution.
Italy and Portugal, not only because we are closely
bound to these countries by cultural ties clnd ~onomic' 48. I now turn to the latest draft resolution, which
has been circulated by the deiegation of El Salvador
tradition, but especially because nv one can dispute
rAI158S]. My delegation appreciates the spirit in
that both Italy and Portugal, having a great_ deal of
experience in the international .field, would in every
which the delegation of El Salvador has taken a new
approach to this difficult problem, but we do not at
way make invaluable contributions to our meetings.
first sight feel that this approach is satisfactory, and
43. The General Assembly has already passed its
we think that any proposal on these lines would re..
judgment toncerning several applicants and expressed
quire at least mature reflection and full consideration
the opinion that they should be admitted to the United
of what it implies in the light -of the Charter and the
Nations. In the light of the advisory opinion of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly. What it
International Court of Justice, it seems to my delega~eems to do is to confer a sort of half-way United Nation that we can do no more than to ask the Security
tions status on certain countries. Would this be acceptCouncil to reconsider its obligations. Accordingly, we
able to those countries? I confess that at this moment
have sponsored a proposal in this respect together with
I cannot say, and I must at least feel considerable doubt.
four other delegations. Let us hope that these new
For these reasons, my delegation feels impelled to vote
reconsiderations by the Security Council may, at least,
against paragraph 2 of the operative part of the draft
bear some satisfactory results.
resolution of El Salvador and against paragraph 4 of
the preamble.
44. The delegation of El Salvador deemed it fitting
to submit to the General Assembly a new proposal,
49. While at first sight we have no objection. to the
the aim of which, as we see it, is to give some satisremainder of the draft resolution, it must be admitted
faction to those applicants which have received seven
that without the parts I have mentioned it loses most
or more votes in the Security Council. We fully realize
of its force. If, therefore, these parts are voted down,
the motives behind this proposal, and we appreciate the
my delegation hopes that the delegation of El Salvador
reasons which prompted the delegation of El Salvador
will see its way to withdraw the rest of the draft
to introduce it in the General Assembly. Although we
resolution.
have no fundamental \lbjection to its adoption, the
50. To sum up, therefore, my del~gation fully supports
Brazilian delegation is not prepared to g!~e its support
only
the joint draft resolution presented by Brazil and
to that proposal. It seems to us that the practice which
the
four
other co-sponsoring delegations. We hope that,
has been foHowed by the General Assembly in the disif this is adopted, the Security Council will be able not
cussion of questions involving the interests of counonly
to reconsider each existing application for memtries which are not members of the Unitea Nations
bership,
but also to make positive recommendations to
fully covers the point expressed in paragraph 2 of the
this
General
Assembly in respect of those States which
draft resolution. A permanent invitation extended by
fulfil the requirements of the Charter but which. so far,
the Secretary-General would add very little, if anyhave been unable t"o assume their right and duties as
thing, to our established practice.
Members because of the veto.
4.;. For these reasons, the Brazilian delegation in51. lVlahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt) : The delegations
tends to abstain when the draft resolution of El Salpresent
will recall that this question has been before the
vador is put to the vote.
General Assembly since 1946. At that date, even the
46. Mr. COULSON (United Kingdom): I proposeY right of the General Assembly to deal in the way m
to deal briefly with the three draft resolutions which
which it dealt with the question of-applications for membership in the United Nations later on was challenged.
are now before the General Assembly. The United
Kingdom delegation has consistently held the view,
Some delegations, fortunately very few of them, thought
now confirmed by the International Court of Justice,
that all the General Assembly could do in the absence
that each new admission should be considered sepaof a recommendation from the Security Council to acrately on its own merits and on the basis of the crH:eria
cept an application for membership was simply to take
of membership described in Article 4 of the Charter.
note of that. If I recall rightly-and I am not saying this
Of the three araft resolutions now befo:-e the General
with any sense of self-justification-roy deJegation was
the first to oppose such an assertion. It was the first to
Assembly,. the draft resolution presented by Brazil,
Canada, the Philippines, Sweden and Syria [A/15?1]
uphold the right of the General Assembly to scrutinize

40. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

'570

General A8selnbly-Fifth Session-Plenary· Meetings

·the work of the Security Council in connexion with
applications for membership, and to state that the General Assembly had the right to ask for a review of those
applications by the Security Council.
52. With that end in view, my delegation submitted a
draft resolution, a and simultaneously with that, according to what I remember, the delegations of Panama and
the Philippines presented similar draft resolutions:'
These draft resolutions were the beginning of what later
on became the advic;ory opinion of the International
.court of Justice and the constant opinion since then
expressed by the General Assembly.
53. In connexion with the draft resolution we now
have before us, my delegation will vote favourably on
all of them. Those draft resolutions are inter-complemrc Itary and they all tend towards the overcoming of
the obstacles which until now have barred many worthy
.applicants from admission to the United Nations.
54. These obstacles have no relation whatsoever to
the Charter, but are inspired exclusively by unwhole'Some and short-sighted considerations of opportunism.
I do not need to dwell at any length on this element in
part of the work-of course I cannot say in all of the
work, nor even in most of the work, I repeat, opportunism in part of the work-of the United Nations.
This element of opportunism has marred a part of our
work and has shown how short-sighted some of the delegations have been in maintaining one stand or other
according to the dictates of the moment, and not according to the real dictates of peace and its requirements.
~S.; On those occasions it was obvious that the inspiring
factor was not the object before us, it was not the
interest of peace, it was not the Charter of the United
Nations and its dictates, but quite different things
derived from the self-interest of one or more countries,
and not from the interest of world peace and security.
56. 1\1y delegation wishes to trust that when the
applications for membership come before the Security
Council for reconsideration, tht~ Council and its members wiiI consider them and act 'upon them in conformity
with the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice which, in this respect, has given what we believe
to be the correct opinion and which, in the view of my
delegation and other delegations-with the exception of
a few-represents the real sense and intent of the
Charter.
$7. Indeed we are entitled to expect that the Security
Coundl and its members will consider all applications
for membership in the United Nations, inspired not by
opportunism and not with the idea of striking' a bargain,
but objectively, according to the merits of each application and keeping in mind the idea of universality of
the United Nations.
'58.· By universality we do not mean the indiscriminate
or wholesale admission to the United Nations of all
applicants, even though they may be unworthy of
membership in the United Nations. We mean, h~wever.
that each and every applicant who, humanly and
relatively speaking, is worthy of membership, according
to the yardstick of the Charter, s:'.luld be admitted.
8 See Official Rec,;,-ds of the General Assembly. second part

'{)f the first sp.ssion, First Committee, annex 6c.
"Ibid., annex 6b and annex 6d.

59. These have· been the considerations which governed the vote of my delegation concerning the applications for membership of the countries which are still
being kept on the waiting list. My delegation d!d _not
vote against the acc~ptance of any of these appltcants,
although for reasons on which I do not need to dwell at
this time, it abstained on the applications of two of
them.
60. However, it voted in favour of the other applicants
which came before the Security Council. My delegation
will always be in iavour of admitting all worthy applicants to membership in the United Nations. This stand
is inspired not only by the theory of the universality of
the United Nations l>ut also by the impelling requisites
of international peace and security, and of addin~ to the
values or the United Nations the undoubtedly great
contributions which all the worthy applicants for. membership are expected to make toward the objecHve of
world peace, security and prosperity.
61. Parallel to this, it can reasonably be hoped that the
admission of all worthy applicants to membership will
help at least to alleviate some of the present international tensions and to instill a very much needed element of mellowness in the present over-'atrained international atmosphere. With this in mind, my delegation
particularly appreciates the intent of the last two
paragraphs of the operative part of the El Salvadorean
draft resolution. They tend to create an interim relationship of co-operation and mutual benefit between the
United Nations and many of the applicants who have
so far been unjustly excluded from membership in the
United Nations.
62. In the meanwhile, I should like to express the hope
that this interim arrangement will soon be superseded
by the complete answer to the whole question of membership in the United Nations, namely, the admission
of all worthy applicants to membership in this Organization.
63. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The advisory
opinion given by the International Court of .Tustice on
3 March 1950 concerning the competence of the General
Assembly for the admission of a State to the United
Nations, in fesponse to the request of the General
Assembly contained in its rf:solution [296 J (IV)] of
22 November 1949 which was adopted on the initiative
of the Argentine delegation, cannot be considered out
of the context of all the events which preceded the
adoption of that resolution.
64. For the last three years, since 1947, each session
of the General Assembly has been the scene of highly
aggressive but unsuccessful attempts to grossly distort
the perfectly clear provisions of Article 4, paragraph 2,
of the Charter which states that "the admission of any
such State to membership in the United Nations will be
effectr"'1 by a decision of the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council".
65. There is no doubt that these attempts reflected the
desire of the Angolo-American hloc to dictate its wiU
and imp, :~e ifs policy with regard to the admission of
new Members into the United Nations.
66. There is no need to dwell upon the unfounded
arguments which were resorted to by a number of
delegations in their desire to give some semblance at

571

Sl8th Meeting-4 December 1950
least of legal justification to their attempts to exclude
the Security Council from participation in the question
of the admission of new Members.

67. The opponents of these principles did not rest
after their frontal attack against the principles of the
Charter was defeated, and they endeavoured to drag
the International Court of Justice into the case, with
the obvious intention of exploiting its authority to
buttress their own efforts, in defiance of the Charter,
to exclude the Security Council from the solution of
such questions as the admission of new Members to the
United Nations.
68. As a result, they succeeded in obtaininl{ the adoption at the last session of the General Assembly of a
resolution which placed the following question before
the International Court of Justice:
"Can the admission of a State to membership in the
United Nations~ pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 2,
of the Charter, be effected by a decision of the
'General Assembly when the Security Council has
made no recommendation for admission bv reason of
the candidate failing to obtain the requisite majority
or of the negative vote of a permanent Ivlember upon
a resolution so to recommend?"
69. This question makes it obvious that its authors
do not clearly understand Article 4, paragraph 2, of the
Charter. A glance at this text, however, will show that
the paragraph contains a perfectly clear and unequivocal
provision which leaves no room for doubt or alternative
interpretation. It states: "the admission of any such
State to membership in the United Nations will be
effected by a derision of the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council". I am quoting
from the Charter.

70. Hence, the answer to the question placed before
the Court can only be in the negative.
71. In view of the wholly unequivocal character of
Article '4, paragraph 2, of the Charter, the USSR
delegation, at the fourth session of the General Assem~ly [252nd meeting], opposed the proposal to refer the
question to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion, and pointed out that the provisions
of the Charter relating to the admission of new Members were perfectly clear and required no interpretation.

72. It was pointed out that the interpretati,)l',J. o~ the
Charter in general could not be the subject of examination and of an advisory opinion by the International
Court of Justice, whose terms of reference in this regard
are defined in Article 65 of the Statute of the Court,
which states that the Court may give an advisory
opinion on legal questions only. The same thing is
stated in Article 96 of the Charter which states that the
General Assembly ". . . may request the International
Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any
legal question".
73. These Articles of the Charter and the Statute of
the Court make it clear that no question relatinl{ to the
procedure for the admission of new Members to the
United Nations can be the object of scrutiny by the
International Court, inasmuch as that question is political in character, as can be seen from the discussions
which have taken place in the General Assembly.

,..,

.

74. Despite these indisputable prQvisions, the majority
of the General Assemb!y nevertheless adopted a resolution last year requesting the International Court of,
Justice to give an advisory opinion.
75. When the Belgian, delegation proposed,1S as long
ago as the second session of the General Assembly, that
the question of the interpretation of Article 4, paragraph
2, of the Charter should be rt.;.erred to the International
Court of Justice, the delegation of the S01Ji,et Union
opposed such a step, pointing out that the qu'estiQn wr;f.S
so clear that there was no justification forilsking the
Court for an opinion [117th l'neeting].
76. This should be rememl.lered at the p;rest~nt moment,
when the International Court of J us~dl~e, in its advisory
opinion, reproduces the perfectly dear provisions of the
Charter and categorically disproves the attempts to
upset those provisions.
77. The delegation of the Soviet Union stilI considers
that the International Court is not competent to give
an advisory opinion on this question £01' the reasons I
have already stated. Nevertheless, the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 3. March 1950
is of undoubted interest. In it, the International Court
states that it "is of opinion that the admission of a
State to membership in the United Nations, pursuant
to paragraph 2 of Article 4 of the Charter, cannot be
effected by a decision of the General Assem1ily 'When
the Security Council has made no recommendation l~or
admission, by reason of the candidate failinJ{ to obtaiu
the requisite majority or of the negative vote of /4
permanent Member upon a resolution so to reC0111mend".6
.

I

78. The Court has explained its opinion in detail. It
states, with regard to Article 4, paragraph 2, of the
Charter, that:
"The Court has no doubt as to the meaninJ{ of this
text. 1t requires two things to effect admi$sion: a
'recommendation' of the Security Council and a
'decision' of the General Assembly. It is in the nature
of things that the recommendation should come before the decision. The 'Word 'recommendation', and
the word 'upon' preceding it, imply the idea that the
recommendation is the foundation of the decision to
admit, and that the latter rests upon the recommendation. Both these acts are indispensable to form
the judgment of the Organization to which the previous paragraph of Article 4 refers. The text under
consideration me(\ns that the General Assembly can
only decide to admit upon the recommendation, of the
Security Council; it determines the respective roles
of the two organs whose combined action is required
before adn1~ssion can be effected: in other words, the
recommendation of the Security Council is the condition precedent to the decision of the Assembly by
which the admission is effected."
79. Such is the conclusion of the I11temational Court
of Justice. The Court lays particular stress upon the
fact that the text of Article 4, paragraph 2, of the
Charter is fully confirmed by the structure of the
Charter, and particularly, by the relation~ established
Ibid., Second Session, First Committee, annex 14j.
See Competence of Assembly rega1'dmg admission to the
United Nations, Adviso1'Y Opinion: l.G.!. Reports 1950, page 10. \
G

6

572

General Assembly-Fifth Session-P'lenary Meetings

by it between the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The Court states that:
c-The General Assembly and the Security Council
are both principal organs of the United NaHons. The
Charter does not place the Security Coundl in a
subordinate position. Article 24 confers 'upon it
'primary responsibility for the maintenance oi international peace and security'."
80. In support of its argument that the Charter does
not subordinate the Security Council to the General
Assembly, the Court concludes this section of its
advisory opinion with the following words:
HTo hold that the General Assembly has power to
admit a State to membership in the absence of a
recommendation of the Security Council would be to
deprive the Security Council of an important power
which has been entrusted to it by the Charter. It
would almost n""iIify the role of the Security Council
in the exercise of 01:1e of the essential functions of the
Organization. It would mean that the Security Council would have merely to study the case, present a
report, give advice, and express an opinion.. This i~,
not what Article 4, paragraph 2, says."
81. The Court also rejected the false alle/{ation of a
number of governments, to the effect that the General
Assembly could treat the absence of a recommendation
as equivalent to an unfavourable recommendation.
82. This utterly ba.seless and absurd allegation served
the purpose of those who wish to minimize the role of
the Security Council. They triea to argue on the basis
of this allegation, that a decision of the Security Council
to recommend to the General Assemb'Ly the admission
of a State to membership in the United Nations meant
that the General Assembly received from the Security
Council a favourable recommendation; but if th{;: SecU\·ity Council failed to reach agreement or h> take ~.
decision, and consequently did not submit ~l1Y recorn··
mendation to the General Assembly, this should he
regarded as an unfavourable recommendation of tae
Security Council but nevertheless a recommendation.
83. Thus it appears th8t in either t::ase there has been a
Security Council recommendation and that the nrQvisiolD of Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Charteroc haw~
apparently been complied with and that consequently
the General Assembly can, on its own initiative, take a.
decision on the admission of a Member to the United
Natio7!s.
84. In communicating their y!ews tr- the International
Court of Justice some gov~rnments tried to j!.!stify thi~
faIlacitiuS assertio:i by referring-and I might add incorrectly-to th'~ preparatory work on the text of the
TJnited Nation'; Charter. In this connexion the International Court of Justice pointed out the following:
"Some of the written stat~ments submitted to the
Court have invited it to investigate the travauz prcl'1t.lra~m~e.~ 0f the Charter. Having regartJ, howev,~r,
to the considel·~t1ons above stated, the Court is of the
opinion that it i~ not permissible, in this case, to
resc.rt to t,-avauz preparf1!oires."
85. The Court also nl,J1t~d further on that: "Reference
has also been made to 2\. document of the San Francisco
Conference, in order to put the possible case of an
unfavourable recommendation being vated by the Se-

eurity Council: such a recommendation has never been
made in practice. In the opinion of the Court, Article 4,
paragraph 2, envisages a favourable recommendation
of the Security Council and that only." Article 4, para..
graph 2 does not account for any unfavourable recom..
mendation.
86. The International Court further points out in its
advisory opinion, thillt:
"Nowhere has the General Assembly received the
power to change, to the \loint of revising, the mean..
ing of et. vote of the Security Council. In consequence,
it is impossible to admit that the General Assembly
has the power to attribute to a vote of the Security
Council the character of a recommendation when the
Council itself considers that no such recommendation
has been made."
87. For these reasons, and in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, the Court is
of the opinio'.'.t that ~
"The admission of a State to membership in the
Unitec'. Nations, pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 4
of thf; l' harter, cannot be effected by a decision of the
Gen(~ral Assembly when the Security Council has
mac'.e no recommendation for admission, by reason of
the candidate failing to obtain the requisitp majority
or (If the negative vote of a permanent Member upon
a re solution so to recommend."
88. lhus, in its advisory opinion of 3 March 1950, the
Court literally reproduces Rll the arguments repeatedly
put forward by the USSR delegation in its defence of
the principles of the Charter.
89. Such was the ignominious end of the attempt to
use the authority of the International Court of Justice
in order to bolster positions which are based on an
obvious misinterpretation of the provisions of the
Charter.
90. The attempt to by-pass the Secu :-ity Council ID
the matter of the admission of new Members, and thus
openly to violate the provisions of the Charter ha~ met
with complete failure. It follows that the question of the
admission of new Members can and must be <1ecid\~
only in strict accordance with the United Nations
Charter and in the manner laid down therein.
91. Item 19 of the Geflleral Assembly's agenda refers
not only to the advisor::. opinion of the Intt;rnatiunal
Co~!rt of Justice, but c.. 'so to the question of the
admi~sion of new Members.
92. On this qU€sti01i w,.; have before us for considera..
tion a draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union
delegation, which proposes that the General Assembly
should recommend the Security Council to re~lew the
applications for admission to membership of the United
Nations submitted by thirteen States, namely: Albania,
the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria, Romania,
Hungary, Finland, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, the Hashi..
mite Kingdom of the J ord9.n, Auc;tria, Ceylon and Nepal.

93. There is also a joint draft resoiution submitted by
the delegations of Brazil, Canada, the Philippines,
Syda, ~J.nd Sweden. It should be noted that this draft
resc1ution is devoid of content and represents an attempt
to avoid a decision on the question by leaving matters
in their present unsatisfactory state. This draft refers to

-

318th Meeting--4 Decembel' 1930

the resolution [294' (IV) ] ~dopted by the General
Assembly on 22 November 1949 which expressed the
view that the nine States whose admission was sought
by the United States and the United Kingdom, should
'be admitted to the United Nations, these nine States
il1cluded even the South Korean puppet of the United
Stat(~s, the blood·ostained anti-democratic re~me of
Syngman Rhee.
94. On the question of the admission of new Members
there is :1180 a draft resolution submitted by the delegation of El Salvador. With regard to this draft, it should
be stated that the proposal it contains-that the States
not members of the United Nations should send representatives to sessions of the General Assembly-is
so entirely in conflict with the Charter and so openly
leads to a flagrant violation of the Charter that it is
unnecessary to demonstrate its harmful nature. Even
the representative of Canada has been unable to agree
to this proposal of El Salvador. That in itself is sufficient comment.
95. The delegation of the Soviet Union will, of course,
vote against the draft resolution submitted by the
delegation of Ei Salvador.
96. The substance of the joint draft rescttJtion and that
of the draft resolution submitted by El Salvador pr,..- 7de
evidence that an attempt is being made also at .lIS
session of the General Assembly to continue the policy
of favouritism, the policy of discriminating in favour
of some States which have applied for membership in
the United Nations and of discriminating against other
States which have made similar applications.
97. The delegation of the Soviet Union pointed out at
the last session of the General Assembly that such
proposals were not likely to facilitate a solution of the
problem of the admission of new Members to the
United Nations. As is known, the Security Council has
before it thirteen applications for membership. Nevertheless, the sponsors of the joint draft resolution and
the delegation of El Salvador have picked out merely
eight States from this list and are urging their admission to the United Nations. I disregarded the ninth
nomination, since it concerns the South Korean puppet
regime of Syngmau Rhee~
98. The delegation of the Soviet Union cannot agree
to this approach to the question of the admission of new
Members. It is an approach which cannot ~ive any
positive res'..11b.:, any more tnan it has been able to do in
the past, a.nd it will not help to solve the problem of the
admission of new Members.
99. .For these reasons the delegation of the Soviet
Union will vote against both the joint draft resolution
and the draft i'esolution submitted by El Sal'lador.
100. The USSR delegation has pointed out both at
previons sessions of the General Assembly and in the
Security Council that discrit.Jination in the question of
the admission of new Members is inadmissible, artd that
the United Nations must be guided on this question
e..~clusively by Article 4 of the Charter, which states
that:
"Membership in the United Nations is open to all
other peace-loving States which accept the obligations
contained in the present Charter and, in the judgment
of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out
these obligations.'"

578

101. The Charter contains no other criteria with
regard to the admission of new Members. In confonnity
with this provision of the Charter, the delegation of the
Soviet Union has already proposed in the past that the
thirt~en States which have applled for mit:mbcrship in
the United Nations should be admitted simultaneously,
Hence, the Soviet Union is by no means to blame for
the fact that these thirteen States have not been admitted to membership in the United Nations, and the
references to the Soviet Union veto which have been
made in this Assembly by the representative of the
United Kingdom, and the references which have been
made here by ~he representative of Canada, to the fact
that the question of the admission of new Members
remains unsolved because of the attitude adopted by the
USSR, are slanderous assertions designed to lead public
opinion astray and to misrepresent the real state of
affairs.
102. When submitting its proposal for the admission
of all thirteen States to the United Nations, the delegation of the Soviet Union pointed out that the USSR had
serious grounds for opposing the admission tOI the
United Nations of a number of those thirteen States:
in order, however, to facilitate a solution of the problemthe Soviet Union was prepared to withdraw its opposi:
tion to the admission of those countries, provided, of
course, that there would be no discrimination against
Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria,
Hungary and Romania, which had every qualification
for admission to the United Nations, since they met all
the requirements of the United Nations Charter.
103. The delegation of tht: Soviet Union continues to
adhere to this position on the question of the admission
of new Members and is convh~ced that if the United
Nations acted in this way it would easily find its way
out of the impasse into which it h~!; been. led by the
policy of the United States and the Un~ted Kingdom
on this question.
104. Statements have already been made' in this
Assembly by a number of represp.ntatives who have
pointed out precisely this aspect of the problem, namely,
that the General Assembly can easily find a way out of
its present difficult position on the question of the
admission of new Members, provided tha.t no discrimi..
nation is practised and that aU thirfteen States are
admitted to the United Nations.
105. The delegation of the Soviet Union wishes trl
bring these views to the notice of the delrgations of
the United States and the United Kingdom, so that they
should not ignore and disregard them, and should _cease
to insist on the position which they have mainta.ined
hitherto, namely, selective admission to the United ,Na'"
tJ10ns, whereby only those States which enjoyed the
protectivn of the United States and the United King..
dom would be admitted to the United Nations, and
whereby the People's Democracies would not be ad..
mitted. This position has le:d the United Nations into
an impasse from which it -, ~11 not escape until the
United States and the Unite~ Kingdom renounce this
policy which is har'11ful to the cause of the United
Nations.
106. With a view to resolving this deadlock on the
admission of new Members, the delegation of the Soviet
Union has submitted a draft resolution designed to

574

. I

i

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

insure the simultaneous admission to the United Nations of the aforementioned thirteen States, many of
which have now been awaiting admission to the Organization for many years.
107. The adoption of the Soviet Union proposal by the
General Assembly would help to increase the prestige
and influence of the United Nations and would strengthen the principle of friendly co-operation between all
peace-loving nations, great and small, irrespective of
their political structure and their social and economic
systems.
108. Mr. HOFFMEISTER (Czechoslovakia): Once
again, as at every previous session of the General Assembly, we are faced with the question of the admission
of new Members. I should therefore like at the very
outset of my remarks to restate the opinion of the
Czechoslovak delegation.
109. Vife consider that the greater the number of
States and differing political concepts which make up
the membership of the United Nations. the stronger the
Organization will be. From this standpoint and from
the standpoint of being just to the applicant States, the
question is of primary importance to the United Nations. The gravity and importance of the problem will
increase as new applications are put on the waiting list,
as the United Nations itself creates new States and as
the people's liberation movements continue to grow.
110. So far as the juridical aspect of the question and
the advisory opinion rendered by the International
Court of Justice are concerned. we expressed our sur·
prise last year at the decision of the General Assembly
to request the venerable judges at The Hag-ue to give
their opinion on a sentence whose meaning must be
clear even to a child. This attempt to shift a political
question onto legal grounds was without any real basis;
it represented all escape into law.
111. The sponsors of that resolution received a clear
answer. The Court had no doubts that under Article
4, paragraph 2, of the Charter two things are required
to effect admission: a recommendation of the Security
Council and a decision of the General Assembly. More~
over, the provision requires combined action by the two
bodies: the recommendation must precede the decision;
it must form the foundation of the decision. By twelve
votes to two-those of Judges Alvarez and Azevedo-the Court was of the opinion that the admission of a
State to membership of the United Nations cOl1ld not be
effected by a decision of the General Assembly in the
absence of a recommendation for admission from the
Security Council.
112. Now that the wording of the Charter has been
made clear to those who voted for putting the question
to the International Court of Justice, it would be logical
fot them to base themselves on the Charter and the
interests of the United Nations and to abandon their
policy of discrimination.
113. On 9 September 1949, the Soviet Union sub~
mitted a draft resolution demanding- the admission of
all the States applying for membership.' This circumstance in itself proves that the Soviet Union did not
and does not exercise discrimination toward any State,

while the majority did exercise such discrimi f
toward five of the thirteen applicants.
na Ion
4
1.1 . This year,. the USS.R reaffirms its recommenda.
tIon .to t,he Secunty C~uncI1 and asks for a review of the
appl~catlOns of. Alba111a, the Mongolian People's Re.
publIc, BulgarIa, Hungary, Romania Finland It I
Portugal, Ire~al1d~ the Hashimite Kingdom'of ~6~
J ordan , Austna, Ceylon and Nepal. Further we ha
befor~ us ~ shor:t dra.ft resolution which merel~ reque~~
the ~ecur~ty S:ounct! to keep. the applications under
con.slderatIOn, In accordance WIth last year's resolution
whIch was also unacceptable to our delegation.
115.. Th~ draft re.sol~ti9n presented by El Salvador
fits III WIth the dlscr1lmnatory methods which have
taken root here in previous years. El Salvador wishes
to pla~ host to observers of one category of States,
cxcll1dl1~g others, co~trar'y to the le~te~ ~nd the spirit
of the Charter, and, In thIS way, prejudICIng their invitation at any given time at the request of one of the
bodies of the United Nations or by decision of the
General Assembly following upon a recommendation
of the Security Council. It must be rejected.
116. The S:zechosl?vak delegation is of the opinion
that the Umted NatlOns should be fully representative
of all countries, regardless of their social, political or
economic structures. That majority which treats .the
~rovisions of th~ Charter in accordance with its polio
tIcal and vested Interests, of course, favours States in
the measure of their adaptability. Those States not
capable of enlarging the artificial majority in this
Assembly and, because of this, not fitting in with the
political calculations of the United States and its supporters, are barred from the Organization. But no one
can succeed in convincing world public opinion that
those countries which stand in the full strength of the
worlel peace movement are not peace-loving- States or
are not willing and able to carry out the obligations of
the Charter.
117. Last year, from this same rostrum, I stated:
"Why the United States decided stubbornly not
to admit five People's Democracies and, by this political attitude, prevent the admission of such important
States as, for instance, Italy into the union of the
United Nations remains the secret of the American
under-developed foreign policy".8
118. I think, and I heard today that I am not the only
one, that the voting balance in this Assembly would not
be greatly changed by the addition of new Members.
But we note that the balance of world power has been·
greatly upset by the historic events of the past year,
and I think it is in complete accord with Mr. Albert
Einstein's theory if we say that, during the ever accelerating speed of developments, certain. bi~ phrases are
losing their weight. It is now up to the In~lvldual representatives and the majority in the SecurIty CouncIl to
change their views.
119. The Czechoslovak delegation has n.ot cha~ged its
attitude and is always ready to reaffirm It. It WIll support the Soviet Union proposal.
120. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated fro,!,
Spanish) : It seems that special circumstances make It

T See Official Records of the Security Council} Fourth Year,
No.40··:~1

8 See 0 jJicial Records of the General Assembly, Fourth SISsiotl, Plenary Meetings} 251st meeting.

-

the lot of my de
are to some ex1
wilh an air of
cism.
12\. My de1eg:
phere, Nothing
eral Assembly (
well-beaten tracl
Security Council
loving States w]
membership in
failed to secure
recommendation
vote, that of tht
give its adverse
122. This is ou
in great detail by
not in a positior
Security Council
of the Soviet U
long as the appH
Sovi~t Union-J
and the People' ~
cepted, it will ne
afavourable rece
concerning Italy,
mite Kingdom of
General Assembl
ments of the Che
oership in the Or
123, It was the
requested that the
Members should
sion of the Gener.
interest taken by
subject; it has c
excessive use of
one of its perma
admission to me
several peace-Io
international obH
history of the Or
124. The de1eg
draft resolution
10, all delegation
With the admissi
~nown their desi
hons and which i
as expressed in ni
22 November 19
meaning of Artic
Willing to carry
Untted Nations a
125. These Stat
Ireland, the Hasl
gal, the R.epublic

12~. In the voti

c~hon for admiss

mne votes in fav
cast by the Unio
cause the DSSR i
Council and bec·
on the admission
Organization, the

SI8th Meeting-4 December 1950
the lot of my delegation to uut forward proposals which
are to some extent novel and which are first received
with an air of uncertainty, curiosity and even scepti..
dsm.
121. My delegation is used to working in this atmos..
phere. Nothing is more difficult than to wrest the Gen..
eral Assembly of the United Nations away from the
well-beaten track. For example, every year we ask the
Security Council to reconsider the applications of peaceloving States which fulfil the necessary conditions for
membership in the Un.ited Nations, and which have
failed to secure' acceptance or to obtain the favourable
recommendation of the Security Council by a single
vote, that of the Soviet Union, which has decided to
give its adverse vote the quality of a veto. .
122. This is OUI' position now. It has been explained
in great detail by several delegations. We are apparently
not in a position to change the present climate in the
Security Council. Today's speech by the representative
of the Soviet Uniorl. makes it perfectly clear that as
long as the applications of the States sponsored by the
Soviet Unbn-Albania, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary
and the Peop~e's Republic of Mongolia-are not accepted, it will never consent to the admission of, or to
a favourable r,,~comt11endation by the Securit'.f Council,
concerning Italy, Austria, Portugal, Ireland, the Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan and other States which the
General Assembly ~las declared fulfil all the requirements of the Chart'~r of the United Nations for mem..
bership in the Orgtmization.
.
123. It was the Government of El Salvador which
requested that the item concerning the admission of new
Members should 'be included in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly. This of course shows the
interest taken by the Government of El Salvador in this
subject; it has constantly upheld the opinion that the
excessi~e use of the veto in the Security Council, by
one of its permanent members, in order to prevent the
admission to membership in the United Nations of
several peace-Iovi~g States willing to respect their
international obligations, is a deplorable event in the
history of the Organization.
124. The delegation of El Salvador has prepar~~d a
draft resolution [A/1585] which has been distributed
to all delegations and which is concerned exclt1sively
with the admission of nine States which have made
known their desire to be Members of the United Nations and which in the opinion of the 'General Assembly,
as expressed in nine resolutions [294 (IV)] adopted on
22 November 1949, are peace-loving States, within the
meaning of Article 4 of the Charter, and are able a.nd
willing to carry out the obligations of Members of the
United Nations and hence qualified to be admitted.
125. These States ~re : Austria, Ceylon, Finland, Italy,
Ireland; the Hashimite Kin~dom of the Jordan, Portugal, the Republic of Korea and Nepal.
126. In the voting in the Security Council, the application for admission of each of these States obtained
nine 'votes in favour and only one against, which was
cast by the Union of S.oviet Socialist R:"publics. Because the USSR is a permanent member of the Security
Council and because its opposition const'itutes a veto
on the admission of these States to =,",p,mbershh) in the
Organization, the Security Council has been prevented

.....

from making the favourable recommendation referred'
to in Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.
127. Against this background, my delegation's draft
resolution first contemplates the necessity of. recom..
mending the Security Council to reconsider the re-.
quests for admission of these nine States, in the light
of Article 4 of the Charter, for the purpose of making
to the General Assembly the favourable recommendatioll'
mentioned in that Article.
128. At the same time I should like to consider, for;
purposes of comparison, on the m~e hand the situation·
devolving from our proposal and on the other hand the
situation which would result from the adoption of the
joint proposal of Brazil and several other States and
the proposal of the USSR.
129. My delegation's proposal requests the Se~ut1ty
Council to reconsider' the applications for admisSi'Dn of.
only those States which obtained nine fa'Votlra~le votes
in the Security Council and only one unfavourable vote,
that cast by the USSR. At the same time, those nine
States obtained an overwhelming majority· in the'.
General Assembly in favour of their applications. ~or':'
membership.
.
130. The draft resolution submitted by the delegatiol1s
of Brazil, Sweden and three other States, including
Syria, proposes that the SecurJty Council should review
all applications for admission including those of Atbania, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary and the People's
Republic of 1vfongolia.
. .
131. . However, the General Assembly has already
considered a request of this kind and has decided that it
could not recommend that the Security Council should
admit any of those five States. What were the' reasons
for this? The reasons are clearly seen in the attitude
those States have adopted in international affairs.
132. Among the resolutions adopted by the General'
Assembly in 191~9, we find resolution 288 (IV) en.
titled "threats to the political independence and terri..
torial integrIty of Greece". Two short paragraphs in the
preamble of that resolution read as follows:
" (i) Albania and Bulgaria have continued to give
moral and material assistance to th~ Greek guerrilla
movement, Albania being the p:dncipal source of
material assistance;
.
" (ii) There has beeen an in\:rease in the support
afforded to the guerrillas from certain States not
Lordering upon Greece, particularly Romania." .
133. Can you tell me that against this oackground we .
can really recommend the reconsideration of ~be ~pp1ica.
tions for admission of Albania, Bulgaria/and Romania,
which have made it quite clear that far from being.
peace-loving, they arp. actively interverJing in an attempt
to stir up civil war in Greece?

134. My delegation regrets that it would be ~nable to
join with Brazil and the other countries proposing that
all the ttpplicatious for admission should be reconsidered, because the General Assembly itself, for the.
reas0!1s which I have indicated, has repeatedly decided
that It cannot recommend the requests for aJmission .
of Albania, Bulgaria and Romania.
J
135. Apart from this, at the fourth session of the General Assembly and at the p:oeserlt session, there ha-V&

I

I

576

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

been clear. condemnations of Bulgaria, Romania and
Hungary, for violating fundamental hl.1man ri~hts and
freedoms, for having made an absolute mockery of the
administration of justice, in that they apply severest
punishments in complete intolerance and in disregard
of the right of religious freedom and many others.I)
136. Thus, these censures have been expressed, and
if one of the -principal duties of the General Assembly
is to promote fundamental human rights, how can it
recommend the reconsideration of the applications for
membership of Albania, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary? The delegation of El Salvador opposes any
recommendation for the reconsideration of these applications for admission by the Security Council. It is
therefore unable to vote in favour of the proposal submitted by Brazil, Sweden, Syria and two other States.
137. The proposal submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics is very similar to the draft resolution
submitted by Brazil, Syria, Sweden and two other COtl1ltries, since it recommends that the Security Council
should reconsider all applications fQr admission, with
the exception of one, that of the Republic of Korea.
This is the only real difference between the proposal
submitted by the Soviet Union and that of Brazil,
Sweden, Syria and two other States. In substance they
are the same: they recommend the reconsideration by
the Security Council of all applications for admission,
without taking into practical account the substantial
difference between the applicants and their conduct in
international affairs.
138. I should like to urge representatives to take into
nccount this substantial difference when voting on the
various proposals.
139. The proposal of the delegation of El Salvador is
only in favour of Austria, Ceylon, Finland, Italy, Ireland, the Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan, Portugal,
the Republic of Kt rea and Nepal. I say again that these
nine States have obtained in every vote in the Security
Council during the past year, nine favourable votes and
only one adverse vote, that of the Soviet Union.
140. Here in this Gener2i.1 Assembly in previous years
we have recommended that the Security Council should
reconsider the applications for admission of these
States, but until today we have never recommended
reconsidera.tion of the requests of Albania, Bulgaria,
Romania, Hungary and the Republic of Mongolia.
141. 11owever, the proposal of El Salvador goes still
further, since it cannot be regarded as right or in accordance with the purposes of the United Nations that
Sta:tes which, in the opinion of the General Assembly,
fulfil all the requirements needed for membership in the
Organization, should be denied all possibility of cooperating with the United Nations and that this should
only be so because of the opposing vote of ~ sin~le 01?-e
(!f the permanent members of the Secunty Councd.
142. An internatiC',al organization like ours, the purpose of which is-here I quote from the Chartflr-"to
maintain international peace and security", cannot close
its doors to States which fulfil all the requirem/~nts for
membership in the OrganIzation.
lJ See resolution 294 (IV) and Official Records of the Genw.al.dssembl;v, Fifth Session, Plenar;v Meetings, 303ro. meeting.

143. Yet, you know perfectly well that, at the present
time, the doors of the United Nations are shut fast
against the nine States I have mentioned.
144. The isolation which exists between our Organization and non-member States is complete. Even the
letters and documents from the governments of these
States which are sent to the Secretary-General for our
information are never circulated. The only "Nay in which
they can be circulated in special cases is for one of the
delegations of the Member States formally to request
that a particular document transmitted by the govern..
ment of a State which is not a member of t11e United
Nation~ shouid be circulated. And all of you realize that
in many instances our delegations find it a practical
impossibility to request the circulation of ;rnportant
official documents transmitted by non-rnembe.l States
because it: is not even known that those documents have
reached the Secretary-Gtneral.

145. Sometimes it OCC'Llrs to me that we are being
treatf.d like small chiitiren who are not allowed to read
cert~dn books. Please do not think that I am exag..
geral;ing. I tried to obtain a copy of a cablegram in
which the government of an Asian nation sou~ht the
aid nf the United Nations for the purpose of settling by
p~acd'i11 negotiation its differences with another gov-·
e;mment, differences which had led to an act of aggression against its territory. It was only after several weeks
of effort that I succeeded in obtaining a copy of this
important message which I had to have in order to
carry out a task my government had entrusted to me.
I later asked that the text of the cablegram to which
I refer should bt: circulated to all the delegations of the
General Assembly and I have been assured that it is
being circulated :mw. I trust that this is so.
146. I hasten to say that I am not by any meaQs lodging a complaint against the Secretariat of the United
Nations which is merely applying a measure of censorship to all correspondence which does not come from
States Members of the Organization. This measure is,
of course, presumably the result of a resolution adopted
by a group of administrative officers or recommended
by some particular committee which deemed to have
special competence in the matter.

147. l\tly only purpose is to show how sadly our Genu
eral Assembly is isolated even from those States which
the General Assembly itself has stated to be peaceloving nations and whi<:h meet all the conditions laid
down for membership in our Organization.
148, It is to rectify this state of affairs in so far as
those nine States are concerned, that our draft resolution suggests that any documents and letters sent by
these nine States to the Se<:retary-General for the information of the United N?tions should be distributed
to the delegations to the General Assembly or, if the
Assembly is not in session, to the foreign offices of
Member States and th~ permanent delegations to the
United Nations.
149. I cannof believe that there is anyone of us here
who is not prepared even in this modest way to break
that icy wall which separates our Organization from the
nine peace-loving States; Austria, Ceylon, Finland,
Italy, Ireland, PIJrtugal, the Hashimite Kingdom of the
Jordan, Nepal and the Republic of Korea.

S18th Meeting-4 Decembel' 1950

571

----------------~---------------------------

150. I wish to point to you that I shaH ask for a vote
onour draft resolution paragraph by paragraph and that
I am particularly interested in seeing how the delegates
will vote on the paragraph which refers to the distribution to the delegations to the General Assembly of
letters and documents transmitted by the nine States to
which I have been referring.
151. If even this form of communication is rejected,
it is clear that the only thing we shall be doing- is to pay
lip service to these nine States in recommending that
their applications for membership should be recon·
sidered.
152. There are other forms of co-operation which,
without making the States concerned Members of the
Organization or giving them the right to vote, can be
exercised without in any way violating the United Nations Charter. These forms of co-operation would rather
strengthen one true mission of the United Nations
which looks towards full co-operation among' States as
a means to maintain international peace and security.
153. For ex,ample the nine States I have mentioned
can be given c..\n opportunity to be heard in our General
Assembly and its plenary Committees on those subjects
which affect the very interests which our Org'anization
has been asked to safeguard. By granting these States
such an opportunity, we would receive co-operation
which would be very valuable to the Untied Nations.
154. I would like to draw attention to th1s point. Our
proposal asks the nine States to which I am referring
to co-operate with us by giving us their opinion when
we request it. It is not fair to silence their ,'oices by
saying that we cannot offer those States too little and
that we must offer them everything, when you know
that it is not within our power to do so.
155. The advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice states that the General Asse'mbly cannot give
favourable consideration to the admission of any State
into the United Nations, in the absence of a favourable
recommendation by the Security Council. We should
not deceive ourselves by saying that we are offering
them much more in asking' the Security Council to reconsider the applications for membership of these nine
States I have mentioned when we know perfectly well
that the USSR delegation will not vote in favour of
their admission unless Bulgaria, Albania, Hungary,
Romania, and the People's Republic of Mongolia are
admitted at the same time.
156. The requests ostensibly puttil1g all these States
as on an equal footing are at odds with previous resolutions of the General Assembly. which were only in
favour of the nine States I have mentioned so many
times.
157. In addition to the fact that, under my proposal,
the voice of these States will be heard in the General
Assembly, this measure also represents a cordial J{esture
of rapprochement which is not prohibited by the
United Natiolls Charter despite the doubts which the
representative of the United Kingdom mentioned here.
158. Recently 10 we adopted an extremely important
resolution entitled "Uniting for Peace" [A /14811. And
yet today, we are told that the very modest proposal
1.0 Ibid., 302nd meeting.

submitted by my delegation would be contrary to the
Charter. Neither of these resolutions is?. violation of the
Charter. The resolution on "Uniting for Peace" was
what the smaller nations wanted. at San Francisco whm
they asked that those principles be stated explicitly in
the Charter. That was not done an~ the interpretation
which the General Assembly gave of its own powers
indicates clearly that it felt that by implication it had
retained those powers which the smaller nations defenden at the San Francisco Conference.
159. I have said several times that the proposal·submitted by my delegation is a cordial gesture of rapprochement which not only is not prohibited by the
Charter but which is vitally necessary in the present
situation which does not allow us to deny ourselves the
valuable co-operation that any peace-loving State may
be able to provide.. It is for these reasons that our draft
resolution suggests that Austria, Ceylon, Finland, Italy,
Ireland, Portugal, the Hashimite Kingdom of th~
Jordan, Nepal, and the Republic of Korea should be
given an opportunity to send observers to sessions of
the General Assembly and its Committees, including the
Interim Committee, in order to enable them to express
their views and furnish information whenever consulted
by the delegation of any Member State. It is understood that any such requests fo. consultation would be
made by the delegation concerned during that particular
meeting and th~.t the President of the General Assembly or the Chairman of the Committee as the case might
be would give that request the appropriate attention,
subject t(. the wishes of the majority of the Assembly or
the respective Committees if there are any objections.
160. There 1.S no reason to think that a request of this
kind would be denied. Members of several delegations
have discussed the various points of our proposal with
me and they have all expressed great interest in studying it. This is an encouraging sign which -leads me to
think that we recognize the great importance of the
matter which I, as the representative of my government,
am presenting for the consideration of the General
Assembly.
161. There is one question which has been put to me
and I think I ought to answer it. This question has also
been raised in the arguments of some of the representa.tives who have spoken before me and concerns the possible impression upon these nine States if our OrJ{anization invited them to send observers to the General
Assembly and its Committees. There are some representatives who think that they would· be offered too
little and that, in reply to their applications for membercjhip, they would be offered something of trifling significance. But that is not so. In the first place, our proposal does not constitute a reply to the applications for
membership presented by these nine States. This proposal offers them a privilege and an opportunity. for
co-operation which is of great importance to their
governments, as it is to all the governments represented
here.
.
162. I am going to answer this question by a logical
argument, making us~ of the information which is available to all of us. On many occasions I have received
letters, and I believe this is true of most of the delegations present, from the Italian Observer to the United
Nations and also from the Permanent Observer of the
Republic of Korea. You will find the address of their

578

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

offices and their telephone numbers in the New York
Telephone Directory. These officials have been especially appointed by their governments to follow the
activiti\~s of the United Nations and to keep their governmenb'· informed. In order to attend our meetings
they need a courtesy pass which is of course freely
issued to them by the Secretary-General.
163. Bearing this in mind, do you think that the
Governments of Italy and of 1the Republic of Korea
would be displeased if the' Gel1leral Assembly were to
extend a similar invitation to their observers to attend
our meetings and also to ~:xpress their views if
consulted?,
164. Now, when we are debating questions which
endanger the peace of the world, do you think these
nine States to which I am referring would scorn at an
opportunity to come and be heard here and to answer a
general appeal to collaborate towards the prevention of
a war which seems imminent? Surely not. They would
sit with us, they would take part in our debates and
they would give us the benefit of their opinions.

appoint observers to this fifth session of the United
Nations General Assembly when their fundamental
interests are as vitally affected as are the basic interests
of the Members of the United Nations? It is clear that
in extending the invitation, the recipient States will be
interested in appointing observers when the matters to
be dealt with by the General Assembly or its Committees
are of special interest to them. If these matters are of
interest to them, they will certainly apppoint observers
and if they ar~ not interested they will obviously not
<1:0 so. This makes it plain that my delegation is proposing that the nine States should be granted a right and
does not in any way compel them to accept obligations.
17~1. I believe that my words fully express the intention.' of the delegation of El Salvador in submitting the
draft resolution which is to be debated and then put to
the vote and the object of which is to obtain for the
United Nations the valuable co-operation of nine peace:loving States. So that each delegation, by its vote, may
support the degree of co-operation in the work of the
General Assembly which they are prepared to offer the
nine States to which I have referred, that is to say,
165. No one can deny that the participation we offer
Au.:tria, Ceylou, Finland, Italy, Ireland, Portu~al, the
,to the nine States is limited, but, at the same time, that
Hashimite Killgdom of the Jordan, Nepal and the
participation indicates the true measure of all that the
Republic of Korea, I now ask the President to take a
General Assembly can 9ffer at this time.
vote in the customary way, by a show of hands, on the
166. And if our Organization offers everything which
proposal which I have the honour of submittin~, with
is within its power to give, can it be said that it must
the exception of the two final paragraphs of the operado more? The General Ass~mbly has limitations which
tive part, relating to the appointment of observers and
we all recognize. These limitations have been made
the distribution of information from the nine States, on
very clear by the advisory opinion of the Court, an
which I ask for a roll-call vote.
vpinion which is !I0t shared by many of the delegations
172. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
here. We recogmz~ these f~cts. There is no ~oubt that
I have three more names on my Hst of speakers. I am
our offer would give the mne States to which I have
hopeful that we may be able to conclude the discussion
been referring eloquent proof of the fact that the General
of this item tonight.
Assembly will continue to support their right to become ,I 173 Mr SPARKMAN (U 't d St t
fA')'
Members of the United Nations until the difficulties 11
.
..
n~ e
a es ? m~F1ca.
which we find in our way today have been overcome.
The UOlted States has Co?slstently bebeve~ 10 and
.
worked for the goal of umversal membership of the
167. The delegation of El Salvador feels that the
United Nations. We have believed and we continue to
p0'Yer of ~~pointing observers to the United. Na.t~o~s is
bel~eye that the C?rganization will not reach its complete
a high prlvdege. So far we have granted thiS prtvtlege
frUIbon or effectiveness until all the States of the world
to the Organ!zation of American States and to t~e Arab
beco~e Members. Our efforts in the Security Council
League and lIt should be noted that the latter mcludes
and m the General Assembly have been directed con'I some States which are not members of the United
sistently towards this aim. Unf0l1unately, however, we
Nations.
have witnessed year after year the spectacle of States
168. In any event there is no argument which can
believed b:y the overwhelm.ing majority of t~is .A:ssembly
convince us that we are trying to offer something- paltry
to be quahfied .and deserv10g of m~mbe~shlp be10g kept
to the nine States whose co-operation in international
out by the arbltra~ and, ~o our m1Od, unproper use of
affairs would be most valuable. At least, we do not
the veto by the Soviet Umono
think that the governments of those nine States will feel
174. On the other side of the coin, may I recall statethat what w/e are offering them is of so little importance
ments made in the past by my go~ernment to the effect
that it is not: worth considering.
that it d.oes not intend to permit its privilep:ed vote to
169. Nor does the last argument against our proposal
prev:ent the admission ?f any applicant Stat~ which h~s
carry great weight. It is said that by inviting the nine
received seyen affirmabve votes m the Securtty Coun~tl.
States to appoint observers we are placing upon them
Indeed, thiS Assembly. last year passed a resolution
a cert~r.in moral obligation to do so. Nothing is further
[296 K (IV)] request10g t~e permllnent members of
from the truth than this. The invitation which my
!he Secur~ty C<?unctl to refr~1O fro~ t~e use of the veto
delegation iis submitting to the General Assembly is a
m conneXl0n With membershtp ~pphcatl(~ns. Many statestanding invitation, which means that the States conments of. s~pp~rt fo~ the Umted Nattons have been
cerned win be able to appoint observers as well as
made durm.g thiS sessIOn ?f the ~eneral A~sem~ly. The
withdraw them and appoint other observers when it
~epresentat~ve.of the Soviet UOlon. has saId thIS. !fete
suits them,
IS an opportUnity for a small act which would contrtbute
',.
. '. .
materially to the success of our Organization. If the
170. Oncle a~atu, do yo~ thmk that tu the present state
Soviet Union would agree, as my government has, not
of world affatrs these mne States would not hasten to
to use its privileged vote to block the admission of

8/18th M~eting-441 December 1950
----------------applicants recelvmg seven affirmative v()tes in the
Security Council, a numbel' of Sta1tes det.ermined by
this Assembly to be amply quaiified for membership
could be admitted immediately.

175. Unfortunately, other applicants are, by their own
actions, continuing to prevent their own admission. In
previous years, th~ majority of members in the Security
Council and General Assembly, including the United
States, have not been able to support the admis~ion of
Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and Outer Mongolia. This position has been taken on Charter R'rot\nds.
I believe that other representatives will agree that these
applicants have done nothing during the past year' to
improve their qualifications; their conduct has even
increased the doubts about their qualifications. All of
these candidates have been rendering at least moral
support to aggression in Korea. Some of them, at this
very moment, are waging a war of nerves aR's.inst a
State seated in this hall, Yugoslavia. The attitude of
thlee of them can be judged by the fact that they have
flouted the recommendations of this Assembly with
respect to violations of peace treaty obligations of
human rights, and have disregarded the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on their peaceful
settlement obligations under these same treaties. One
applicant, Outer Mongolia, has never demonstrated that
it has the capacity to play the normal role of a State in
the international community. I could cite further examples of this sorry record. My government cannot,
therefore, at this time, support the admission of Albania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and Outer MonR'olia.
176. I express again, on behalf of my government, the
hope that these States will alter their policies and their
actions so as to permit my gQ'\,-ernment and others to
vote for their admission. The sooner this happens, the
more pleased and satisfied we shall be.
l77. Under present conditions it seems to us that there
is no action which the Assembly can take this year,
other than to reaffirm the past resolutions which express
the overwhelming sentiment here, that Austria, Italy,
thl': Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan, Finland, Ceylon,
Portugal, Irebmd, Nepal and the Repubiic of Korea
are all qualified for membership and are deserving of
admission. We support the resolution before the Assembly in this sense presented by Brazil, Canada, th~
Philippines, Sweden and Syria [A/15i1]. and hope
that conditions wotlld make it possible for the Security
COl ,ncil to forward, in due course, afl5rmative recomffi_cldations on fae!:),::, States, as well as others if by
their conduct HtC:Y demonstrate their worthiness.

178. A dt'aft resolution has been presented by the
Soviet Union [Af1577]. It has one glaring defect and
two other defects of lesser import. Its glarinR' defect is
its omission of the Republic of Korea. It is really
unnecessary t() sS,y mor~. Another serious defect is the
omission of a provision relC2ting to the elimination of the
veto in cor.nexion with questions of membership of the
Uni~cd Nations. A third reason for not adopting the
USSR draft resolution !s that the re,view of the other
'applications is covered by the joint. draft resolution
before the Assembly.
179. My delegation will therefore oppose the Soviet
Union draft resolution.

5'79

180. As regards the· draft resolution submitted by the

delegatior~ of El Salvador [A/1585] , paragraphs 2 and

3 of the operative part and paragraph 4 of the preamble,
which apparently relates to paragraph 2 of the ()perative
part, are the new elements in the matte:r~
181. My delegation questions the desirability ,of adopt~
ing para,graph 2 of the operative part, providling for a
formal observer status on the spur of the moment and
without more car~ful study. While we undentand and
sympathi~e ·v'dl.n the spirit underlying the st1~gestion,
we feel that it has many implications which should first
be considered. For instance, is it netes~ary? ~rany nonmember States have observers following the pJ'oceedings
of the United Nations. Furthermore, the practice has
been established of inviting non-tnember States to the
table of the United Nations when cases in which they
are directly interested are under discussion. Also, we
wonder whether the applicants themselves would find
the proposal attractive. The nine States mentioned are
all qualified for and deserve full membership. Would
anything short of full membership be acceptable to
them? My delegation would therefore oppose paragraph
2 of the operative part, as well as paragraph 4 of the
preamble which relates thereto, although we aR'l'ee com~
pletely with the sentiment expressed in that paragraph
of the preamble.
182. Paragraph 1 of the operative part of the draft
resolution, if slightly redrafted, would not be obiection~
able. It seems to us, however, to be redund~nt, since its
objective is provided for in the joint draft resolution
which my delegation supports. Hence, my delegation
will abstain from voting on that paragraph.
183. Similarly, there is no objection to paraR'raph 3 of
the operative part of the draft resolution. My delegation
will vote for it although we are not con~aced that it is
really necessary.
184. In conclusion, I should like once again to express
my conviction that a satisfactory solution to the problem
of membership could be achieved today if all of the
permanent members of the Security Council would
abandon the use of the veto in connexion with appli{:a~
Hons for membership.
185. Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland) (translated
from Russian) : The question of the admission of new
Members to the United Nations reappears on the
agenda of every session of the Genteral Assembly with
monotonous regoularity. Year after year, it becomes more
and more evident that for a number of States to re"
main outside the Organization creates a situation which
is both. abnormal and harmful. Yet, all attempts to solve
that question remain of no avail because of the attitude
adopted by the United States and several countries
which follow in its steps. Political machinations,a policy
of discrimination against countries whose political and
social structure is not to the liking of the United States,
the violation of obligations flowing from international
agreements and a prejudiced and twisted interpretation
of the Charter-such are the basic elements of the policy
consistently pursued by the United States in this
matter. The result of this policy is that the United
Nations now has in its files thirteen applications. for
admission to membership in the Organization, which
have not received the majority provided for in the
Charter.

580

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

186. I shall not now review the history of this question
and repeat all the argu,ments advanced since 1946 to
show that it was necessary to find a positive solution to
the problem. I would only like to note that the Polish
delegation hars repeatedly stated that it is essential for
the United 'Nations to be a universal Organ.izatior. and
that all States which possess the qualifications set forth
in Article 4 of the Charter should be admitted tc member~hip. At the same time, however, we are firmly
oppo~ed to the repeated attempts made to admit only a
few S"'~tes including the favourites of whom the Unit~1
States f~els sufficiently sure that they would obediently
follow its policy in the Organization anc1 that they would
increase still further the organized mechanical majority
of votes and blocs. We have been witnessing such
attempts for four years already. While blindly and
unreserved'y advocating the admission of nine States,
the United States at the same time is relentlessly doing
its utmost to reject the applications of other countries.
187. The question of the admission of Hungary,
Romania and Bulgaria into the United Nat~ons is a
particular glaring example of the way in which the
Anglo-American Powers flout international obliJ{ations.
The Peace Treaties concluded with those countries and
signed by the United States and the United Kingdom,
as well as the Potsdam Agreement, contain perfectly
dear and unambiguous provisions regarding the support
to be given to their applications for membership in the
United Nations. Consequently, voting against their
admission or even abstention can only be reg-arded as a
gross violation of freely assumed obligations.
188. The same applies to Albania, a country which
heroically resisted the fascist invaders and whose C011tribution to the common struggle by far exceeded its
strength. The United States and the United Kingdom,
however, resorted to the harshest methods and referred
the case to the International Court of Justice. l l It was
in this particular case that Albania displayed the
maximum good will as regards respect for international
institutions and international law.
189. Lastly, in the case of the Mongolian People's
Republic, when even the most captious could not find
fault with anything, they advanced the laughable argument that a considerable number of Member States had
not yet established diplomatic relations with that
country.
190. The follfJ" ll!ng fact illustrates the cynical attitude
adopted by the Anglo-American States: while thus
opposing the admission of five countries which are
restoring. their economy by means of tremendous efforts
and doing' their utmost to promote and maintain frlp.ndly
relations with their neig-hbours, the United States and
the United Kingdom tried at the same time to have the
so-called Republic of Korea admitted into the United
Nations. I shall not cite facts to show what this artificial
so-called State and its g-overnment really were, because
we have all been able to form an opinion on that during
the debate on the Korean question at this session of
the General Assembly.
191. During- the last three years, all sorts of political
and legal mareuvres have been used to prevent the
adoption of a just decision on the question of memher-

ship; one of them has been to refer the case twice to the
Interl :ational Court of Justice. The decision adopted in
1947 [resol~ttion 113 B (II)] to ;a\sk the Court for a
legal opinion on an exclusively political question violated
the Charter and defied common sense; its aim was to get
the Court to dictate to sovereig-n States how they should
vote on this important and political question of principle.
Obviously, such an attempt only led to .a complete
confm:ion of 'Opinion in the Court. We need only recall
that out of fifteen judges, six were categorically opposed
to any such interpretation of tile Charter, while two
others gave dissenting opinions. Thus, the majority
actuaUy turned out to be a minority. That, hr>\vever
in no way dismayed the Anglo-American b!c~ which
decid(~d to repf~at its manreuvre at last year's session of
the G~neral Assembly. Disre~arding both the rules oi
procedure of the Security Council and the decisions
taken aLt San Frandsco, the General Assembly again
decided to refer the case to the International Court of
Justice. This time the question put to the Court was
worded. in such a manner as to invite an opinion which
would be contradictory to the Charter. However, the
question was so patently absurd and illegal tha.t, as
might l1ave been expected, the conclusion of the Court
was qwite clear and was adopted by a crushing majority. That opinion is correct, but it is utterly superfluot1s
because it only confirms that white is white, and that,
under the Charter, the General Assembly cannot hke
decisions regarding the admission of new Members
without a recommendation by the Security Council and
that such a recnmmendation c~!!not b~ made wit:aout the
con-::urring vote of thf> five great Powe.is.
192. There is always an outcry when the Sovit.'t Union
vetoes the admission of a new Iv.Iember. At the same
time, shame-faced silence is maintained abUi:t c1U the
completely unjustified vetoes repeatedly exercised by
the United States, the United Kingdom, France and
their friends, in order not to admit five countries which
undoubtedly deserve to be Members of the United
Nations. A shame-faced silence is maintained over a fact
which dearly shows who really supports the principle
of the universality of the United Nations: it was, in
fact, the ~30viet Union which in 1949 submitted a draft
resolutioa12 proposing the admission of all the thirteen
States which had been vainly seeking admission to the
Unite.d Nations for a number of years.
193. That resolution was rejected [252nd meeting]
anc. a gross collective veto slammed th~ door in the face
of tho~~ thirteen States. The responsibility rests wholly
on those who flout their obligations, violate the Charter
and do harm to the Organization by blindly indulging
i~ unbridled discrimination ag-ainst countries which do
not obey their orders, which freely settle their own way
of life and which refuse to be exploited.
194. In these circumstances, how can we speak of
obstructionism by one Power, as the representative of
the United States did today? It was precisely the Soviet
Union which submitted a conciliatory and compromise
proposal to admit all the thirteen States into membership. If there is any obstructionism, it comes from the
Anglo-American bloc which refuses all compromise and
agreement and continues to reject the applications of
those States in a categorical and unjust manner.

11 See Official Records of the Security COfmcil, Second Ye~!r,

12 See Official Records IJf the General Assembly, Fourth Ses·
sion, Plenary Meetings, Annex, document A/I079.

No. 34.

1

ps

318th Mflet!ng-4 December 1950
---------------_._--.195. In these condition, when the Sov1et Union votes
againsl~ the admission of a few States emly, it is in fact
doing CL great serviee to the United Nations by not
allowi~~g discrimination and iniquity to prevail. In its
endeavours to reach a compromise solution, the Soviet
Union closed its eyes to the fact that some of the
favourites of the United States did not possess all the
necessary qualifications for membership. The application
of South Korea obviously constituted too glaring a
violation of the Charter to be accepted, but the Soviet
Union did agree to the admission of eight other
countries sponsored by the United States.
196. Consequently, tb(~ re~!lonsibility for the absence
of any positive decision on the question now on our
agenda and the failure to settle a number of other
questions, in short, the responsi~i1ity for the impasse in
which we now find ourselves falls squarely on those
who, because of selfish considerations, narrow doctrines
and extreme prejudice, refuse to agree to a compromise
solution of international problems. The policy of the
United States is responsible for the absence of thirteen
States whose participation wou!d undoubtedly have contributed to the develtJpmellt :md strengthening of the
United Nations.
197. The draft resolution submitted by El Salvador is
imbued with the same spirit which characterized all the
s~t, 'Jents made on behalf of the Anglo-American bloc
last year. It sets forth the same principle of discrimination against some Stat("~ seeking- admission to the
United Nations and tries to obtain special privileges
for nine States, including- the so-called Republic of
Korea. Furthermore, that draft resolution represents an
illegal attempt, and one that is in contradiction with the
Court's opinion, to impose upon the Security Council a
decision regarding these nine States. Lastly, the draft
resolution provides for ,ome new form of membership
for these nine States-I would say a kind of semimembership-which not only contradicts both the spirit
and the letter of the Charter but also defies elementary
common sense. It is nothing- else but a manceuvre
designed to drag American favourites into the United
Nations through the back door.
198. Consequently the draft re8olution submitted by
El Salvador should be rejected as being both irregular
and illegal.
199. On the other hand, we have before: us a draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union recommending that the Security Council should I~onsider the
applications submitted by thirteen States for admission
into the United Nations. Thus the USSR is once again
giving proot of its determination to admit an countries
into the United Nations irrespective of their political
stru~ture and without any discrimination whatever.
200. The Polish delegation considers that this is the
only draft resolution which is correct in substance and
consistent with the Charter and the interests of the
United Nations. We shall, therefore, vote in favour of it.
201. Mr. KHOMUSKO (Byelorussian Soviet Soc!alist Republic) (translated from. Russian) : The question of the admission of new Members to the United
Nations has been on the agenda of the Security Council
and the General Assembly for several years and still
remains. unsolved. The reason for this abnormal situation lies in the policy of the Anglo-American bloc, which

581

does not aim at solving the problem in accordance witb
the United Nations Charter and the interests of inter..
national co-operation, but aims at using it tor its own
purposes, which are in direct contradic)~ion with the
tasks incumbent upon the United Nations. In violation
of the Charter, especially Article 4 on the admission of
new Members to the United Nations, and in disregard
of their own obligations, the representatives of the
Anglo-American bloc began, from the very beginning
of the consideration of this question, to pursue a policy
of discrimination against such peace,.loving countries
as Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria"
Romania and Hungary.
202. The representatives of the Anglo-American bloc
have made every effort to oppose the admission of these
States to the United Nations, merely because the reactionary circles of the Anglo-American b:,~oc do not
approve of the political systtm in those cotmtries. The
purpose of these tactics is pei"tectly obvious: it is to
add to the Members of the U&iited Nations only those
States which are favoured hy the Anglo-American bloc.
203. As we know, on 22 November 1949 the fourth
session of the G~!1er;l.1 Assembly adopted a resolution
[296 J (IV j] sponsored by the Argentine delegation,
recommending that the International Court of Justice
should be asked for another advisory opinion. Th,
Inter~ational Court of Justice was asked the following
questIOn:
"Can the admission of a State to membership in
the United Nations, pursuant to Article 4, 'paragraph
2, of the Charter, be affected by a decisi.~n of the
General Assembly when t~la Security Council ha~
made no recommendation fc admission by reason of
the candidate failing to obtain the requisite majority'
or of the negative vote of a perlT~nent member upon
a resolution so to recommend?U
204. In reality, there was no reason to apply to the
International Court of Justice for an answer to that
question, since the criteria for the admission of States
to membership in the United Nations are clearly set
forth in Article 4 of the United Nations Charter.
205. As we know, the International Court of Justice
submitted its advisory opinion on 3 March 1950. The
Court pointed out in its opinion that the text of Article
4, paragraph 2, of the United Nations Charter meant
that the Assembly could only decide to admit upon the
r,~commendation of the Security Council. The recomm,endation of the Security Council was thus the condi..
tion precedent to the decision of the General Assembly
on the admission of States to membership in the United
Nations.
206. The Argentine representative to the International
Court of Justice stated, on behalf of his government.
that, in the first place, the Security Council was obliged,
under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter to give
either a fa.vourable or an unfavourable recommendation,
which had received 7 'Votes, and, in the second place,
that the General Assembly had the right either to agree
or disagree with the recommendation of. the Security
CouncU; even in the event of the Assembly~s disagreement with an unfavourable recommendation of the
Security Council, the Assembly could admit a State to
the United Nations.

S82

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

207. In other words, the Argentine representative
stated that the Assembly could disregard the principle
of the unanimity of the five great Powers in the
Security Council. The Argentine representative to the
International Court of Justice was supported by the
representative of Chile.
208. The International Court of Justice, bearing in
mind thf' ~~ttempt of the Argentine Government to
attribute a different meaning to Article 4, para~ra1Jh 2,
of the United Nations Charter, stated that its first duty
in interpreting and applying the provisions of a treaty
was tu attach to words the meaning which they had in
the context in which they occurred.
209. In this case, the Court found no difficulty in
ascertaining the natural and ordinary meaning of
Article 4,'paragraph 2, of the United Nations Charter.
The International Court of Justice reached the conclusion that the Security Council was not in a subordinate
position with regard to the General Assembly.
210. The Int~r-.aational Court of Justice stated that to
hold that the Assembly had power to admit a State to
membership in the United Nations in the absence of a
recommendation of the Security Council would be to
deprive the Security Council of an important power
entrusted to it and would reduce its functions to
submittin~ conclusions and opinions on candidates for
membership in the United Nations.
211. In the opinion of the Court, the assertion that the
~bsenceof a recommendation by the Security Council
should be regarded as an "unfavourable recommendaHonu would le?d the General Assembly to take upon
itself. the powe'l' to change, to th~ point of reversing, the
meaning o~ a 'Vote of the Security Council.
212.: In the oI>~nion of the International Court of
Justice, Article 4, paragraph. 2, of the United Nations
Charter, envisages a favourable recommendation and
that only. That paragraph does not provide for a
"negative recommendation". The Court concludes its
opinion with the following categorical statement:
.
"The, Court, .
"By twelve votes to two,
HIs ot the opinion that the admission of a State to
'membership in the United Nations, pursuant to
paragraph 2 of Article 4 of the Charter, cannot be
effected by a decision of the General Assembly when
the Security Council has made no recommendation
for admission, by reason of the candidate failing to
obtain the requisite majority or of the ne~ative vote
of a permanent Member upon a resolution so to
recommend".
213. Judges Alvarez and Azevedo voted ag-ainst the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and submitted dissenting opinions to the Court. The
dissenting opinions of judges Alvarez and Azevedo do
not call for extensive comment. Both judges oppose the
use of the so-called rule of veto with regard to the
ad..mission of new Members to the United Nations and
regard this as an 'labuse of right". The An~lo-American
1;>loc stubbornly opposed the admission to membership
in the United Nations of democratic countries, whose
peoples took an active part in the struggle against the
armies of Hitler and Mussolini. As is known, Albania
conducted a long and unr.elenting struggle against fas-

cist aggression and thus gave valuable assistance to the
Allies during the war. In the war against German and'
Italian forces, Albania, which has a population of only
1 million, put into the field 70,000 warriors, who fought
heroically against the enemy and were victorious in the
end.
214. From the ashes of the struggle against the fascist
aggressors arose new democratic countries, such as
Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary and Albania. It is these
new People's Democracies that the ruling circles of thp
United States and the United Kingdom are opposing,
and their representatives in the United Nations arle
illegally and without any grounds whatsoever preventing the admission of these countries to membership in
the United Nations.
215. The representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom allege that the Mongolian People's
Republic cannot be admitted into the United Nations
on the grounds that it is not qualified to become a
Member of the Organization. I should like to ask these
representatives what are the qualifications ef the
Rashimite Kingdom of the Jordan, Portugal, Ireland
and other cuuntries which they are sponsoring for
membership in the United Nations, from the point of
view of their participation in the struggle against
German fascism and Japanese imperialism?
216. The Mongolian People's Republic, unlike Portugal, gave considerable assh.:tance to the Allies and the
United Nations in the stru.ggle against imperialist
Japan. It sent 80,000 troops to the front, who fought
with the Army of the USSR against Japanese forces;
In 1939, before the Japane:se attack on Pearl Rarhor"
Mongolia was already fighting against the .Tapanese
Army which had invaded its territory. The ~foll~olian
People's Republic, like Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania, is a peace-loving State which can make a
valuable contribution to the common cause of peaceloving nations. They are all therefore worthy of ad.:.
mission to membership in the United Natians.
217. The representative of El Salvador st2.ted in his
speech here that Albani~ and Bulgaria were not peaceloving countries because, they gave assist~tnce to the
Greek partisans. There can be no doubt that this is
merely slander against Albania and Bul~aria.
218. The Soviet delegations have had several opportunities of proving that Albania and Bulgaria are peaceloving countries and that, on the contrary, Greece is
pursuing' an aggressive policy against Albania, in laying
claim to Albanian territory.
219. The representative of El Salvador proposes in his
draft resolution that we should recommend to the
Security Council to reconsider only the applications of
Austria, Italy, the Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan,
Ireland, Portugal, Finland, Ceylon,Nepal and Korea.
220. We consider this draft resolution to be unaccept:
able, in view of its discrimination against other Sta.tes
which have made applications for admission to membership in the United Nations. This draft is tendentious
and politically biased. The delegation of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic objects to the draft
resolution proposed by the deleg,r.i::1on of El Salvador,
and will vote against it. The delegation of the Byelo"
russian SSR urges the adoption of the draft resolution
submitted by the USSR, which provides for the ad;.

--

-

----318th Meedng-4 Deeeulber 1950
mission of all thirtp,en States to membership in the
United Nations.
221. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet SociaH~i R~publics) (translated from Russian): The
speeches of the representatives of the USSR" Poland
and the Byelorussian SSR, w~th which my de1eg-ation is
in complete agreement, have covered what the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR was proposing to :,ay on the
quelltion of the admission of new Members ;to the
United Natiolls. I will therefore be brief in statil1g my
delegation's position.
222. In the first pla.~e, the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR would like to point out that the decision takc:~n by
the General Assembly at its fourth session to refer the
question of the admission of new Members to the
International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion
was a violation of the United Nations Cha.rter. At the
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 22 No~em­
ber 1949 [251st meeting], at which,that illegal resolution was adopted, the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
pointed out that neither the Charter as a whole nor its
~everal Articles can be or are subject to interpretation
by the Court, because that power is not conferred on
the Court by its Statute and because every organ of the
United Nations is entitled, where necessary, to interpret
those Articles of the Charter- to which its operations
give effect.
223. The procedure for the admission of new Members, as had been said, is laid down in Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Charter, under which admission must be
recommended by the Security Council before the- General Assembly can proceed to l~onsider the matter. This
provision of the Charter is so explicit that it calls for
no further elucidation or interpretation. The resolution
adopted at the fourth session of the General Assembly
by which the question of the admission of new Members
was referred to the Court for an advisory opinion was
therefore uncalled for and directly contrary to the
Charter.
224. The question of the admission of new Members
has been discussed at every regular session of the
General Assembly since 1947. The question had been
017 the Security Council's agenda throughout that
period. The discussion of this question both in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly has
clearly indicated that the admission of new Members
to the United Nations is a political question. The Court,
which is required to confine itself to legal matters, was
accordingly not competent to express an opinion on
that question.
225. The efforts which the delegations of the United
States and of certain other countries have exerted and
are still exerting to prevent the admission to the United
Nations of democratic States such as Albania, Hungary,
~ul~~ria, Romania and the Mongolian People's Repubbc IS a particularly clear indication of the political
nature of the question.
226..In his statement today, the United States repre~
sentattve has confirmed that the United States will
continue to oppose the admission to the United Nations
of .t~e People's Democracies because it finds their
pobtlcal str~cture and economic system unacceptable.
22(. The El Salvadorean delegation's draft resolution
whIch has been submitted for the consideration of the

plenary meeting of the General Assembly is a flagrant
viola tion of the Charter and a cleat manifestation of the
United States discriminatory poli~y towards the coun..
tries of people's democracy.
228. After considering the question of the admission
of new Members to the United Nations referred to ithy
the Gener:al Assembly, the International Court of Justice
expressed the opinion that the admission of a State to
membership in the United Nations cannot be effected
by a decision of the General Assembly in the absence of
a recommendation by the Security Council. The Court's
opinion reads as follows:
"The Court . . . is of the npinion that the admi~..
sion of a State to membership in the United Nations,
pursuant to paragraph 2 ('If 'Article 4 of the Charter,
cannot be effected by a decision of the General Assembly when the Security Council has made no
recommendation for admission, by reason of the candidate failing to obtain the requisite majority or of
the negative vote ot a permanent member upon a
resolution so to recommend."
229. The Intt.~rnational Court of Justice has thus
upheld the only possible interpretation of Article 4,
paragraph 2 of the United Nations Charter, and its
conclusion is a complete rebuttal of the incorrect position and unwarranted demands of the delegations of the
United States and the United Kingdom, who have set
themselves against one of the most important Articles
of the United Nations Charter.
230. The Court's conclusion also reaffirms the indisputable fact that great-Power unanimity, which has
been under fire from the Anglo-American bloc for
some years, is unquestionably required for the adoption
of decisions on the admission of new Members to the
United Nations.
231. I need hardly say that the Court's opinion adds.
nothing new to the interpretation of the Charter. Confining itself to the question referred to it, the Court
merely confirmed the correctness \)f the position taken·
by the delegations of the USSR, the Ukrainian SSR,
the Byelorussian SSR ~d the People's Democracies at
previous sessions of the General Assembly on the
question of the admission of new Members.
.
232. According to Article 4, paragraph 1 of the United
Nations Charter, membership in the United Nations is
open to all peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the Charter. Contrary to the assertions of the United States representative, Albania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and the MonJ'{olian People's Republic are unquestionably peace-loving States
and are undeniably entitled to membership in the
United Nations.
233. It would, therefore, be improper to adopt the El
Salvadorean draft resolution, which singlEtS out from
the applicants for membership in the Uni\:ed Nations
only those States which the United States and El
Salvador, its mouthpiece, cottnt on as partners and
supporters, while the question of admitting the People's
Democracies remains undecided.
234. For this reason we shall vote against the El
Salvadorean draft resolution and against the draft
resolution submitted by Brazil and four other delega...
tions. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR whole... heartedly supports the draft resolution of the USSR on

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

.....;..-_._--------

the admission of new Members, because that draft does
not give preferential treatment to any group of States in
the matter of admission to the United Nations as does
the United States in vetoing the admission of the
People's Democracies. On the contrary, the USSR draft
resolution is designed to ensure that the overwhelming
majo!~:ty of States are simuitaneously admitted to
mr,mhership in the United Nations.
235. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will accordingly vote in favour of a General Assembly recommendation to the Security Council to review the
applications of Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Finland, Italy,
Portugal, Ireland, the Hashimite Kingdom of the
J ord~n, Austria, Celyon and Nepal for membership in
the United Nations.
236.

Mr.ORDONNEAU (France) (translated from
French) : The French delegation has no new arguments

to put forward on this subject, which has already been
debated at length at three previous sessions of the
Assembly. All the', possible arguments have been exhausted. We cow;ider that it was pointless to reopen a
question to which no practical solution can apparently
be found at the present time. We can only do what. th~
joint draft resolution of Brazil, Canada, the Philippines,
Sweden and Syria invites us to do, namely, recall the
previous resolutions of the Assembly and request the
Security Council to reconsider pending applications in
accordance with the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
237. The French delegation will therefore vote for the
five-Power joint draft resolution. It cannot, however,
vote for the Soviet Union draft resolution, which has a
similar purpose but ignores the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly at its 1949 session. With regard
to the draft resolution submitted by El Salvador, which
we were unfortunately unable to study properly because
it did not reach us in sufficient time before the meeting,
we shall be compelled to vote against paragraph 2.
238. We do not, as a matter of fact, believe that a
decision of such magnitude can be taken lightly. Less
perhaps in its wording tha!1 by implication, the El
Salvadorean draft resolution contains an important and
entirely new proposal that we cannot accept without
thorough study.
239. Moreover, we are by no means certain that an
invitation to certain countries to send observers to the
General Assembly and the Interim Committee will be
welcomed by aH those to whom it is addressed. In any
event, non-member States already have the right to
accredit observers to the United Nations. Some of them
have made use of that right. Are we not justified in
assuming that all those desiring to make use of that
right have already done so?
240. The theoretical position taken in this matter by
the French delegation does not imply that we relinquish
the views we have so far upheld with respect to the
applications pending before the Security Cc,JDcil. Onethird of Europe is absent from our deliberations. For
five years we have deprived ourselves of the invaluable
contribution that could have been made by those
peoplec;, whose culture has had so great an influence
on world civilization.

241. The French delegation feels that this is an
extremely unfortunate state of affairs. It hopes that it
will shortly be possible to admit to the United Nations
all countries which fulfil the conditions laid down in
Article 4 of the Charter.
242. Mr. MU1'J'OZ (Argentina) (translated fro,.
Spanish) : The General Assembly, at its fifth regular
session, is once again considering the question of the
admission of new Members to the United Nations.
~~43. The International Court of Justice has, on two
Heparate occasions, been requested to give an advisory
opinion on the general question of admission. It J{ave its
first opinion on 28 May 194818 when, by a majority cf
nine to six, the judges held that, under Article 4 of the
Charter, admission could not juridically be made dependeI~t on conditions not expressly stipulated in that
Article. The Court held, in particular, that the admission of a State could not be made contingent on the
admission of ~nother State.
244. The second opinion of the Court, J{iven Oit 3
March 1950, deals with another generai question of
admission. The point was first raised by the delegation
of Argentina at the fourth session of the General
Assembly. Although our original proposaP' was subsequently amended by the Ad Hoc Political Committee,
the purpose of the request made to the Court was
clearly to clarify two basic points. The isst:f~ was the
scope of the term "recommendation" in Article 4, that
is to say the function of the General Assembly, the
organ which decides upon admission, as against the part
played by the Security Council, which has recommending powers.
245. The Court failed tG ~p.ply to this first part of the
request, possibly on accmmt of the term.s in which the
General Assembly's resolution [296 (IV)] was drafted,
although we feel that the records of the debates which
were transmitted to the Court should clearly have
shown the doubts which a number of delegations
entertained concerning the scope of the word "recommendation" in Article 4.
246. With respect to the ~econd, important part of the
request-that relating to the voting procedure when the
Security Council is dealing with recommendations
nader Article 4--the Court, by a majority of twelve to
two, held that the admission of a State to membership
in the United Nations cannot be effected by a decision
of the General Assembly when the Security Council has
made no recommendation for admission, by reason of
the candidate's failure to obtain the requisite majority
or by reason of the nr.:gative vote of a permanent
member.
247. In other words, the majority of the Court, as the
opinion expressly states, proceeded on the assumption
that, as the question put by the General Assembly .
implied, there is no recomm(~ndation if one permanent
member of the Council casts a m.'gative vote.
248. Those of us who participated in the debates of
the Ad Hoc Political Committeelll at the previous
18 See Adtnission of a State to the United Nations (CharfS~
Articie 4), Advisory Opinion: I.C.!. Reports 1948, page "I.
l'See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth St~
sion, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annes, Vol. I, documeti
AIAC31/L.l8.
.
!!: Ibid., Ad Hoc Political Committee, 25th to 29th meettJJaa

inclusive.

S!8th Meeting-4 Deeember 1950
session of the General Assembly find it difficult to admit
that assumption. Moreo ~·4'>r, owing to the interpretation
placed by the majority of the Court upon the request
submitted to it, its opinion is so narrow in scope that
the General Assembly is left where it was when it
decided to apply for enlightenment concerning- terms of
the Charter. Its position remains unchanged in a matter
of great importance; for some years a number of States
have been prevented from offering their precious contribution to the Organi"tion; their number is growing
from day to day, a fact which contrasts with the inertia
afflicting the United Nations.
249. !1.S the opinion is of such strictly limited application, no light could be shed on the important arg-uments
a{~vanced during the debate on the question, which is so
complex as to defy an over~implified solution. We feel
tnat in a problem such as this no rigid formula can
l~revaiI eit1Jer in the interpretation of the Charter or of
,:he resolutions of the General Assembly.
~\50. We do not intend to restate our attitude in detail
hilt we do wish to emphasize 01'.1r belief that it ',vas not
the purpose of the Charter to e:;tabIish a system which,
in the final anaylsts, makes the admission of a State
dependent on the will of one single Member State and
that this is possihle even if objections were raised that
are bol,sed 011 con~iderations other than those precise!y
stated in Article 4.
251. Our objectlLln to such a system of interpretation
is based on reasons of principle which apply to the
present si~uation as they do to situations which might
arise in t he future.
252. We accept the right of veto as a temporary
solution, in view of the prevailing political reality. We
further agtee that the Security Council should have
special powers for the purpose of maintaining peace.
253. Both cases, however, represent a departure from
the· overriding principle of the sovereign equality of all
Member States as laid down in the Charter. The
exception, or pri\Tilege, should be express and whenever
doubts are enterta~ned as to its existence or iegality it
must be regarded as non-existent.
254. We have not thought it desirable, during the
present session of the G€neral Assembly, to take any
further action toward a finai solution of the problem,
because we, like others, reaHze the gravity of the
international situation. But we reserve our right to
return to this delicate question o:r the admission of new
Members, at a more suitable time.
255. Now with reference to the draft resolution submitted at this session of the Assembly, I wish to explain
the attitude of my delegation with respect to those
proposals.
256. The USSR proposal simply recommends to the
Security Council to reconsider the applications for
admission of all countries which have applied so far,
with the excepti'on of the Republic of Korea. In the draft
resolution [A/1079] which it submitted at the last
session of the General Assembly, the Soviet Union
included a paragraph referring to the existence in the
Assembly of a general feeling in favour of the admission
of all the States mentioned in that proposal. The present
USSR draft resolution [AI1S77] does not mention
Such a feeling, and we shaH therefore vote in favour of

it. Vve cannot oppose a reconsideration of such applications by the Security Council.
.
257. As regards the omission of the Republic of Korea
from the list of States, that is remedied by the joint
draft resolution of the delegations of Brazil, Canado.,
the Philippines, Sweden and Syria. In point of fact, the
fiv~-Power proposal, [A/1S71] refers to resolution
296 (IV) adopted by the General Assembly, which
stated that Austria, Ceylon, Finland, Italy, Ireland,
Portugal, the Hashimite Kingdom of the Jordan, the
Republic of Korea and Nepal should be admitted to
membership in the United· Nations, and which accordingly requested the Security Council to reconsider the
applications of these countries. We cannot oppose this
reconsideration requested in the five-Power draft resolution, and we shaH .the?:'efore vote in favour of it also.
258. N evt~rtheless, we wish to make it clear that
although w.e shall vote in favour of these two draft
resolutions, we hd.ve very little hope that they will solve
the problem. If our doubts are confirmed, and we do not
achieve even a partial solution of the problem during
the coming year, then, clearly, the Assembly will have
to seek other means of arriving at a satisfactory conclusion to the affair.
259. The problem is steadily becoming more political
in character, and we must solve it by applying political
standards; but our solution must not be allowed to
involve permanent refusal of membership to certain
countries merely because we disagree with the political
ideas of other States which also desire membership. If
universality of membership is not considered sufficient
in itself-and we admit that it is not an absolute
principle-it will have to be resorted to in the end, as
the only remedy for this intolerable situation.
260. The Argentine Government believes that it has
made a contribution to the task of finding a solution of
the problem. We have tried to demonstrate that this
Assembly is the final authority in decisions relating to
the admission of new Members. The opposite point of
view has prevailed, and the opinion of the Court
unquestionably strengthens the attitude taken thus far
by the majority of the delegations. The efforts of some
delegations can in no way alter that opinion, any more
than the hrilliant minority opinions of judges A1varez
and Azevedo were able to alter the course of events.
But the fact that we respect the will of the majority
does not mean that we abandon our convictions. How
much longer we can allow the present situation to
continue is a question which we cannot answer at the
moment. What we do know is that the situation may
continue indefinitely, and that accordingly several delegations have done their best to find a means whereby at
least to a certain extent the countries which have not
yet obtained admission to membership of the United
Nations can be enabled to collaborate so that a closer
relationship between those countries and the United
nations may emerge to the advantage of our work.
261. That we think is the reason behind the proposal
submitted by ~he delegation of El Salvador as presented
in document A/1585. Under the terms of this proposal,
the Governments of Austria, Ceylon, Finland, Italy,
Ireland, Portugal, the Hashimite Kingdom of the
Jordan, tht: Republic of Korea and Nepal would each
be invited to send an observer to attend sessions of the

C

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
General Assembly and its main Committees, so that
they might express their views and furnish wha~ever
information might be requested by the other delegations.
262. The attendance of observers is a practice laid
down, in final form, by the General Ae ~embly. On the
initiative of Argentina, the Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States was invited to attend
the sessions of thl~ General Assembly as an observer
[lSlst meeting]. During the present session of the
General Assembly, as a result of a proposal made
originally by the Syrian Government,t6 a similar invitatien has been extended to the Secretary-General of the
t..rab League [299th meeting].
263. It is, moreover, the practice for representatives
of the specialized agencies to attend meetings of the
General Assembly's Committees, and also of t~e
Economic and Social Council and the TrusteeshIp
Council. As can be seen, the General Assembly is
liberally extenJing the right to send observers to groups
other than States.
264. A generous policy has always been followed in
so far as the States are concerned, so that when a nonmember State is especially interested in any item under
discussion it is invited to take part in the debates of the
main Committees and sub-committees. In practice the
sole difference between a Member State and a nonmember State invited to attend meetings is in the voting
rights.
265. In the draft resolution submitted by El Salvador,
the right to take part in discussions is granted to States
which the General Assembly considers should be ~ embers of the United Nations. Even if the majority of the
General Assembly do not feel qualified to de~ide. to
admit those countries as Members of the Orgamzatton,
there is no reason to admit those countries as Membersof the Organization, there is no reason why they
should not· be entitled to be represented and to take
part in the discu~sions. What the .~eneral Assembly
can do in the partIcular cases to whIch I have referred
-the Org'c.J.nization of .I\medcan States and the Arab
League-it can also apply generally.
266. The Charter does not make provision for any of
the:;e cases. These are cases in which the General
Assembly is ~ompetent, under Article 21 of the Charter,
to make its own rules of procedure. These remarks
describe the powers of the General Assembly and the
prevailing practice.
267. As regards the position of the States referred
to in the draft resolutif\n of El Salvador, we do not
consider that this is a question of Members with a
lower status. Although Article 19 of the Charter mentions at· least one case whete a Member ha~ no. vote-:the case of arrears in the p~ymeIit of contrlbutlOns--lt
is clear that the draft r ~solution of El Salvador does
not aim at the creation of a spedal category of Members. On the contrary, we understand that the draft in
question has nothing to do with membership, for those
States cannot become Members until the General
Aesembly so decides. In the meantime, if ~he draft ~ub­
mitted to us is adopted, those States ,-1111 be entttled
to take part in. the Jiscussions, without the right to vote,
whenever they wish. to do so.
lG

See document A/C.6/L.113.

268. For these reasons we shall vote in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by the delegation of El
Sal·;ador.
269. Mr. SUPHAMONGKHON (Thailand): My.
government firmly adheres to the prinCIple of universality of membership in the United Nations. It is with the
deepest regret that we are not yet in a position to
welcom~ as fellow Members a number of countries, such
as Italy, Portugal, Ireland, Ceylon, and so on, which
have all the qualifications required by Article 4 of the
Charter.
270. 11y delegation is not very sure that, if we decide
to renew our request to the Security Council for
reconsideration of this matter, we will have a better
chance this year, in view of the attitude adopted by a
certain country with regard to those applications. However, my delegation will support the draft resolution
submitted by Brazil, Canada, the Philippines, Sweden
and Syria.
271. We also have greater sympathy for the draft
resolution submitted by the representative of El Salvador because, in our opinion, it tends to afford an opportunity to the States whose membership in the United
Nations has been preve.l.lted from participation in our
work solely by the veto in the Security Council. Some
doubt has however been expressed as to the desirability
of adopting paragraph 2 of the operative part of that
draft, which requests the Secretary-General to invite the
governments concerned to send an observer to the sessions of the General As&embly and its Committees. It is
feared that such an invitation might not be accepted.
272. In this connexion, I wonder whether a slight
modification of wording would not render the paragraph
more acceptable. Therefore, I would venture to propose
an amendment, so that the paragraph would read:
"That, pending admission to membership each of
the governments of the States to which this resolution applies be allowed an opportunity to send an
observer to sessions of the General Assembly and its
Committees, including the Interim Committt':e, in
order to express their views and furnish information
whenever consulted by the delegatiofll (ri1f any ~.,\' rmber
State; and".
273. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The debate is closed.
274. We shall now vote on the various draft resoIn··
tions before us. When we come to the draft resoiution
presented by the delegation of El Salvador, I shall ask
the repr.esentative of El Salvador whether or not he
accepts the amendment submitted by the delegation of
Thailand; if so, the amendment will be considered as
part of the original proposal; if not, we shall vote on the
amendment separately.

275. I now put to the vote the draft resolution presented by the delegations of Brazil, Canada, the Philippines, Sweden and Syria [A/lS7l].
The draft resolution was adopted by 46 'Votes to 5,
with 2 ab$t~ntions.
276. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put to the vote the USSR draft resolution
[A/lS77].

318th Meeting--4 December 1950
The draft resolution was rejected by 22 votes to 18,
with IS abstentions.
277. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
Does the representative of El Salvador accept the
amendment submitted by the delegation of Thailand?
278. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador): Yes.
279. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In that case, we shall vote first on the preamble to the
draft resolution of El Salvador, since the sponsor of the
draft resolution has requested a vote on the separate
pal1s of the proposal and a vote by roU-caU on the
operative part.
The preamble was rejected by 15 votes to 12, with
20 abstentions.
280. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) : This is the first
time that I cannot be in agreement with the President,
because, exercising my right as a representative of a
Member State, I requested that the vote be taken paragraph by paragraph on the preamble and on aU parts of
the operative sections. Also, I requested a nominal
vote, that is to say, a vote by roll-call on the two last
parts of the operative section. Either my proposal has
been disl'egarde;d or there has been a mistake, and that
mistake should be corrected. Otherwise, the right of a
delegation would be ignored.
281. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I respect the rights of all delegations; but if I misunderstood the representative of El Salvador, he also misunderstood me. I said that he had requested a separate
vote on the different parts of the proposal and a vote
by roll-eaU on the operative part; he agrees with me on
that point. Now he says that he requested a vote paragraph by paragraph on the first part of the proposal
also. I am now in a rather embarrassing position, since
I mt',t now put again to the vote the paragraphs of his
draft resolution on which a vote has already· been
taken. In any event, I shall call for a vote on the operative part paragraph by paragraph and by roll-call.
282. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador): The President
may insist on his ruling and impose his ri~ht as the
President, but, in fact, he has disregarded a specific
request, a request which was written in the paper which
I read. I requested that my draft resolution should be
voted on paragraph by paragraph and that there should
be Cl. roll-call vote on the two last paragraphs of the
operative part. I had reasons for that. Some representatives have ~tated that they have no objection to some
paragraphs of the preamble, but that they have objections to the last paragraph of the preamble and to
paragraph 2 of the operative part of the draft resolution. If the wl~ole preamble is put to the vote, therefore,
those representatives will naturaUy vote a~ainst the
whole preamble because they object to the last paragraph.
283. If nothing can be done now because it is too late,
I just want to pla<;e on record that, as soon as the President said he was going to put the whole preamble to
the vote, I raised my hand on a point of order. Unfortunately, that was not seen, and now I do not know
whether the President will try to right the wrong or
whether he will let the wrong remain.
284. Mr. PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
appeal to the members of the General Assembly: will

587

they agree to a new vote being taken, in order to $atisfy
the representative of El Salvador? This is a personal
appeal on my part, qnd I will say immediately that if
any delegation objects, the vote will stand as taken.
But if Member~ will accede to my request, I shall be
very grateful.
285. I understand tb'at the Assembly acce4es to my
request, and I thank tlie M:embers. We shall now proceed to vote on the draft ~esolution [A/1585] paragraph
by paragraph.
'.
Paragraph 1 of the preamble was adopted by 14 votes
to 8, with 2;1 abstentions.
Paragraph 2 of the preamble was adopted by 15 votes
to 7, with 22 ab'stentions.
Paragraph 3 of the preamble was adopted by 14 fJotes
to 10, with 19 abstentions.
Paragraph 4 of the IfJrea:mble was rejected by·ZO fJotes
to 7, with 22 tlbstentions.
286. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote, paragraph by paragraph, on the
three paragraphs of the operative part of the draft
resolution.
Paragraph 1 of the operative part was adopted b, 16
votes to 6, with 25 abstentions.
287. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): A
roll-call vote on paragraph 2 of the operative part has
been requested by the El Salvadorcan delegation.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Denmark, having been drawn by lot by the Presiclenfl
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Egypt, El Salvador, Greece, Panama,
Saudi Arabia, Thailand, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Burma, Cuba.
Against: Denmark, France, Iceland, India, Iran,
Israel, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of South Africa,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Yugoslavia, Australia, Belgium, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile,
Czechoslovakia.
Abstaining: Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, Syria, Turkey, Afghanistan, Bolivia, Brazil,
China, Colombia.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part was rejected by 27
votes to 11, with 16 absten.tions.
288. The PRESIDENT (t'ranslated from French):
We shall now vote, by roll-call, on paragraph 3 of the
operative part of the draft resolution.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Belgium, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called ·upon to vote first.
In favour: Bolivia, Burma, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Greece, Iran, Panama, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina.

S88

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

Against: Belgium, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, India, Israel,
Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia, Australia.
Abstaining: Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
France, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Union of SI)uth AfriLd., United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Afghanistan.
The result of the 'Vote was 18 in favour, 15 against,
and 21 abstentions.
289. The 'PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In my vpinion, ,;ince this paragraph has financial impliI cations, a two-thirds majority is required for its
adoption.
Paragraph 3 was n:;t adopted, having failed to obtain
the required two-thirds majority.
290. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote, as a whole, 011 those paragraphs of

-

the draft resolution which have been adopted, that is
paragraphs 1~ 2 and 3 of the preamble and paragraph i
of the operative part.

The draft resolution as a whole was rejected by 19
'Votes to 13, with 19 abstentions.

291. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
will remind the Assembly that, in two resolutions
adopted on 1 and 2 December [314th and 315th meet~
ings], and concerning, respectively, relief and rehabili..
tation for Korea [A/1595] and relief for Palestine
refugees [A/1603] the Assembly entrusted to the
President the appointment of a negotiating committee.
292. I have appointed the fonowing States to this
Committee: Canada, Egypt, France, India, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, and Uruguay. I request the
members of this Committee to meet as soon as possible
to begin their consultations.
The mee~ing rose at 6.55 p.m.

~-~----:------------_._-------------------~
Printe;~ in U.S.A.
A-40464-February 1951-3,600
