A/RES/77/219

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 68 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for improving
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 15 December 2022
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/77/463/Add.2, para. 87)]

77/219.

Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
and the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocols thereto, 2 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 3 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto, 4 the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance,5 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 8 as well as all other relevant international
treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council that
are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justice, including

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 1465 and 2375, No. 24841.
5
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
6
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
1
2

22-28963 (E)

110123

*2228963*

A/RES/77/219

Human rights in the administration of justice

General Assembly resolution 75/185 of 16 December 2020 and Human Rights
Council resolutions 37/22 of 23 March 2018 9 and 42/11 of 26 September 2019, 10
Recalling also its resolution 74/306 of 11 September 2020, recognizing the
primary responsibility of Governments to adopt and implement responses to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that are specific to their national context,
and that emergency measures, policies and strategies put in place by countries to
address and mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 must be targeted, necessary,
transparent, non-discriminatory, time-bound, proportionate and in accordance with
their obligations under applicable international human rights law, and reaffirming the
obligation of States in this regard, in accordance with article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities, 11
Reaffirming the importance of international standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice, including in relation to drug-related crimes, as
recognized by Member States in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session
of the General Assembly, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing
and countering the world drug problem”, 12
Welcoming the work of all special procedures of the Human Rights Council that
address human rights in the administration of justice in the discharge of their
mandates,
Taking note of the work of the human rights treaty body mechanisms on human
rights in the administration of justice, inter alia, of general comments No. 21 (1992)
on humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty, 13 No. 32 (2007) on the right
to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial 14 and No. 35 (2014) on liberty
and security of person, 15 adopted by the Human Rights Committee, general comments
No. 13 (2011) on the right of the child to freedom from all forms of violence 16 and
No. 24 (2019) on children’s rights in the child justice system, 17 adopted by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, general recommendation No. 31 (2005) on the
prevention of racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the
criminal justice system, 18 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, general recommendation No. 33 (2015) on women’s access to
justice, 19 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, and general comments No. 1 (2014) on equal recognition before the law, 20
No. 6 (2018) on equality and non-discrimination 21 and No. 7 (2018) on the
participation of persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
10
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
11
A/77/213.
12
Resolution S-30/1, annex.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty -seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
14
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40), vol. I, annex VI.
15
CCPR/C/GC/35.
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty -seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41),
annex V.
17
CRC/C/GC/24.
18
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18), chap. IX.
19
CEDAW/C/GC/33.
20
CRPD/C/GC/1 and CRPD/C/GC/1/Corr.1.
21
CRPD/C/GC/6.
9

2/10

22-28963

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/77/219

their representative organizations, in the implementation and monitoring of the
Convention, 22 adopted by the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Developm ent
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peace Operations
of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Taking note with appreciation of the International Principles and Guidelines on
Access to Justice for Persons with Disabilities, which are the product of joint work
by the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities, the Committee
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Special Envoy of the Secretary General on Disability and Accessibility,
Recalling the adoption of the Kyoto Declaration on Advancing Crime
Prevention, Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law: Towards the Achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 23 adopted at the Fourteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Kyoto, Japan,
from 7 to 12 March 2021,
Encouraging continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best
practices and the provision of technical assistance in the field of child justice, and
noting in this regard the panel discussion on “Upholding the human rights of
prisoners, including women prisoners and offenders: enhancing technical cooperation
and capacity-building in the implementation of the Nelson Mandela Rules and the
Bangkok Rules”, held during the forty-fourth session of the Human Rights Council,
Recognizing the needs of women and girls in detention or imprisonment,
including their health-care needs, and noting the importance of gender- and agesensitive justice systems and a victim- and survivor-centred approach in addressing
all forms of violence, including sexual and gender-based violence,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system, as well as an independent legal profession, are
essential prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good
governance and democracy and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the
administration of justice and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations and to challenge the lawfulness of
detention before a court,
Emphasizing that the equal right to access to justice for all, which could include
access to legal aid, forms an important basis for strengthening the rule of law through
the administration of justice,
Underlining the importance of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 24 and recognizing the role of the relevant Sustainable Development
Goals for eliminating discrimination in the administration of justice,

__________________

CRPD/C/GC/7.
Resolution 76/181, annex.
24
Resolution 70/1.
22
23

22-28963

3/10

A/RES/77/219

Human rights in the administration of justice

Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,
Recognizing the rapid advances in the design, development and use of digital
technologies in various aspects of criminal justice systems, including the pretrial
stage, during trials as well as after convictions,
Encouraging law enforcement, criminal justice and other relevant institutions
to effectively and appropriately employ new and advanced technologies as tools
against crime with adequate and effective safeguards to prevent the misuse and abuse
of these technologies in this regard,
Recognizing the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful
limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons
deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Concerned about the negative impact of overincarceration and overcrowding on
the enjoyment of human rights, and acknowledging that overincarceration constitutes
one of the major underlying causes of overcrowding,
Emphasizing that the penitentiary system should provide the possibility of
reform and social rehabilitation of the offender in all appropriate cases, and that
punishment should be dealt with in the larger framework of a criminal justice system
that provides the possibility of reinsertion and reintegration of the offender into
society,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation and reintegration of persons deprived of
their liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring,
as far as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law-abiding and self-supporting
life upon their return to society,
Underlining that, where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized,
prejudice and discrimination in the administration of justice may result in their
overincarceration and overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice system, and
recognizing the need for States to take measures, within the justice system,
particularly the criminal justice system, to prevent discrimination, inter alia, against
persons with disabilities and persons belonging to national or ethnic, religi ous and
linguistic minorities and to increase their effective participation within the system,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles, women, persons with disabilities, older persons, Indigenous
Peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants, persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and people who are in vulnerable
situations in the administration of justice, in particular while they are deprive d of
their liberty, and their risk of facing various forms of violence, abuse, injustice and
humiliation,
Reaffirming that children who are victims and witnesses of crime and violence
are particularly vulnerable and require special protection, assistance and support
appropriate to their age, level of maturity and needs, in order to prevent further
hardship and trauma that may result from their participation in the criminal justice
process,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while they were children associated with armed forces or armed
groups,

4/10

22-28963

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/77/219

Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all actions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all matters
concerning the child related to the sentencing of the parents, or, where applicable,
legal guardians or primary caregivers,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on human rights in the administration of justice, including on the situation of
women and girls; 25
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on violence, death and serious injury in situations
of deprivation of liberty, 26 as well as previous reports on human rights in the
administration of justice submitted to the Human Rights Council;
3.
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice, and invites
States to assess their national legislation and practice against those standards;
4.
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national capacities and
infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
5.
Expresses concern that persons with disabilities may experience
disproportionately high levels of unlawful and arbitrary deprivation of liberty, and
recalls that persons with disabilities should not be deprived of their liberty unlawfully
or arbitrarily, and that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their liberty through
any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled to guarantees in
accordance with international human rights law, including by provision of reasonable
accommodation;
6.
Appeals to Governments to include, in their efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and in their national development plans, the
effective administration of justice and equal access to justice for all as an integral part
of the development process, with a view to promoting and protecting human rights,
and to allocate adequate resources for effective, fair, humane and accountable justice
systems, including the provision of legal aid services, and invites the international
community to respond favourably to requests for financial and technical assistance
for the enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
7.
Reaffirms the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective into the
criminal justice system by promoting measures that address the specific needs of both
offenders and victims, including the protection of women and girls from
revictimization in criminal justice proceedings;
8.
Urges States, bearing in mind national priorities, to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women at all levels, including in institutions of
governance and in the judicial system, and to secure their empowerment and full and
equal access to justice without discrimination, including through taking legislative
and practical measures to eliminate barriers, dismantle related stereotypes and ensure
the equality of women and girls in the administration of justice and maximum
protection for women and girls deprived of their liberty from all forms of violence;
9.
Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, and through the encouragement
__________________
25
26

22-28963

A/77/364.
A/HRC/42/20.
5/10

A/RES/77/219

Human rights in the administration of justice

of independence, accessibility, accountability and transparency in the judiciary, in
order to establish and maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post -conflict
situations, and welcomes the role of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting the establishment and functioning of
transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict situations;
10. Reaffirms that no one should be unlawfully or arbitrarily deprived of
liberty, and notes that any deprivation should observe the principles of necessity and
proportionality in this regard;
11. Calls upon States to apply individual criminal responsibility and to refrain
from detaining persons based solely on their family ties with an alleged offender;
12. Also calls upon States to ensure that anyone who is deprived of liberty
through arrest or detention has prompt access to a competent court with the effective
power to determine the lawfulness of the detention and to order release if the detention
or imprisonment is determined not to be lawful and prompt access to legal counsel,
which could include legal aid schemes, in accordance with their international
obligations and commitments;
13. Calls upon all States to consider establishing, maintaining or enhancing
independent national mechanisms with the mandate to monitor all places of detention,
including by making unannounced visits, and to hold private interviews without
witnesses with all persons deprived of liberty, inter alia, in line with the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules); 27
14. Emphasizes the importance of States’ keeping under systematic review
rules, instructions, methods and practices on interviewing, as well as arrangements
for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment under their jurisdiction, including by taking into account, as
appropriate, the Principles on Effective Interviewing for Investigations and
Information Gathering (the Méndez Principles);
15. Calls upon States to ensure a proper file and data management system on
prisoners that allows the tracking of the number of persons deprived of their liberty,
their detention period, offences or grounds for detention, and developments regarding
the prison population, and encourages States to collect other up-to-date,
comprehensive and disaggregated data, including on women’s and children’s needs
and challenges in accessing justice, that allow for the identification and prevention of
discrimination in the administration of justice and overincarceration;
16. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with the ir obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
17. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty, including in police custody, that
amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
18. Calls upon States to investigate promptly, effectively and impartially all
alleged human rights violations suffered by persons deprived of their liberty, in
particular cases involving death, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, to provide effective remedy to the victims, in accordance with their
international obligations and commitments, and to ensure that detention
__________________
27

6/10

Resolution 70/175, annex.
22-28963

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/77/219

administrations fully cooperate with the investigating authority and preserve all
evidence;
19. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial detention,
which should be a measure of last resort and for as short a period as possible, inter
alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and policies on its
preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking measures aimed at
the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring access to justice and
legal advice and assistance, which could include legal aid schemes;
20. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities, bearing
in mind the various impacts of COVID-19 on persons deprived of their liberty, by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the availability and use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences, bearing in mind the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules) 28
and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), 29 access to legal aid, mechanisms
for crime prevention, early release and rehabilitation programmes and the efficiency as
well as the capacity of the criminal justice system and its facilities, bearing in mind
the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal
Justice Systems; 30
21. Urges States to take all measures, including those related to the use of
digital technologies, necessary to prevent and eliminate discrimination in law and in
practice against persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized in the
administration of justice that may also result in their overincarceration and
overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice process;
22. Also urges States to pay special attention to the conditions of detention or
imprisonment of persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized and to their
particular needs;
23. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the Bangkok Rules
when developing and implementing relevant legislation, procedures, pol icies and
action plans, and invites relevant special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the
High Commissioner, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and all other
relevant organizations to take those rules into consideration in their activitie s;
24. Encourages States to review penal policies that can contribute to
overincarceration and overcrowding, in particular regarding so-called “zero-tolerance
policies”, such as the application of mandatory pretrial detention and mandatory
minimum sentences, especially for minor and/or non-violent crimes;
25. Recognizes that all children and juveniles alleged as, accused of or
recognized as having infringed the law, particularly those who are deprived of their
liberty, as well as child victims and witnesses of crimes, should be treated in a manner
consistent with their rights, dignity and needs, in accordance with international law,
bearing in mind relevant international standards on human rights in the administration
of justice, taking into account also the age, gender, social circumstances and
development needs of such children, and calls upon States parties to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and States parties to the Optional Protocols to the
Convention 31 to abide strictly by their principles and respective provisions;

__________________

Resolution 45/110, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
30
Resolution 67/187, annex.
31
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171, 2173 and 2983, No. 27531.
28
29

22-28963

7/10

A/RES/77/219

Human rights in the administration of justice

26. Takes note with appreciation of the global study on children deprived of
liberty 32 and the leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Violence against Children in the follow-up to the study in cooperation with the other
entities in the United Nations inter-agency task force and the non-governmental
organization panel, and in this regard encourages Member States, United Nations
agencies, funds, programmes and offices, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to
consider the follow-up to and recommendations of the global study;
27. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so and to develop and implement a comprehensive
and coordinated justice policy for children that prioritizes prevention and early
intervention to prevent and address juvenile delinquency and to address risks and
causes for children’s contact with the juvenile and/or criminal justice system by
providing necessary support through child protection systems that encompass social
protection, education and physical and mental health, as well as with a view to
promoting, inter alia, the use of alternative measures, such as diversion and
restorative justice, in cases where a child commits a crime, and complying with the
principle that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only a s a measure of
last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, wherever
possible, the use of pretrial detention for children;
28. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in justice policies, in particular through the provision of gendersensitive education and life skills programmes, as well as treatment and services for
substance abuse and mental health needs, in line with relevant commitments and
obligations under international human rights law, with a view to their assuming a
constructive role in society;
29. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system, including within the informal justice system, where
it exists, and to consider applying the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, 33 as appropriate, in the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of laws, policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms
aimed at eliminating violence against children in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice, and encourages States to support and to benefit, as appropriate, from
the programme proposed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Children’s Fund in this regard;
30. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under 18 years
of age, and encourages States to consider repealing all other forms of lif e
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
31. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intellectual
maturity of the child, and in this respect notes the recommendation of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child to increase the minimum age of criminal responsibility to
at least 14 years as the absolute minimum age, and to continue to increase it to a
higher age level;34

__________________

A/74/136.
Resolution 69/194, annex.
34
See CRC/C/GC/24.
32
33

8/10

22-28963

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/77/219

32. Also encourages States to gather relevant information, including through
data collection and research, concerning children within their criminal justice systems
so as to improve their administration of justice, while being mindful of the children’s
right to privacy, with full respect for relevant international human rights instruments,
and bearing in mind applicable international standards on human rights in the
administration of justice;
33. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact on
children of imprisonment or other sentences imposed upon their parents, while noting
with interest the convening of and reports on all relevant meetings and panel
discussions on these issues held by the Human Rights Council; 35
34. Calls upon States to take effective and appropriate measures to remove all
barriers preventing persons with disabilities from having effective access to justice
on an equal basis with others and without discrimination;
35. Encourages States to ensure equal access to justice for persons with
disabilities through the provision of accessible information and communications,
physical accessibility to relevant premises, gender- and age-appropriate
accommodations that take into account their will and legal counselling, and, where
applicable, free or subsidized and accessible legal aid, and to deploy efforts to enable
the meaningful and equal participation of persons with disabilities throughout all
stages of the judicial process;
36. Calls upon States to ensure effective access to justice for persons with
disabilities when investigating, prosecuting and punishing persons responsible for
human rights violations and abuses committed against them, including by providing
effective remedies, taking into consideration, on an equal basis with others, the
specific circumstances of the person with disabilities, as well as by implementing
systemic changes, legal and policy reforms and capacity-building where needed in
order to ensure non-repetition;
37. Invites States to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human rights
training, including anti-racist, anti-discriminatory, multicultural, disability-inclusive,
gender-sensitive and child rights training, as well as on the implications of the use of
digital technologies in the field of criminal justice in this regard, to all judges,
lawyers, prosecutors, social workers, immigration, correction and police officers and
other professionals concerned, including personnel deployed in international field
presences;
38. Also invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance provided by the relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order
to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration
of justice;
39. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to reinforce their technical assistance to States, upon request and
in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen the national capacity building of States in the field of the administration of justice, in particular in postconflict situations, and in this context to strengthen cooperation with relevant United
Nations entities;
40. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary-General to
further streamline and strengthen system-wide coordination and coherence of
__________________
35

22-28963

A/HRC/21/31 and A/HRC/25/33.
9/10

A/RES/77/219

Human rights in the administration of justice

programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
including through the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary General and the global focal point arrangement for the police, justice and corrections
areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations;
41. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
42. Also invites States, when reviewing progress made in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to consider the possibility of
looking into the causes and effects of overincarceration and overcrowding, including,
where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized, with regard to
non-discrimination and persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized in
the administration of justice;
43. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council, as well as relevant treaty bodies, to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administration of justice,
and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific recommendations in this regard,
including proposals for advisory services and technical assistance measures;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a report on the latest developments, challenges and good
practices in human rights in the administration of justice, including on the application
of digital technologies in the administration of justice, and on the activities
undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole;
45. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its seventy-ninth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
54th plenary meeting
15 December 2022

10/10

22-28963
