General Assembly-Thirty-second SPssion

162

can Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary session devoted to the question of Western
Sahara, 3
Recalling also its resolution 3412 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,

l. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of
self-determination of peoples in accordance with the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Expresses the hope that a just and lasting solutior :0 the problem ur Western Sahara will be speedily
achieved, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, at the extraordinary
session of the Organization of African Unity devoted
to this question, to be held shortly in accordance with
the decisions taken at the thirteenth 3 and fourteenth 4
ordinary sessions of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity;
3. Decides to resume consideration of the question
of Western Sahara at its thirty-third session;
4. Requests the Spedal Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to keep developments in this matter
under review and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
5. Requests the Administratjve Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the
Secretary-General of the United Nations of the progress
achieved in the implementation of the decisions of
the Organization of African Unity concerning Western
Sahara, and invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to report on the question to the General Assembly as soon as possible and not later than at its
thirty-third session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/23.

Question of the Gilbert Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peopks,5
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having heard the statcmc'.lt of the administering
Power relating to developments in th.~ Territory,H
3 See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, rc:so!ution AHG/Res.81
(XUI). For the printed text, see Ofjici11l i<ccords of the Security Council, Th;rty-first Yt·ar. S11ppleme111 for July, August
and September 1976.
4 See A/32/310, annex !I.
5 Official Records of tlz~ G encral Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 ( A/32/23 /Rev. I), vol. 1, chap. 111.
and vol. Ill, chap. XIX.
6 Ibid., Thirty-second Srssion, Fourth Commiltee, 12th meeting, paras. 12-2 l.

Noting with satisfaction that the Gilbert Islands attained full internal self-government on 1 January 1977,
to be followed by a general election to be held no later
than 13 August 1978 and by a constitutional conference prior to independence,
Notinrt further that the constitutional conference to
be held in preparation for independence, to which repfl'sent:Hivcs of the B,maban community will be invited,
will take into account the special rights and interests
of the Banaban community,
Bearing in m!nd that the phosphate resources of the
Territory will soon be exhausted,
1. A ,,proves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implement:1tion of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Gilbert Tslands; 7
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gi:bert Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Grantirig of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Exnresses the hope that the constitutional conference will lead to independence for the Gilbert Islands in accordance with the Decbration and that the
constitution to be agreed upon will respect the special
rights and interests of the Banahan community;
4. Requests that steps be taken towards diversifying
the economy of the Territory and that the administering
Power continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, as well as of regional bodies, in the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert Islands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/24,.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and People~, 8
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting nf
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to American Samoa,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to developments in American Samoa.1'
7 !bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rcv.1), vol. III, chap. XIX.
.s //,id .. vol. I, chap. 111, and vol. Ill, chap. XXI.
11 Ibid .. Thirt\·-,1ccond Session, Fourth Commitlce, 17th meeting, paras. 47-50.

VII.

Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSelf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such visiting missions is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in those Territories
and to the views, wishes and aspirations of the p:::oples therein with respect to their future status,
Mindful that American Samoa requires the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by its people of the objectives cmbodicJ
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying
its economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce
its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to American Samoa; 10
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people,
to continue to take all the necessary steps to 'ensure
the full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure that the culture and identity of the
people of the Territory continue to be reflected in the
Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation with neighbouring is'.and communities;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of Americc1n
Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
8. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United Nations visiting missions and reques:s the Chairman of
the S?ecial Committee to continue his consultations
with a view to the dispatch of such a mi,,sion to the
Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of American Samoa, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resource.,
10 Ibid.,

163

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fonrth Committee

Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. III, chap. XXI.

by taking •effective measures which guarantee the right
of the people to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of
their future development;
10. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accekrating progress in all sectors of the national
life in American Samoa;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek the best ways and means for the implementation of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
including the possibie dispatch of a visiting mission
in consultation with the administering Power and in
acco;dance with the wishes of the people of the Territory, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session on the implementation of the present
resolution.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/2.'i.

Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Speoial Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 1~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countr,ies and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 46 of 1 December
1976 on the question of the Solomon Islands,
Noting with satisfaction that an agreement was
reached at a constitutional conference, held in London
from 6 to 16 September 1977, between the administering Power and the Solomon Islands delegation, led by
its Chief Minister, whereby the Territory will achieve
independence in July I 978,
Noting w:th satisfaction that the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
will continue to provide as~istance to the Territory
after independence,
1. Approve:. the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of l11dcp-:ndene-:: to Colo:1ial Countries and Peoples relating to
tll•; Solomon Islands;

2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the people ot
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in ,1ccordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and PeopLs;
1 t I bid .. chap. XVI.
12 Ibid., Thirty-second Session,

ing, paras. 12-21.

Fourth Committee, 12th meet-
