A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/183
29 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.3)]
54/183. Situation of human rights in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
International Covenants on Human Rights2 and other human rights instruments,
Bearing in mind Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998, 1199 (1998) of
23 September 1998, 1203 (1998) of 24 October 1998, 1239 (1999) of 14 May 1999 and 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999, and the general principles annexed to that resolution, as well as the statement made on
24 March 1998 by the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights at the fifty-fourth session of the
Commission,3 Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1998/79 of 22 April 19984 and 1999/2 of 13 April
19995 and the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Bureau of the
Commission on the situation of human rights in Kosovo of 7 September 1999,

1
2

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. III,
sect. E, para. 28.
4

Ibid., chap. II, sect. A.

5

Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A.

00 31436

/...

A/RES/54/183
Page 2

Recalling, against the background of years of repression, intolerance and violence in Kosovo, the
challenge to build a multi-ethnic society on the basis of substantial autonomy, respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), pending final settlement
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
Taking fully into account the regional dimensions of the crisis in Kosovo, in particular with regard to
the human rights and humanitarian situation and the continuing problems in that regard, and noting that the
return of refugees to their homes has contributed to the easing of this crisis,
Taking note with concern of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro),6 which describes the persistent and grave violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law in Kosovo,
Condemning the grave violations of human rights in Kosovo that affected ethnic Albanians prior to the
arrival of personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and troops of the
international security presence, the Kosovo Force, as demonstrated in the many reports of torture,
indiscriminate and widespread shelling, mass forced displacement of civilians, summary executions and
illegal detention of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo by the Yugoslav police and military,
Deeply concerned, in spite of the efforts of the Mission and the Force, about the frequent instances of
harassment, periodic kidnapping and murder of ethnic Serb, Roma and other minorities of Kosovo by ethnic
Albanian extremists,
Expressing concern that the entire population of Kosovo has been affected by the conflict, and stressing
that all of the national minorities there must benefit from their full and equal rights,
Stressing, in this context, the importance of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Distressed by the lack of due process in the trials in Serbia of the ethnic Albanians who have been
detained, charged or brought to trial in relation to the crisis in Kosovo in violation of international human
rights standards,
Stressing the urgent need to implement effective measures to stop trafficking in women and children,
1. Underlines the obligation of the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to abide by the terms of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the general principles on
the political solution to the Kosovo crisis adopted on 6 May 1999 and annexed to that resolution;
2. Reaffirms that the human rights and humanitarian crisis in Kosovo shall be addressed within the
framework of a political solution based upon the general principles annexed to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999);

6

A/54/396–S/1999/1000 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/54/183
Page 3

3. Welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, and calls upon all parties in Kosovo and the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to cooperate fully with the Mission and the Force in the fulfilment of
their respective mandates;
4. Also welcomes the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Kosovo and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
5. Calls upon all parties in Kosovo to cooperate with the Mission in ensuring full respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms and democratic norms in Kosovo;
6. Calls upon all authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), the local
Serb leaders in Kosovo and the leaders of the Albanian community in Kosovo to condemn all acts of
terrorism, sequestration or kidnapping and forced eviction from homes or places of work of any resident of
Kosovo, whatever the ethnic background of the victim and whoever the perpetrators, to refrain from all acts
of violence and to use their influence and leadership to cooperate with the Force and the Mission in stopping
these incidents and in bringing the perpetrators to justice;
7. Expresses its concern about the forced division of any part of Kosovo into ethnic cantons or
ethnically based divisions of any type, which is counter to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and to
the guiding principles of Rambouillet,7 and stresses the need for all parties in Kosovo to take all necessary
measures to stop or reverse any action that de facto or de jure permits such ethnic cantonization;
8. Calls upon all parties, in particular the authorities and representatives of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and the Kosovar Serb and Albanian leaderships, to cooperate with the
Mine Action Coordination Centre;
9. Demands that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
provide an updated list of all persons detained and transferred from Kosovo to other parts of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), specifying the charge, if any, under which each individual
is detained, and that it guarantee their families and non-governmental organizations and international
observers unimpeded and regular access to those who remain in detention and release all individuals detained
and transferred from Kosovo prior to July 1999 in violation of international humanitarian and human rights
standards;
10. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to open
to public observation trials or criminal prosecutions against all those charged in relation to the conflict in
Kosovo;
11. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and
ethnic Kosovar Serb and Albanian representatives to allow for and to facilitate the free and unhindered return
to their homes, in safety and with dignity, of all displaced persons and refugees, of whichever ethnic
background, and expresses its concern about reports of continuing harassment or other impediments in this
regard;
7

See S/1999/648, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/183
Page 4

12. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to return
or to facilitate the fair, unbiased and accurate restoration or reconstruction of Kosovar documentation and
legal records taken or destroyed during the conflict;
13. Stresses the importance of and the responsibility of all parties to create a secure environment in
Kosovo that will allow refugees and displaced persons to return and allow all those who wish to remain in
Kosovo a genuine possibility to do so, irrespective of their ethnic origin;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his humanitarian efforts in Kosovo through the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, other appropriate humanitarian organizations and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and to continue to take the urgent practical steps to meet the critical needs
of the people in Kosovo and to assist in the voluntary return of displaced persons to their homes in conditions
of safety and dignity;
15. Encourages the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 to continue investigations at all levels concerning official individuals
or private citizens with regard to serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in Kosovo,
and reaffirms that the investigation of such crimes falls within the jurisdiction of the Office;
16. Demands that the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and
the Kosovar Serb and Albanian leaderships and all others concerned cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and honour all obligations towards it;
17. Reiterates its call upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to live up to their commitment to provide financial and material assistance to those residents
of Kosovo whose homes have been damaged;
18. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
provide information on the fate and the whereabouts of the high number of missing persons from Kosovo,
and encourages the International Committee of the Red Cross to pursue its clarification efforts in this regard,
in cooperation with other organizations such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
19. Encourages the ongoing cooperation provided by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) regarding the visits to some two thousand prisoners, mainly of Kosovar Albanian origin, carried
out by the International Committee of the Red Cross and held under the authority of the Ministry of Justice
of Serbia;
20. Welcomes the efforts made by the international community, and calls for continuing support for
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other agencies engaged in the effort
to provide those in need in Kosovo with proper accommodation, in particular with a view to facilitating the
preparation and provision of adequate winter accommodation;
21. Urges all parties involved in Kosovo to support the efforts of the United Nations Children’s Fund
to ensure that all children in Kosovo return to school as soon as possible and to contribute to the rebuilding
and repair of schools destroyed or damaged during the conflict in Kosovo;

/...

A/RES/54/183
Page 5

22. Calls for the most rapid and full deployment of United Nations police and for the creation of a
multi-ethnic local police force throughout Kosovo, as a key step towards guaranteeing respect for law and
order and for creating a safe environment for all inhabitants of Kosovo;
23. Condemns any effort, on behalf of any ethnic group, to create any sort of parallel institutions for
Kosovar Serb and Albanian populations, be they police, school, administrative or other institutions, and calls
upon the Mission and the Force to prevent any such institutions from being formed;
24. Requests the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human
rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia
and Montenegro) to continue to monitor closely the situation of human rights in Kosovo, to pay special
attention to Kosovo in his reporting and to report his findings to the Commission on Human Rights at its
fifty-sixth session and to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
