S/PV.9180

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9180th meeting

Wednesday, 2 November 2022, 4.50 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Asokan
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66921 (E)
*2266921*

S/PV.9180

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/821, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian Federation.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The upcoming vote is a considerable
milestone for the Security Council. We will have
to decide whether the Council shows readiness to
act in line with international law, in this specific
case, with the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
their Destruction (BWC). We explained our positions
in this regard in detail at the Security Council meeting
held on 27 October (see S/PV.9171). I am not going to
repeat them.
After that meeting, we conducted two rounds of
expert consultations on the draft resolution contained
in document S/2022/821, but what we heard from
our former Western partners — only the old talking
points about so-called Russian propaganda and
their statements that the evidence we provided is not
sufficiently convincing and that it does not merit
further consideration — were conclusions that they
arrived at unilaterally, prejudging any outcomes that
could issue from the Security Council, and in essence
they replaced the decisions about to be taken by the key
body of the United Nations responsible for maintaining
international peace and security with their own biased
national assessments.
We regret the fact that our Western colleagues
essentially derailed the negotiations on the draft
resolution. It became obvious that Western countries are
simply fearful of establishing the kind of commission
that would consider the materials presented by Russia
2/8

02/11/2022

and will investigate them, as provided for in the BWC.
In particular, they are not satisfied with the fact
that this commission will consist of all members of
Security Council because they are trying to unilaterally
make decisions on behalf of the entire international
community. Indeed, they are also not satisfied with
other forms of international cooperation because they
do not fit in with the concept they are promoting: the
so-called rules-based order where the rules are to be set
by themselves.
The accusations against us by Western countries
and Ukraine without providing any evidence
whatsoever are immediately presented as the absolute
truth. Whenever we voice any kind of concern with
supporting documentation, we are immediately accused
of spreading propaganda. Generally speaking, Western
countries remember the United Nations Charter and
international law only when they need to. The idea that
such norms could be or should be applied to them as
well sparks categorical rejection among our Western
colleagues. Work on the draft resolution was a very
eloquent illustration of that fact.
We expect that respect for the standards of
international law, including the BWC, will prevail in the
Council today. Those delegations that are committed
to upholding those standards and which are not afraid
of taking an independent stance that could anger
Washington and its satellites will support our draft.
The President: I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
France, United States of America, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab Emirates
The President: The draft resolution received 2
votes in favour, 3 against and 10 abstentions.
The draft resolution has not been adopted, having
failed to obtain the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
22-66921

02/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are extremely disappointed by the
fact that the Security Council today did not manage
to activate the mechanism provided for under
Article VI of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
their Destruction (BWC). Let me recall that, according
to section 2 of Article VI,
“[e]ach State Party to this Convention undertakes to
cooperate in carrying out any investigation which
the Security Council may initiate, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, on the basis of the complaint received by
the Council...”.
In the course of our work on the draft resolution,
Western countries demonstrated in every way that
the law does not apply to them and that they have no
intention of abiding by the provision I just quoted, and
for this so they are ready to trample on any norm or to
flout any rule. This is the usual colonialist mentality to
which we are accustomed, and we are not surprised by
it now.
Regardless of the outcome of the vote today, we
retain our questions for the United States and Ukraine
to answer, and the evidence that accompanied our
complaint still requires clarification. We will continue
to further act within the framework of the BWC and
make the efforts needed to establish all of the facts
having to do with the violations by the United States
and Ukraine of their obligations under the Convention
in the context of the activities of biological laboratories
on the territory of Ukraine. Sooner or later, all the
violators will be held accountable by the international
community for such illegal activities. In order to
ensure national, regional and global biosecurity, Russia
will unfailingly work on further strengthening the
regime of the Convention. We will make such efforts
during the ninth Review Conference of the BWC,
slated to take place in Geneva from 28 November to
16 December 2022.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico abstained from voting on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2022/821 for the
following reasons.
Mexico is not opposed to the Security Council
being seized of a situation covered by Article VI of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,

S/PV.9180

Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their
Destruction of 1970, and such a possibility should not
be ruled out in advance. The absence of a precedent in
the practice of the Security Council is not, in our view,
a reason to dismiss a priori the request contained in the
draft resolution that is the subject of today’s meeting.
However, the condition set forth in Article VI of the
Convention, namely, that the party alleging violations
of the Convention must provide credible evidence to
trigger an investigation at a later stage, has not been
met. This has not occurred either in the debate or in the
consultation process surrounding the draft resolution.
In our opinion, neither the terms nor the timing of the
draft resolution are likely to meet the requirements
of Article VI of the Convention. In the first place, it
is unrealistic to think that a commission such as the
one proposed could be set up, granted a mandate to
carry out an investigation and submit a report with
recommendations to the Security Council — all within
28 days.
Secondly, no State can be judge and jury of
any commission that claims to be independent and
objective. In this case, the Russian Federation should
be excluded, as it is one of the parties involved in the
armed conflict. Undoubtedly, the Security Council has
proven experience in investigating alleged programmes
of weapons of mass destruction. A good example
is the establishment in 1999 of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) in Iraq, pursuant to resolution 1284
(1999). In that resolution, the Council set out in great
detail the terms of reference and the mandate governing
UNMOVIC’s work, all of which was based on a series
of established facts.
Nevertheless, the forthcoming review conference
of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention is
the ideal forum to consider the points made by the
Russian Federation and, in particular, to generate the
agreements necessary to initiating the consideration of
a genuine verification mechanism for the Convention.
Mexico will participate actively in that conference
in order to advance towards the establishment of the
necessary institutional architecture for an objective,
rigorous and impartial assessment of allegations such
as those contained within the draft resolution, which,
for the reasons I mentioned, it is improper to support.

22-669213/8

S/PV.9180

Threats to international peace and security

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States voted against draft
resolution S/2022/821 because it is based on
disinformation, dishonesty, bad faith and a total lack of
respect for this organ.
The Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
is important. It addresses the grave threat posed
by biological weapons. The United States takes its
responsibilities seriously and fully complies with and
fulfils its obligations under the BWC. That includes
assisting partners around the world to strengthen global
health security and reduce the impact of infectious
diseases on their societies.
We cannot allow such life-saving cooperation to be
stigmatized. Russia tried and failed to claim that we had
violated the BWC at the article V meeting in Geneva
in September. Russia failed to provide any credible
evidence to support those false allegations. Despite
Russia’s abuse of the process and precisely because we
respect the BWC and its provisions, the United States
and Ukraine went through Russia’s allegations in
Geneva point by point and debunked every single one.
Russia knows that our cooperative threat-reduction
efforts are not for military purposes. We know that
Russia knows this because, for nearly two decades,
Russia participated in that very kind of cooperation
with us, including on biological threats.
The truth is that Russia’s questions are insincere,
and Russia is uninterested in our answer. Russia said
that this is a milestone, and it is. It is a milestone for
Russia’s deception and lies, and the world sees it.
An overwhelming number of State parties that spoke
at the Geneva meeting considered that the issues
raised by Russia were unsubstantiated and had been
conclusively addressed.
But that was not enough for Russia. Instead, when
Russia failed in Geneva, it inappropriately raised
the same false claims here, abusing its position and
abusing us. And Russia should not be surprised or
disappointed by what happened here today. Russia
showed zero appreciation for the precedent it has set
in invoking article VI of the BWC for the first time in
the Convention’s history, and as one can see from the
vote today, no one is buying it except China. I will not
devote any more time, energy or resources to those lies
from Russia, and neither should the rest of the Security
Council — not while troops still occupy Ukrainian
territory and not while Russian forces continue to attack
4/8

02/11/2022

Ukrainian civilians and commit war crimes. Instead
of letting Russia waste our time, we should focus on
the truth and the horrors Russia has inflicted upon the
Ukrainian people.
Mr. Asokan (India): India attaches high importance
to the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), which
is the first non-discriminatory disarmament treaty
banning a complete category of weapons of mass
destruction. We remain committed to enhancing
the effectiveness of the BWC and strengthening its
implementation in letter and spirit.
India participated in the article V consultations in
Geneva in September on the matter under consideration
today and has expressed our views on that issue. We
have also expressed them during previous Security
Council meetings. I reiterate that any matter
relating to the obligations under the BWC should be
addressed as per the provisions of the Convention and
through consultations and cooperation between the
relevant parties.
Nonetheless, India would like to underline the
important role of international cooperation in the
field of peaceful biological activities and the related
exchange of scientific and technical information. India
emphasizes the full and effective implementation
of article X of the Convention and underlines that
biological-related activities for peaceful purposes that
are fully consistent with the Convention’s obligations
should not be undermined. India also reiterates the
need to negotiate a comprehensive, legally binding
protocol providing for an effective universal and
non-discriminatory verification mechanism in order to
strengthen the implementation of the Convention. That
is necessary in order to strengthen the BWC and its
implementation by the State parties, and we hope that
the current situation will provide impetus for the early
consideration, negotiation and finalization of such a
protocol by the State parties.
Factoring in all of those aspects, India decided to
abstain in the voting on draft resolution S/2022/821.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Ireland upholds the right of
any State party to the Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention (BWC), under article VI, to bring a
complaint to the Security Council if it finds that
another State is acting in breach of its obligations under
the BWC.
22-66921

02/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

We duly listened to the complaint brought by the
Russian Federation. We consider that no substantive
or credible evidence has been presented by Russia to
support its allegations, either through the article V
consultative meeting in Geneva in September or in
materials submitted to the Security Council. As such,
the Russian Federation’s complaint has no validity. We
do not see the proposed investigation by the Council as
either justifiable or useful.
We therefore abstained in the voting on draft
resolution S/2022/821, which the Russian Federation
has brought to Council.
Ireland believes that this matter has been
comprehensively addressed through the provisions set
out in the Convention. Regrettably, Russia is attempting
to misuse the Convention and the Security Council as a
platform for its disinformation in an attempt to justify
its unjustifiable and unlawful invasion of Ukraine. We
ask Russia to stop these deeply cynical and harmful
actions, which risk undermining key multilateral arms
control agreements as well as international cooperation
into vital health research.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Just a few days ago, we had a
thorough discussion on the substance of the matter (see
S/PV.9171), the latest of a series of the same during the
year. We made our position clear, and it has not changed.
We take very seriously any and all issues related
to threats of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, anywhere and at any time. They are
prohibited by international law and must never be used
by anyone, under any circumstance. In that respect,
we remain convinced that the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) is a key element in the international
community’s efforts to address the proliferation of such
weapons, as the Convention has established a strong
norm against biological weapons.
As to draft resolution S/2022/821, presented by
the Russian Federation, it is our conviction that the
claims presented by Russia remain unsubstantiated
and uncorroborated. The Russian Federation has yet to
provide credible evidence to justify its requests for an
article VI investigation. As we have seen several times
during this year, no credible report thus far — none
whatsoever, including from the Office for Disarmament
Affairs — has shown that foreign assistance by one or
more countries to public health programmes in Ukraine
runs contrary to article X of the BWC or poses any
public health or security risks.

S/PV.9180

The result of the voting showed clearly that Russia
has still a long way to go and must provide convincing
information to the Council, instead of sticking with
its unconvincing claims. We therefore reiterate the
need for the BWC and its mechanism to be fully used
without any undue politicization, while supporting
constructive and much-needed public health assistance
and cooperation among Member States.
For all those reasons, Albania abstained in the
voting, and we welcome that all 10 non-permanent
members are united with the same position on that issue.
Finally, instead of misusing the Council and
polluting its work with disinformation and fantasies,
the Russian Federation must do the only right thing we
have been calling for incessantly — to stop the war,
get all of its occupying troops home and respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Lastly, if I heard correctly, the representative of
the Russian Federation said that those who would not
support his delegation’s draft resolution are satellites.
Russia must have felt well-served, since there were
quite a lot today: 13 out 15 members did not vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway abstained in
the voting on draft resolution S/2022/821, as we want to
avoid setting a negative precedent in the use of article
VI of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BWC). Russia’s complaint is not set forward in good
faith, and neither is the draft resolution before us.
Setting up a commission would be an abuse of the
Security Council’s time and resources. We therefore
find an abstention necessary in order to safeguard the
integrity of future good-faith requests under article VI.
Norway remains determined to uphold the total
ban on biological weapons. Allegations of violations
of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
are something we take seriously, and they merit our
scrutiny. Norway meticulously reviewed the documents
annexed to the Russian complaint under article VI
of the BWC. We note that it consists predominantly
of assertions, interpretations and conclusions by
the Russian Federation itself. The same accusations
were also dealt with in September during the formal
article V consultations. We listened carefully to
the representatives of Russia, the United States and
Ukraine. And Norway then, as now, reviewed the
documents provided by Russia in detail.

22-669215/8

S/PV.9180

Threats to international peace and security

However, no evidence has been put forward. In
fact, contrary to Russia’s assertions, the documentation
strongly suggests that the cited cooperation between
the United States and Ukraine indeed has a legitimate
peaceful purpose fully in line with the provisions on
international assistance and cooperation under article
X of the BWC. It is therefore our firm conclusion
that Russia has failed to demonstrate probable cause
for further investigative steps. Russia’s spurious
allegations do not justify a request for the consideration
of the Security Council under article VI of the BWC.
It is deeply problematic that the State that has
lodged the complaint with the Security Council itself
has taken the pen and submitted the draft resolution
that addresses the complaint. The process shows the
importance of ensuring that the Secretary-General’s
Mechanism for Investigation of the Alleged Use of
Chemical, Biological or Toxin Weapons retains its
independence and impartiality, free from the Security
Council’s veto mechanism.
I will conclude with an appeal to the Russian
Federation to end its relentless campaign of
disinformation and stop congesting the Council’s
agenda with patently unfounded requests related to the
situation in Ukraine.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom voted against draft resolution
S/2022/821 in order to protect the integrity of the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and to
prevent it from being undermined by unfounded
accusations. Russia has claimed that the United States,
Ukraine and their allies have failed to consider the
evidence they have presented. This is completely false.
Russia’s allegations of United States and Ukrainian
biological activities were given a full hearing in
September under Article V of the Convention. At that
meeting, Ukraine and the United States provided a
comprehensive response to Russia’s allegations. The
United Kingdom shared its own extensive technical
analysis of the evidence that Russia presented. Russia’s
allegations have no credible basis in fact.
Russia’s long-standing disinformation efforts
undermine peaceful biological cooperation under
article X, a vitally important aspect of the Convention.
We must defend peaceful biological cooperation
against unfounded malicious allegations. The United
Kingdom remains deeply committed to the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention. We value article VI as
6/8

02/11/2022

an important mechanism for States parties to address
real and valid concerns arising under the Convention.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya reaffirms its
commitment to the Biological Weapons Convention,
which remains the global norm against biological
weapons and a fundamental pillar of the international
community’s efforts to prevent their use. It is our
conviction that any actions that may undermine the
Convention, especially in a world grappling with
the effects of a pandemic, should be avoided. The
coronavirus disease has demonstrated the importance of
international cooperation and partnership in biological
research and technologies in accordance with article X
of the Convention.
Any actions that breed mistrust with regard to
such cooperation would be detrimental to global public
health. It is therefore important that the utmost respect
be given to the existing conventions and norms that
ensure that such cooperation remains unimpeded. As
we have said before, any credible allegations of the use
of any weapon of mass destruction should be treated
with the seriousness that they deserve and be duly,
transparently and impartially investigated. Such an
investigation would require that all parties concerned
have confidence and faith in the Secretariat to conduct
it in an independent, transparent and professional
manner. Kenya therefore abstained in the voting on
draft resolution S/2022/821.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China voted in favour of draft resolution S/2022/821,
submitted by the Russian Federation, in which article
VI of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) is
invoked requesting the Security Council to initiate an
investigation into compliance violation.
I would like to explain China’s position.
Biosecurity knows no borders and has an impact
on the common interests of all humankind. Since
March, Russia has repeatedly lodged complaints with
the Security Council with regard to the United States
suspected biomilitary activities in Ukraine, about
which China is gravely concerned. We believe that any
evidence or indications related to compliance issues
concerning the Convention should receive the full
attention of the international community and deserve
thorough and purposeful responses and clarifications
by the party concerned.
22-66921

02/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The BWC clearly provides for how to address
compliance concerns of its States parties, which
in September held a formal consultative meeting
under article V of the Convention and demonstrated
the aspiration shared by all parties to use the BWC
mechanism to clarify and resolve compliance issues.
It also sharply revealed the need to show unity in
dealing with security challenges against the backdrop
of international conflicts.
Regrettably, the series of questions raised by Russia
at the meeting were not fully answered. As such, in the
exercise of its right as a State party under article VI
of the Convention, as well as in accordance with the
final document of the previous Review Conference,
Russia submitted is complaints to the Council and
requested that the Council initiate an investigation,
which is reasonable and legitimate and should not be
blocked. China believes that a fair and transparent
investigation by the Council can effectively address
compliance concerns and help uphold the authority and
effectiveness of the Convention.
China has always advocated for a full prohibition
and thorough destruction of all weapons of mass
destruction, including biological weapons. We firmly
oppose the development, stockpiling or use of biological
weapons by any country and under any circumstances.
Last April, President Xi Jinping proposed the
Global Security Initiative, stressing the need for joint
international efforts to address global issues, including
biosecurity. To that end, China calls on all countries
to adhere to the concept of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security, to continue to
strengthen global cooperation on biosecurity and to
work together to overcome challenges in that regard.
We hope that all States parties will actively
and constructively participate in the ninth Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention,
to be held in November, further strengthen
confidence-building mechanisms; resume negotiations
as soon as possible on a verification protocol, which
have been at a standstill for more than 20 years; promote
the swift establishment of a multilateral verification
mechanism; further enhance global biosecurity
governance and take global biosecurity to a new level.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): As many
delegations indicated at our most recent meeting on the
subject, held on 27 October (see S/PV.9171), we take
note of the complaint lodged by the Russian Federation

S/PV.9180

to the Security Council, in accordance with article VI
of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC).
Brazil participated in the formal consultations held
in Geneva, from 5 to 9 September, under article V of the
BWC. On that occasion, Russia presented its concerns
regarding alleged biological activities developed
jointly by the United States and Ukraine on Ukrainian
territory. The parties to the Convention also listened to
the comments of the representatives of both countries
on Russia’s queries.
Having considered the documents made available
by the Russian Federation, and bearing in mind the
discussions held in Geneva, Brazil believes that, at
the moment, the necessary conditions for the initiation
of investigations under article VI of the BWC have
not been met. Brazil reiterated its commitment to the
resumption of negotiations towards the adoption of
a binding verification protocol that strengthens the
implementation of the Biological Weapons Convention
regarding the exclusively peaceful use of knowledge
and technology in the field of life sciences.
The situation before the Council today only
reinforces the need to establish such a mechanism.
The next Review Conference of the States Parties to
the BWC represents an opportunity for us to re-engage
in such discussions, without delay. While such a
protocol is not adopted, we call upon the States parties
to strengthen the mechanisms of transparency and
confidence-building available under the framework of
the Convention by sharing the broadest possible range
of information regarding research projects on topics
related to the objectives of the Convention.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates has a long-standing position of
support and commitment to the Biological Weapons
Convention and recognizes it as an important part of the
global non-proliferation architecture. The Convention’s
prohibition on the development, production, stockpiling,
acquisition or retention of biological weapons is core
to the international consensus that biological weapons
must never be used.
Article VI of the Biological Weapons Convention
has the potential to play an important role in promoting
compliance with the Convention. However, given that
article VI has never before been applied, the Security
Council should be prudent and deliberate when
establishing important new precedents on compliance.
We believe it is particularly important for there to

22-669217/8

S/PV.9180

Threats to international peace and security

02/11/2022

be broad agreement among members of the Security
Council on the triggers and modalities for proceeding
under article VI. Given the lack of such broad
agreement on the draft resolution presented today, the
United Arab Emirates chose to abstain in the voting on
the draft resolution.

Parties to the Convention, we must focus all our efforts
on safeguarding and implementing the Convention so
as to prevent the use of such weapons.

The Biological Weapons Convention remains
crucial both in prohibiting biological weapons and in
supporting cooperation in the study of biological agents
and toxins for peaceful purposes. To that end, the
United Arab Emirates looks forward to participating in
the ninth Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention to be held in Geneva at
the end of this month.

As a State party to the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), Ghana is fully supportive of the
objectives of the Convention, which bans biological
weapons by prohibiting the development, production
and stockpiling of biological agents, as well as related
equipment and delivery systems that are intended for
hostile use.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
result of today’s vote is clear — Russia is isolated more
than ever before, and its lies deceive no one.
France voted against the draft resolution presented
by Russia, because we refuse to allow the Council to
become a propaganda platform. If words no longer have
any meaning and if truth and lies are both permitted,
then diplomacy is no longer possible.
The Biological Weapons Convention clearly
states that a complaint under article VI must include
all possible evidence confirming its validity. We have
already assessed that so-called evidence in detail, and
it does not merit further consideration. The truth is that
Russia’s allegations are completely groundless. That
point was made during the consultations in Geneva.
Russia itself made it clear that it had no new evidence.
The Secretariat has repeatedly stated in this Council
that it has no information on the subject.
Now, Russia will attempt to play the victim. It will
school us on respect for international law, which might
be laughable, were the disaster unfolding not cause
for tears. Let us be serious and focus on the facts — it
is Russia that started a war of aggression against its
neighbour and illegally annexed its territories. It is now
creating confusion to serve as a distraction. Russia
must stop this irresponsible disinformation campaign.
France reiterates its commitment to the Biological
Weapons Convention and deplores the fact that it is being
exploited by Russia. Its provisions relating to peaceful
cooperation among States parties are essential. As we
approach the ninth Review Conference of the States

8/8

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.

The BWC forms the foundation of the international
biological arms control regime and must continue to
be strengthened to enhance the effectiveness of its
mechanisms, including in the area of verification. While
we believe in the right of States parties to consult and
cooperate with each other in order to reach solutions in
the event of any complaints or violations of the BWC,
as agreed in article V of the Convention, we are of the
view that a necessary condition for the invocation of
article VI for a formal investigation into a complaint
should be a compelling prima facie case.
Ghana therefore abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution on that account and given the non-consensusbased outcome of the article V consultative meeting,
held in Geneva in September, while also taking into
account our repeated proposition that a conclusive
determination of Ukraine’s biological programmes can
be made only after further assessment by the relevant
institutions. We wish to reiterate that we take seriously
any issues related to the threat of use and proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. We have also
acknowledged the provisions of article X of the BWC,
which accords States parties the right to participate in
the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials
and scientific and technological information for the
use of bacteriological agents and toxins for peaceful
purposes.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-66921
