S/PV.8059

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8059th meeting

Thursday, 28 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-30232 (E)
*1730232*

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; and
Mr. David Scharia, Officer-in-Charge of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Scharia and
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent
Representative of Egypt, in his capacity as the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I would like to begin by thanking
you, Sir, for organizing today’s important meeting,
which marks the sixteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). Allow me to start
by remembering the tens of thousands of victims of
terrorism around the world.
It is an honour to brief the Security Council for the
first time as Under-Secretary-General of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism (OCT). I thank all 15 members
of the Council for their strong support to the creation
of the OCT — the very first reform initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres. As he said last week in the
General Assembly,
“National and multilateral counter-terrorism efforts
have indeed disrupted networks, reclaimed territory,
prevented attacks and saved lives, but we need
to intensify this work. Stronger international
cooperation remains crucial against terrorism.”
(A/72/PV.3, p. 2)
I am strongly committed to the Secretary-General’s
vision and look forward to working with the Security
Council to achieve this goal.
2/23

28/09/2017

I would also like to express my gratitude for the
able leadership shown by Ambassador Aboulatta of
Egypt, as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
I look forward to working closely with the Committee
and its Executive Directorate (CTED) to build a
strong partnership among all General Assembly
and Security Council-mandated bodies to promote
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The new Office of Counter-Terrorism established
by the Secretary-General, which I head, intends to
make a qualitative difference in our support to Member
States by bringing leadership, mobilizing resources
and developing, together with United Nations entities
at Headquarters and in the field, a coherent and wellcoordinated one-United Nations framework to counterterrorism and prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism. Support and assistance for Member States
are the key words in this regard.
In order to meet this goal, I intend to work closely
with all States members of General Assembly, the
Security Council and all other relevant organs and
bodies of the United Nations. Listening and acting on
their priorities will be my priority. That is why I held
more than 50 high-level meetings with Member States
and international and regional organizations last week.
I also listened carefully to the statements delivered in
the General Assembly, in which counter-terrorism was
clearly one of the highest priorities for the majority of
Member States.
From these consultations and statements, we have
already identified six key areas that are fully aligned with
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Council’s priorities, namely, strengthening
international counter-terrorism cooperation; preventing
violent extremism conducive to terrorism in the context
of Pillar I of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy; addressing the terrorist use of the
Internet; enhancing intercultural dialogue; addressing
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters; and increasing
the exchange of information and good counter-terrorism
practices. I will continue listening in order to build,
together with the Security Council and all relevant
United Nations entities, an effective, future-oriented
and balanced counterterrorism programme to support
Member States.
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Since 2001, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate have resolutely contributed
to supporting Member States in the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001). Leveraging their respective
comparative advantages, the United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) has also
contributed significantly to that effort. Now it is high
time to bring together our collective efforts. I therefore
welcome the growing emphasis that the Security
Council is placing, in its resolutions and presidential
statements, on ensuring that United Nations entities
work closely together in addressing the terrorist
threat. This must be followed by concrete actions and
initiatives, respectful of mandates and done in the spirit
of collaboration from the very start.
Allow me to cite four examples of what the two
constituent parts of the OCT — the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, of which CTED is a core
member, and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre — are already doing.
First, our 12 Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force inter-agency working groups represent
a good example of counter-terrorism coordination
in action. This means exchange of information, the
identification of threats and challenges, and the
development of all-of-United Nations projects. Our
new Office of Counter-Terrorism intends to further
mainstream the all-of-United Nations approach to our
counter-terrorism efforts across the United Nations
system both at Headquarters and the field. This
strengthening of coordination and coherence will be
the highest priority of the Office of Counter-Terrorism .
Secondly, through our CTITF Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Working Group, we have developed, as
mandated by the Security Council, an all-of-United
Nations CTITF foreign terrorist fighters capacitybuilding implementation plan that now includes over
50 projects from 13 United Nations entities, addressing
the entire life cycle of the foreign terrorist fighters
phenomenon. Leveraging CTED’s comparative
advantages, capabilities and knowledge of Member
States’ needs and priorities, these projects have been
thematically and geographically ranked by their
criticality so as to ensure an impact on the ground and
efficient use of donor resources.
Thirdly, as requested by the Council, the OCT United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is implementing
the all-of-United Nations Integrated Assistance for

S/PV. 8059

Counter-Terrorism initiative in the Group of Five for
the Sahel, as well as in Nigeria and Mali. In mapping
the priorities and needs of those countries, close
coordination and input from CTED have been critical.
Fourthly, resolution 2242 (2015) calls for the greater
participation and leadership of women in developing
strategies to prevent terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism — a substantial component of
Pillar I of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. As
called for by the resolution, the CTITF is integrating
gender as an all-of-United Nations cross-cutting issue
in its work, and created a dedicated CTITF Inter-Agency
Working Group on Gender, chaired by UN-Women.
We must recognize that there are four important
spheres of United Nations activity that need to be
aligned if we are to effectively develop a coherent and
well-coordinated all-of-United Nations framework
for our future counter-terrorism efforts, namely, the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, with their
international peace and security mandate; the General
Assembly, which brings together our common efforts
through the consensus-based Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, its review resolutions and international
counter-terrorism legal instruments; the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat, which now includes the
Office of Counter-Terrorism; and the 38 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes that directly or
indirectly contribute to our efforts to counter terrorism
and prevent violent extremism in support of the
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
These four spheres of United Nations activity will
need to be more closely aligned if we are to build, as the
Secretary-General stated before the General Assembly
last week, “a new international counter-terrorism
partnership” (A/72/PV.3, p. 2).
For their part, Member States will also have to
mobilize the political will and resources necessary
to backstop this effort, especially through the full
implementation of all relevant United Nations
resolutions and counter-terrorism Conventions.
Our new Office of Counter-Terrorism stands ready
to be strongly engaged in this effort, and I look forward
to hearing the Council’s views on how we can move
forward together in pursuit of this goal.
I commit to doing my utmost in this regard and
thank all Council members for their support.

17-302323/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Scharia.
Mr. Scharia: Allow me to begin by thanking the
Ethiopian presidency and the Russian Federation for
supporting the inclusion of this topic on the Council’s
agenda and for inviting the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to address
the Council.
On behalf of CTED, I wish to congratulate UnderSecretary-General Voronkov on his appointment as
head of the Office of Counter-Terrorism. CTED looks
forward to strengthening its partnership with him and
his Office.
Sixteen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001), and terrorism today still affects
us all. No single country can claim to be invulnerable
to it.
As the Council is aware, since its establishment
CTED has been tasked with providing the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) with neutral and
independent expert assessments of Member States’
implementation of that resolution and subsequent
resolutions on counter-terrorism. One of the principal
tools it uses is the country visit, a highly collaborative
process that involves experts from many partner
organizations. The visits are designed to help Member
States develop an effective road map while also avoiding
duplication of effort.
Our assessments bring to the CTC and all our
partners in New York and in the field the most updated
assessment of Member States’ counter-terrorism
situation. They also serve as a practical way to discuss
current trends with national experts and to advise
Member States on developing and implementing
national counter-terrorism strategies.
Since the beginning of the year, CTED has visited
16 States. The full list can be found in my written
remarks, which will be shared after this meeting. Seven
further visits are scheduled for the remainder of this
year, more than in any other equivalent period since the
Committee’s creation.
CTED has now conducted 133 visits covering
96 States, including 45 visits since its previous review.
Much has been accomplished through this process.
New national and regional laws have been enacted, new
institutions established and capacities strengthened.
4/23

28/09/2017

This progress reflects not only the impact of resolution
1373 (2001), but also the determined efforts of Member
States to comply with their obligations.
And yet many States still do not have all
counter-terrorism measures in place. Many CTC
recommendations still await action.
As the Council is aware, the recommendations are
usually divided into two categories: those that require
technical assistance and those that do not. Over the years,
many of our partners have delivered technical assistance
on the basis of the Committee’s recommendations and
integrated them into their work programmes. However,
the Committee’s recommendations could be acted upon
much more rapidly and much more widely.
The establishment of the Office of CounterTerrorism, with a strong mandate on prevention of
violent extremism and capacity-building, provides
an opportunity to strengthen the links even further
and shorten the time period between our assessments
and the delivery of assistance. We look forward to
discussing ways to strengthen those links with UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and his Office.
But let us make no mistake: as much as we invest in
capacity-building, we should avoid any perception that
technical assistance is a precondition for implementing
binding Council resolutions. The Council may wish to
consider ways to encourage States to implement CTC
recommendations, especially in cases where technical
assistance is not the reason for the lack of implementation
or when States are visited more than once.
These are not regular times. The Council has adopted
six new resolutions on terrorism in a short period of time,
an unprecedented achievement and show of consensus.
CTED has contributed to their elaboration. One notable
example is CTED’s development of the comprehensive
framework on counter-narratives, which served as the
foundation for resolution 2354 (2017). CTED, relying
on its thematic expertise and guided by resolution
2129 (2013), will continue to advice the CTC on the
implementation of these resolutions. CTED will also
promote them. It will also continue to integrate them
into its work streams and identify challenges as well as
practical ways to overcome them.
In this regard, I would note that CTED recently
updated its technical guide, which serves to strengthen
and deepen CTC assessments and helps Member States
prepare for them. It contains the most updated advice
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8059

on practical ways to implement all the new resolutions.
It is now available for download in English on the
CTC website.

and comprehensive evidence-based analysis in the
United Nations system on counter-terrorism capacity,
challenges, trends and developments.

The new resolutions also require CTED to prepare
analytical reports in a wide variety of areas that
require new and constantly developed expertise. New
areas for CTED include foreign terrorist fighters, the
use of digital evidence and battlefield evidence, new
border-control measures, including advance passenger
information and biometrics, the use of the Internet
by terrorists, the role of women and the human rights
aspects of all these issues.

Over the past 12 months, CTED has organized
four open briefings and four special meetings. These
meetings serve at least three important purposes.

All United Nations bodies can benefit from CTED
assessment and analysis. Let me stress that most CTED
work products, including in particular its thematic and
regional analysis, are not confidential. As demonstrated
in the multiple open briefings we held, including
meetings on Iraq, CTED can and does share its work.
Since its last review, CTED is also mandated to
identify emerging issues, trends and developments
related to resolution 1535 (2004). Our cooperation
with the Monitoring Team and the joint drafting of the
five reports of the Secretary-General required under
resolution 2253 (2015), as well as periodic exchanges
between the two expert bodies, have allowed us to make
a valuable analysis of the threat and Member States’
responses and to enrich our work on identifying trends
and developments. It also allows us better to understand
the challenges that Member States face. We are thankful
to the Monitoring Team and to the Committee for their
cooperation with us.
CTED continues to strengthen its capacity to
identify trends and developments, also through its global
research network. CTED is able to provide the CTC
with research-based policy advice on a range of issues,
from the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
of returnees and the protection of critical infrastructure
to the effectiveness of counter-messaging.
CTED also takes great care to ensure that identified
trends and developments and the threat assessments
provided by the Monitoring Team are thoroughly
and consistently integrated into its assessments. I
should note also that CTED’s analysis of trends and
developments is free of confidentiality requirements.
We need to explore ways together to ensure
that the entire United Nations system benefits from
CTED’s analysis, as it is probably the most updated

First, they bring transparency to the Committee’s
work. On numerous occasions, Member States, notably
States not serving on the Council, have thanked us for
these meetings and expressed a strong wish that they
be continued.
Secondly, they enable the CTC to forge new
partnerships with international, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and even with
private-sector actors.
The meeting held yesterday on aviation security
(see S/PV.8057) is one example of such partnership.
The establishment of the Global Internet Forum by
four major companies and its partnership with the CTC
is another.
Lastly, these meetings play an important role in
policy formulation. Resolution 2370 (2017), on small
arms and light weapons, is a good example of the
effectiveness of that practice and its role in supporting
policy formulation both at the CTC and at the Council.
CTED remains committed to our contribution by
assessing Member States’ implementation, facilitating
technical assistance delivery, identifying trends and
good practices and advising and promoting the policy
decisions of the Committee and the resolutions of
the Council.
However, those tasks are also stretching our
capacity and resources to the maximum. It is therefore
CTED’s hope that the Council will provide it with the
resources required to fulfil its significantly expanded
mandate. The CTED Executive Director Designate,
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, intends to submit a report to the
CTC, setting out CTED’s vision of how the CTC, the
Council and the entire United Nations can maximize
the impact of CTED and benefit from its work. The
debate today serves an important function and will
guide us in drafting that report.
Together, we have achieved a great deal since
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). However, the
terrorist threat continues to evolve at an alarming
pace. Terrorist organizations continue to demonstrate
flexibility and the capacity to quickly adapt their

17-302325/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

methods. They are also particularly adept at exploiting
new technologies on the Internet — whether to spread
their messages, recruit new members, or finance, plan
and perpetrate attacks.
More than ever before, the Committee needs a
dynamic, agile and responsive body of experts to
support and promote its work. CTED will continue to
do its utmost to fulfil that role, and is honoured to serve
this cause.
The President: I thank Mr. Scharia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Aboulatta.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), I
have the honour to brief the Council on the topic of
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.
I wish to thank the Ethiopian presidency and the
Russian Federation for supporting the inclusion of this
item on the Council’s agenda. I also wish to welcome the
Secretary-General’s recent counter-terrorism reforms,
including his establishment of the Office of CounterTerrorism, led by the Under-Secretary-General. I
believe that those reforms will greatly enhance the
coordination of counter-terrorism activities, both
within and outside the United Nations system.
This month marks the sixteenth anniversary of
the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 against the
United States and the Council’s adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), which also established the CTC to monitor
the implementation of its provisions. Since 2005, the
CTC has been supported by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
works to implement the Committee’s policy decisions,
coordinate the monitoring of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), and assess Member States’
implementation efforts.
Acting on behalf of the Committee, CTED conducts
assessment visits to Member States, with the consent
of the host Government. The assessment visits enable
the CTC and CTED to engage in constructive dialogue
with the visited State; gather an accurate picture of
its overall counter-terrorism capacity; and identify
gaps, challenges, trends, good practices, and technical
assistance needs. An essential part of the assessment
process is to identify priority areas for further action,
as well as priority technical assistance requirements.
6/23

28/09/2017

The information gathered during the visits is also
used to produce global implementation surveys of the
efforts of all Member States to implement not only
resolution 1373 (2001), but also resolution 1624 (2005),
on preventing incitement to commit terrorist acts.
Regarded as the most comprehensive analytical
documents on counter-terrorism in the United Nations
system, the surveys identify where gaps remain, where
the international community might most usefully
focus its efforts, and where progress has been made.
And Member States have made significant progress
in many areas, assisted by an international counterterrorism legal framework that has itself developed
considerably — especially over the past decade — in
response to the constantly evolving terrorist threat.
However, many States continue to face significant
challenges. Some States do not yet have all the
necessary counter-terrorism measures in place. States
also face challenges in their efforts to ensure that the
measures that are in place are constantly reviewed
and amended as terrorists develop new operational
methods and techniques. In order to ensure that our
assessments continue to serve a useful purpose, we
must continue to build upon the dialogue that has been
developed between the Council and Member States,
through the CTC and CTED. Member States should
be encouraged to strengthen their efforts to implement
the Council’s resolutions on terrorism, as well as the
recommendations emanating from the Committee’s
assessment visits.
Our assessments and analysis show that many States
lack the necessary capacity and resources to comply
effectively with the Council’s resolutions. Moreover,
our follow-up assessments show uneven progress in
implementing our recommendations. It is vital that our
recommendations be taken up by our implementing
partners and integrated into their work and technical
assistance programmes.
In order to be successful, the follow-up process must
receive strong support from our implementing partners,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism. At the
political level, successful follow-up depends in part on
the Council’s consideration of States’ non-compliance
with its counter-terrorism resolutions.
With respect to practical follow-up action, I would
recall that our visit assessments are shared with the
visited State. CTED may also share the recommendations
for further action with its implementing partners and
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

share the assessment itself, in full or in part, with third
parties, with the consent of the visited State. Member
States are encouraged to give that consent, as it greatly
enhances our ability to identify potential donors and
technical assistance providers. Member States should
also be reminded of their obligation to meet their
international counter-terrorism obligations, for it is in
their primary interest to protect their citizens’ lives,
their borders, and their institutions.
Over the past decade, in response to the rapidly
evolving terrorist threat and operational landscape, the
Committee’s country visits have become considerably
more demanding and complex. As States increasingly
request more focused assessments and follow-up visits,
the Committee and the CTC must be able to provide
needs-based and flexible responses. Within a relatively
short time period, the Council has adopted six new
resolutions on counter-terrorism, addressing issues
as diverse as strengthening international judicial and
law enforcement cooperation, countering terrorist
narratives, countering the use of information and
communications technology for terrorist purposes,
human trafficking for terrorism-financing purposes,
terrorist threats to civil aviation, protecting critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks, building publicprivate partnerships and preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons.
All those resolutions require the CTC and CTED
to assist in their implementation and promotion,
including through special meetings on themes, such as
international cooperation and civil aviation security.
The role of CTED thus continues to expand thematically.
With respect to international cooperation, for example,
its mandate has expanded through the requirements to
address biometrics and the downgrading of intelligence
threat data.
The addition of new tasks has also brought
horizontal and conceptual expansion. In addition to its
work of identifying gaps and challenges, CTED is also
required to support the work of its key partners in many
areas. Through its work on those issues, CTED supports
the policy development of the CTC and the Council,
assists the CTC in defining its priorities and promotes
the Security Council global counter-terrorism policy.
I wish to commend CTED for its readiness to
engage proactively in those areas. I also wish to stress
the need for CTED to be provided with the necessary
resources, both human and financial, to effectively

S/PV. 8059

assist the Committee to monitor, promote and facilitate
Member States’ implementation of all relevant
Council resolutions.
In accordance with the relevant Council resolutions,
the Committee and CTED will continue to cooperate
closely with their key partners, including the Expert
Group of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, through regular exchange of
information, sharing of reports and the preparation of
joint documents and joint statements of the three Chairs
to the Council.
The CTC and CTED will also cooperate closely
with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and will continue
to promote the best international codes and standards,
best practices and recommendations for countering
terrorism and the violent extremism that can lead to
terrorism. We hope that the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and our other implementing partners will make full use
of our assessments, analysis, recommendations and
expertise in their work, including where the facilitation
of technical assistance is concerned.
The President: I thank Ambassador Aboulatta for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the Ethiopian delegation for including today’s
meeting in the Council’s September programme of
work and for your efforts in preparing for it.
Exactly 16 years ago, on 28 September 2001, the
Security Council adopted a core counter-terrorism
resolution, resolution 1373 (2001). Today’s meeting
is aimed at conducting a long-overdue analysis of the
current situation with regard to the implementation of
that resolution and the other Council resolutions that
define States’ counter-terrorism obligations. In our
view, today’s discussion is particularly essential in the
light of December’s forthcoming review and extension
of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and the opinions
expressed today will constitute an significant basis for

17-302327/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

drafting the relevant Council resolution before the end
of the year.
The Russian delegation would like to thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
for his briefing, and to congratulate him on his first
appearance in the Council. We are glad to see him here.
We are also grateful to Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and to Mr. Scharia for their briefings and for presenting
their approaches to the subject of today’s meeting.
As terrorist threats evolve, it is increasingly
clear, among other things, that international as well
as regional efforts to combat terrorism can hinge on
how conscientiously individual States view their
obligations. Breaches in counter-terrorism systems
do not go unnoticed. Terrorists skilfully exploit such
loopholes, and as they flee justice in one country they
will inevitably pose threats to other States, especially
neighbouring States. Unfortunately, national counterterrorism legislation is often still at a rudimentary
stage even now. For example, the global survey of the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1373
(2001) (S/2016/49, annex), prepared by CTED in 2016,
points out that the legislation of numerous countries
lacks the standards needed for the criminal prosecution
of foreign terrorist fighters. A number of countries have
not established proper mechanisms for information
exchange and interdepartmental coordination or
adequate immigration and visa controls. Many are
not connected to the relevant INTERPOL databases.
There are also shortcomings where the suppression of
terrorism financing is concerned. And unfortunately
the list does not end there.
We have to take into consideration the fact that the
type of terror taking centre stage at the moment does
not require significant financial support. It is based on
the threat posed by suicide bombers who are subject to
potent propaganda. For example, all that is needed to
stage an attack is a truck, and of course it is impossible
to control such murder weapons. That is why we
have to emphasize preventive measures and the fight
against radicalization.
Against that backdrop, it is easy to see glaring
inadequacies in the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), on combating incitement to terrorism, including
instances of public justification and even glorification.
8/23

28/09/2017

The global survey on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005) by Member States
(S/2016/50), for example, notes a number of factors that
present obstacles to the prosecution of instigators of
incitement and other terrorist accomplices, including
the fact that in some States such acts are not criminalized
or that there is inadequate enforcement of the “extradite
or prosecute” principle.
We firmly believe that coordinated measures are
urgently needed to identify and remove the terrorist
content on the Internet through which propaganda
flows and terrorists are actively recruited. We welcome
the fact that last week, at the initiative of the United
Kingdom, France and Italy, a special high-level event
on this subject was organized on the sidelines of the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventysecond session. At the same time, it is paradoxical
certain countries were previously been unwilling to
cooperate on Russia’s draft resolution on combating
terrorist ideology, which was focused on resolving
these very issues.
We are convinced that in general we have to extract
better results from the Council’s counter-terrorism
resolutions, create a climate that demands more from
States on the enforcement front and establish the
conditions necessary for strengthening the capabilities
of national counter-terrorism systems. We must always
remember that Member States have agreed to comply
with Security Council resolutions and implement them
strictly, and that obligations based on the Charter of the
United Nations prevail over all others.
During the previous renewal of the CTED
mandate, in 2013, the Security Council underscored
the key role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate in ensuring the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We are grateful to the
Executive Directorate and to Mr. Laborde, its able
leader for the past four years, for the effective work
they have done since 2013. We hope that this goal will
be a top priority for CTED’s new Executive Director,
Ms. Michèle Coninsx. We welcome her appointment
and are confident that her experience as prosecutor and
head of the European Union’s Judicial Cooperation Unit,
Eurojust, will be what is needed in her new position.
Overall, in our view, against the background of
the reform of the architecture of the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, a new chapter is beginning for
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international efforts in the fight against terrorism. We
look forward to close cooperation between the CTC and
its Executive Directorate and the Office for CounterTerrorism. We believe that the information that has
emerged from CTED’s analytical work is an important
indicator for States’ needs in the area of technical
assistance. Ensuring its effectiveness therefore depends
largely on the proper exchange of information, without
excessive bureaucratization, between CTED and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism Office.
We believe that the upcoming review of the CTED
mandate will be the right moment to consider how
the Council can strengthen the effectiveness of the
Executive Directorate, particularly given the significant
amount of useful work that it has done during and after
country visits. It seems clear to us, for example, that we
should get better returns on the recommendations made
based on their results. At the moment, it appears that
CTED’s efforts are sometimes unfairly overlooked by
States. That should be rectified. In our view, there are
reserves that the Counter-Terrorism Committee could
harness to streamline its procedures in the preparation
stages for country visits. We trust that the Executive
Directorate will summarize the opinions expressed
today by States and use the time remaining until the
review of its mandate to take stock of the experience
of previous years and come up with its own ideas in
this regard.
We look forward to constructive collective work
in the Security Council during the forthcoming review
of the CTED mandate. Our common goal is to achieve
the full and honest fulfilment of Security Council
resolutions, which the Committee has the unique
potential to promote.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Scharia and
Mr. Aboulatta for their briefings.
All over the world, we are confronting new and
dangerous terrorist threats. We see terrorists using
trucks to mow down innocent civilians in city centres,
home-brewed improvised explosive devices left on
trains, aeroplanes brought down by bombs smuggled
on board. More than 17 years after the 9/11 attacks,
terrorists continue to adapt their tactics and launch
barbaric attacks to try to disrupt our modern way of life.
The United States is leading the fight against
terrorism in all its forms. We head a coalition of States
that is successfully liberating territory from the Islamic

S/PV. 8059

State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). ISIS is on the run. It
is only a matter of time before it loses what is left of the
territory it controls. The United States is also committed
to holding State sponsors of terror accountable,
especially the number-one such country, Iran.
But even as we and our partners step up our efforts
to defeat terror, the United Nations has remained mostly
on the sidelines. However, it does not have to be that way.
The United Nations has a strong foundation to enable it
to be an effective counter-terrorism partner, and that is
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is imperative,
however, that we ensure a balanced implementation of
the Strategy across all four of its pillars, including by
integrating the prevention of violent extremism into
pillars one and four.
The Security Council itself has adopted important
resolutions that oblige all Member States to criminalize
acts of terror, stop the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and end flows of foreign terrorist fighters.
Yet those resolutions will be only words on paper if
Member States do not step up and implement them.
That is where the United Nations can do much more. It
can help Member States strengthen their defences and
follow through on the tough demands that the Council
has made. That is especially true for Member States
that may not have the resources or expertise to address
all of their vulnerabilities. And when States have not
shown the political will to follow through, we must all
work together to press them to do so.
Where the Organization’s own counter-terrorism
architecture is concerned, the United States wants
to see an active, strengthened and updated CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
We want to see a strong CTED that will help Member
States understand the gaps in their counter-terrorism
efforts and analyse the ways in which terrorist threats
are changing. The United States will lead the effort to
update the CTED mandate later this year to make the
Organization more relevant to today’s threats.
We also fully support the Secretary-General’s
effort to reform the way the United Nations addresses
counter-terrorism. But to succeed, those reforms must
do more than change the boxes on an organizational
chart. For example, as the campaign against ISIS
continues, some ISIS fighters will try to slip back into
their home countries to plan new attacks. The United
Nations should help Member States at risk to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters and assess future

17-302329/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

threats. It should also help Member States to keep their
citizens from becoming radicalized in the first place.
The United Nations has a lot of tools available
for Governments to draw on. There are experts in
governance, development, communications, security
and, of course, counter-terrorism. The United Nations
should bring all of those components together when
Governments need help fighting the spread of terrorist
ideologies and preventing violent extremism from
taking hold. We call on the entire United Nations system
to support innovative, on-the-ground efforts to prevent
violent extremists and their supporters from inspiring,
radicalizing, financing or recruiting individuals to
commit acts of violence. The United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and CTED must take the lead in
making sure that everyone at the United Nations works
together in this fight. If it is to expand its impact, the
United Nations cannot work alone. It must get out of
New York and engage the various players in the field. It
can gain from their expertise.
As the United Nations strengthens its counterterrorism efforts, respect for human rights is vital.
Counter-terrorism should never be an excuse
for ignoring human rights. The fact is that when
Governments abuse human rights in the name of
counter-terrorism, the tactics backfire. Abusing human
rights actually increases local support for terrorism.
Promoting respect for human rights and the rule of law
must be a fundamental part of the United Nations work
with Member States around the world.
Counter-terrorism is a major test of the relevance
of the United Nations to the threats we face today.
The United States will continue to take action against
terrorism, but the United Nations can and must do
more to help. We look to it to respond to global threats.
Fighting terror is at the top of the list, so we urge the
United Nations to step up and help Member States
strengthen their efforts against this shared threat.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office,
Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and
Mr. David Scharia, Officer-in-Charge of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
for their informative briefings. I would like to take
this opportunity to speak as Chair of the Committee
10/23

28/09/2017

pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), focusing
my remarks in the framework of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture.
The international community is facing a multitude
of challenges from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and from Al-Qaida and their respective
networks. Terrorist groups continue to adapt in
response to global counter-terrorism efforts, and the
Taliban remains a serious threat to the peace, stability
and security of Afghanistan. The Committee continues
to administer measures that include assets freezes,
travel bans and arms embargoes targeting designated
individuals and groups associated with ISIL, Al-Qaida
or the Taliban.
If the sanctions regimes are to operate effectively,
it is crucial to ensure that the Committee’s work goes
in lockstep with the evolving global threat posed by
these groups. In that regard, the Committee’s work is
supported by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2368 (2017) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, which continues to provide updated threat
assessments and monitors the measures’ implementation.
The Monitoring Team closely coordinates its work
with CTED and the Expert Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and
participates actively in all relevant activities under the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It
also regularly contributes to the Secretary-General’s
reports on the threat posed by ISIL and the range of
United Nations efforts supporting Member States
in countering that threat. The Committee and the
Monitoring Team stand ready to work closely with the
new United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
executing its overarching mandate.
To fulfil the Committee’s mandates, it is
also important to coordinate effectively with key
specialized agencies such as the International Air
Transport Association, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the World Customs Organization,
INTERPOL and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as with regional organizations such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The Monitoring
Team also plays a key role in this matter. In order to
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

see how the sanctions regime can be implemented more
effectively and to understand the national and regional
challenges to implementing the Council’s measures, I
organize regional visits aimed at raising awareness of
the Committee’s mandate. Such visits serve to share
the best practices employed by national authorities in
combating terrorism, as it relates to the mandate of
the Committee. In that regard, the Chair plans several
visits in the near future to Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and
the Russian Federation.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on
Member States to continue their engagement with the
work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team,
as it is essential to the maintenance of an up-to-date
and dynamic sanctions list. The Monitoring Team
updates list entries based on information provided by
Member States. I therefore encourage Member States
to keep the monitoring team informed. I also urge
those Member States that have not done so to submit
their implementation reports mandated under the
relevant resolutions.
It is also imperative that the Committee continues
to promote due process in its work, in particular
through the work of the Office of the Ombudsperson.
As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their continued willingness to cooperate constructively
with the Committee, its monitoring team and the Office
of the Ombudsperson.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would also like to
thank all the briefers here this morning and take this
opportunity to welcome Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov to his new post, wish him every success and
tell him how much we are looking forward to working
with him during his time.
As all of us in this Chamber know only too well,
international terrorist groups like Da’esh and Al-Qaida
seek to divide us. They seek to divide our communities
and tear apart our countries, attacking our values and
our institutions. But in the face of their attempts to
divide us, one of our greatest weapons is our ability
to come together and work together, and the Security
Council is united in our desire to protect people across
the world and defeat terrorism.
Our shared multilateral counter-terrorism system
has never been so needed. Each constituent part is
crucial. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum and the
Coalition against Da’esh helped to forge our strategies
and technical capabilities. The United Nations Counter-

S/PV. 8059

Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the newly created United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Office marshall the resources of the United Nations
to tackle both terrorism and violence extremism. The
Council has a vital role to play, producing ever most
sophisticated measures and guidance for States. I
would like briefly to highlight two opportunities to
improve and recalibrate the United Nations counterterrorism approach.
First, we must maximize the impact and effectiveness
of CTED. I would like to congratulate CTED for its
work to date. It is a well-functioning United Nations
entity with real expertise and knowledge. CTED’s
proactive approach to new counter-terrorism issues
has been welcome. Its guidelines on foreign terrorist
fighters and counter-narratives, for example, are
excellent benchmarks. Further, CTED’s work on publicprivate partnerships on the Internet has been vital, for
example, working with the ICT4Peace Foundation and
the world’s largest tech firms in addressing terrorism
and violence extremism content online. Governments
have also built new relationships with the private sector
as demonstrated last week when my Prime Minister
along with partners from Italy and France for the first
time hosted the world’s largest information technology
companies at the United Nations to address terrorist
use of the Internet.
The CTED mandate renewal at the end of this year
is a chance to enhance its impact. This should include
learning lessons on how to address emerging security
issues, improving country assessments and making sure
they are acted upon, ensuring that technical expertise
is fully used, and providing guidance on prioritization.
We look forward to welcoming Michèle Coninsx as the
new Executive Director and hearing her ideas for how
to further improve this important office.
The second opportunity we see is to give priority to
prevention, addressing the root causes and the violent
extremism that spawns terrorism. For every person
who is radicalized into terrorism, there is first an
environment in which ideology, economic factors and
grievances are bent to a violent end by opportunistic
leaders. This can happen. I am afraid, in schools, places
of worship and prisons. States can address a terrorist
case with all of the intelligence, police, judicial and
even military means at their disposal. But as UnderSecretary-General Voronkov says, until we break the
life cycle of radicalization and terrorism and address the
environments in which calls to terrorism are espoused

17-3023211/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and take hold, there will always be another would-be
terrorist waiting to emerge. That is why preventing
violent extremism is a vital investment for peace and
security and why I think Secretary-General Guterres
highlighted it when he established the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Office.
I therefore believe that the strategic leadership and
coordinating function of the Counter-Terrorism Office
is vital in this context. The Office should use its central
coordination role to look outside traditional peace and
security analysis and draw on United Nations expertise
in human rights, development, gender issues and
education, to name just a few. Only then can the United
Nations help countries address a violent extremist
threat before it explodes into a threat to international
peace and security. The United Nations potential to
help States prevent violent extremism is unique and
rightly lies at the heart of the mandate of the CounterTerrorism Office.
I would like to pose a question if I may to UnderSecretary-General Voronkov. I found his description of
his strategy extremely helpful when he set it out in his
briefing, and I wonder if he might take the opportunity,
either now or later, to say more about how he sees the
Counter-Terrorism Office delivering the vital mandate
from the General Assembly for the preventive pillar
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and how he might use his chairmanship of
the Secretary-General’s High-Level Preventing Violent
Extremism Action Group to coordinate this. It would be
really good to hear some more about that.
Multilateral cooperation must continue to
effectively counter terrorism and violent extremism.
A smoothly functioning CTED, a newly-established
Counter-Terrorism Office and a truly strategic United
Nations approach to prevention coordinated by the
Counter-Terrorism Office are two concrete ways to
assist in this endeavour.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov
to his post as head of the newly created United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Office. I would also like
to thank him, Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Mr. Scharia of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), for their briefings on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).
12/23

28/09/2017

It has been 16 years since the terrorist attacks
of 11 September 2001 and the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001). Despite the international community’s
numerous counter-terrorism efforts since then, we
continue to witness terrorist attacks all over the world
with alarming frequency. In Europe this year alone, we
saw serious terrorist attacks in London, Manchester
and Barcelona. In Asia, a group claiming to be the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-East Asia has been
fighting with the Government over the city of Marawi
in the Philippines since May. The threat posed by
terrorists is evolving globally, particularly with foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
or relocating to other regions.
In addition, we are alarmed by terrorists’ evolving
tactics, which include diversifying financial sources,
disseminating propaganda through social media,
exploiting encrypted applications and using broken
travel. We have heard reports of the use of bitcoin and
drones. In response to terrorists’ evolving tactics, we
must enhance our capacities and vigorously implement
counter-terrorism resolutions.
In addition to resolution 1373 (2001), the Council
has recently adopted resolutions 2309 (2016), on
aviation security; 2322 (2016), on international judicial
cooperation; 2341 (2017), on protection of critical
infrastructure; 2354 (2017) on counter-narratives; and
2370 (2017), on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. The adoption of these resolutions is important,
but their full implementation is vital.
Japan has implemented these resolutions and
developed new measures in response to terrorists’
evolving tactics. For example, we recently enacted
laws to prevent terrorists from using bitcoin and
virtual currencies and to prohibit drones from flying
over critical facilities, embassies, and nuclear plants.
To strengthen international judicial cooperation
against transnational organized crimes, including
terrorism, Japan, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and two of its supplementing protocols, will cooperate
more effectively with each State party in investigation
assistance and extradition.
The terrorist threat is global and we must extend
assistance to those in need as part of our collective
response. Japan, for example, provided $35 million in
March, mainly in South-East Asia, in the light of the
increasing threat in that region. That will be used to
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

facilitate the implementation of relevant resolutions
through concrete projects, including the Advance
Passenger Information system, international judicial
cooperation, INTERPOL databases and counterpropaganda. Japan will continue to work closely with
CTC and CTED towards the full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
The new Office of Counter-Terrorism is expected
to greatly enhance coordination of counter-terrorism
measures in all Member States. We should build
on that momentum. Japan looks forward to close
collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. The Council
must be united in fighting terrorism by implementing
our resolutions, including resolution 1373 (2001), and
further developing our counter-terrorism measures.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this briefing
on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
which provides us with an international framework for
combatting terrorism. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov on his appointment as UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and to thank him for his briefing. I
extend my thanks to the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta,
for his work at the helm of the Committee and for his
briefing today, as well as to Mr. David Scharia of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Regrettably, the global terrorism threat has become
a pervasive issue and terrorist acts are occurring at an
intolerable rate. The international community must
take united action because it cannot allow terrorism to
continue to take innocent lives and destabilize States,
and because it must protect the rights and values that
terrorists seek to destroy. In his statement before the
General Assembly at its seventy-second general debate
(see A/72/PV.3), Secretary-General António Guterres
referred to the global threat of terrorism with precision
and clarity. We endorse his words, which describe the
complexity of the problem we face.
We value and support the work of the United Nations
through its various organs and entities. We trust that
under the leadership of the recently established Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the fight against the scourge of
terrorism will benefit from renewed impetus. Among
the functions of that new Office, we would underscore
the improved assistance offered to Member States in

S/PV. 8059

developing their counter-terrorism capacity. That
assistance is crucial, especially to those countries that
are most affected by the actions of terrorist groups, in
enabling them to confront terrorist acts with adequate
means and resources, in allowing them to benefit from
cooperation and in exercising their sovereignty.
We consider the role of Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate to be critical
in assessing the status of States’ implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in promoting the adoption
of measures that support its implementation. We also
emphasize the importance of their role in facilitating
technical assistance. We are grateful for the CounterTerrorism Committee’s visit to Uruguay in March. We
attach great importance to the recommendations that
were made and are taking them into consideration.
We are working to advance the implementation of
various aspects set out in various Security Council
resolutions. Examples include the draft comprehensive
counter-terrorism law and the draft comprehensive
anti-asset laundering law. Both draft laws are currently
before our National Parliament for review and both
include recommendations made by the CounterTerrorism Committee.
We are aware of the importance of acting
collectively in this fight and of the need to cooperate
at the bilateral, regional and international levels. We
acknowledge cooperation as a part of our responsibility,
as a member of the international community, to act and
to protect. Cooperation makes us stronger. We believe
that the fight against terrorism must be made in respect
for and accordance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. We reaffirm
our commitment to working in solidarity and with
responsibility for the success of that task.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly thank our briefers,
beginning with the Under-Secretary-General for
Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov. We
have already had the opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Voronkov and to offer him France’s fully support
for his initiatives, but today I once again reiterate
our most sincere wishes of success, as this is his first
briefing before the Security Council.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Amr
Aboulatta for his briefing and for the leadership shown

17-3023213/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

by his country at the helm of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
Finally, I wish to express France’s gratitude to
Mr. David Scharia for his briefing on the outstanding
action led by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and to take this
opportunity to emphasize that France eagerly looks
forward to the arrival in New York of the new Executive
Director, Ms. Michèle Coninsx.
Terrorism currently is one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security. Naturally, the fight
against terrorism is at the heart of the Security Council’s
work. It requires an organized, firm and united
response on the part of States and the international
community as a whole. Today, I will focus on two main
observations — first, on the essential role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, and secondly, on
the role of the Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Committee, in particular.
While it is primarily up to States to adopt the
measures and mechanisms necessary to combat
terrorism, the United Nations also has a major and
growing role to play. Terrorism is one of those global
threats that require a global response, and the United
Nations therefore has as an invaluable mission in that
regard. The United Nations is not working from a blank
page. To date, it has fulfilled three key functions in the
fight against terrorism.
First, standards and obligations must be developed
to allow States to establish robust counter-terrorism
mechanisms. A number of important thematic Security
Council resolutions have been adopted since 2001
to that end, particularly over the past three years,
covering many aspects of counter-terrorism, such as
financing, anti-propaganda campaigns and foreign
terrorist fighters.
Secondly, the adoption of sanctions aimed at
depriving terrorist groups of the means to commit
attacks, such as the regime pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). The United Nations has developed important
know-how in that field.
Lastly, the strengthening of international
cooperation and dialogue to encourage States to
work together more effectively and to exchange good
practices is obviously an essential point and a key
priority for all of us.
14/23

28/09/2017

With the rise of Da’esh in 2014, the terrorist threat
has significantly evolved. The phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and the wide scale use of the Internet
and social networks for recruitment, funding and calls
to action have given a new dimension to the threat,
which is now truly global. Combating terrorism has
therefore become a new frontier for the United Nations
among other major global challenges, such as climate
change and migration. The United Nations therefore
has both the obligation and the responsibility to
ensure that its response is well adapted to the threat.
In that regard, the establishment of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the appointment of an
Under-Secretary-General at its head, dedicated to this
issue, represent a real breakthrough. France welcomes
that development and hopes that it will improve the
coherence of the United Nations work in this area and
increase its visibility.
I turn now to my second comment, which concerns
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate, as the concept note encourages
us to lend closer attention to resolution 1373 (2001).
At the core of the new counter-terrorism architecture,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee must continue to
fulfil two essential functions both of which are equally
important. The first involves raising States’ awareness
of developments with regard to the terrorist threat.
The Committee can carry out that work only with the
support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which has considerable expertise in that
area at its disposal. I would like to commend today
the excellent work that the CTED teams are carrying
out. The issues on which it is working are very much
in line with France’s priorities, including countering
terrorist propaganda, especially on the Internet, and the
financing of terrorism, among others.
Through President Macron’s commitment, France
is playing a major role in addressing those two
issues. In that regard, France, along with the United
Kingdom and Italy, organized on the sidelines of the
General Assembly a high-level meeting on the use of
the Internet by terrorists groups. The first of its kind,
that meeting allowed us to strengthen dialogue with
Internet companies. As President Macron underscored,
that represented a major step, but we must go even
further. He also announced that France will hold an
international conference on the financing of terrorism
in early 2018. We, of course, also encourage CTED to
pursue its work in both of those areas.
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The second function of the Committee as
implemented by CTED is to assess how the States
implement the relevant resolutions. That type of
assessment is essential. France encourages all States to
accept visits by the Executive Directorate so that it can
audit their counter-terrorism systems and come up with
optimum recommendations. For its part, France received
its last visit by CTED in 2015 and drew important
lessons. Since that time, numerous administrative
and legislative measures have been adopted so as to
strengthen our counter-terrorism systems. Moreover,
it is essential that, based on those assessments and
recommendations, technical assistance programmes
can subsequently be designed and implemented by
the relevant United Nations entities. In that particular
regard, close cooperation between CTED and the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism will be crucial.
Terrorism is now one of the major global challenges
that States can no longer face alone. As President
Macron reminded us at the General Assembly last week
(see A/72/PV.4), France believes that multilateralism is
not only the right way to react in terms of legitimacy,
but also in terms of effectiveness, so as to respond to
those challenges.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by joining others in welcoming Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov to the Security Council for his first
briefing. Let me also thank Ambassador Aboulatta and
Mr David Scharia for their briefings on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), respectively.
In his address to the General Assembly last week
(see A/72/PV.3), the Secretary-General identified
terrorism as one of the seven threats and challenges
that are undermining our efforts to achieve peace and
a better world. He also noted, however, that counterterrorism efforts have disrupted networks, reclaimed
territory, prevented attacks and saved lives. Nonetheless,
it is clear that if we are to overcome the threat to our
societies from terrorism, our work must be intensified,
not least in the area of international cooperation.
The transnational nature of many terrorist operations
make the prevention of terrorist attacks by any one
country alone more difficult. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to establish the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) as

S/PV. 8059

the first of his reform initiatives. We look forward
to working with Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
going forward. Sweden greatly appreciates the work
of the UNOCT, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. CTED’s
expert assessments and work to facilitate Member
States’ implementation of the Council’s counterterrorism resolutions is essential. UNOCT’s ongoing
work to ensure implementation across all four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
as well as its bolstered capability to deliver capacitybuilding assistance to Member States, also represents
invaluable support for national efforts.
Special attention is needed with regard to the
multiple roles played by women with regard to terrorism,
including those of perpetrator, supporter, facilitator,
victim and preventer. Each of those roles requires
different approaches and strategies as part of our fight
against terrorism. It is important that CTED continue
its work on promoting the role of women in countering
terrorism and violent extremism. We recognize
CTED’s important work on developing thematic work
streams on issues, such as gender and its inclusion in
assessments, dialogues and analytical products. Such
thinking must also be mainstreamed into UNOCT’s
work. Sweden will continue to propose that references
to women, peace and security, as well as women’s role
in relation to terrorism and violent extremism, are
included in relevant Council work, including in the new
CTED mandate.
As we said yesterday during our debate on
aviation security (see S/PV.8057), there is no room for
complacency in the fight against terrorism. The terrorist
threat is always evolving, and attacks over the past
year, including in Stockholm, have shown that we need
to be constantly vigilant. We must continue working
to improve our counter-terrorism efforts. Sweden is
committed to that work, as well as to working together
with our European Union partners to that end.
In a broader context, we also need to ensure
continued efforts to prevent the emergence of
radicalization and violent extremism. That work
should be aligned with our common United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as the Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. The newly
established United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism
will be instrumental in seeing that work through.

17-3023215/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Among other actions, Sweden has supported work
by the United Nations Development Programme in
connection with the prevention of extremism, including
the recently released report, Journey to extremism in
Africa: Drivers, incentives and the tipping point for
recruitment. That report clearly shows that supporting
the social sectors in a participatory way at the local
level leads to hope and a sense of belonging that
counters violence and disruption. Inclusive societies,
education, growth and globalization are central to
those prevention efforts. Fully implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development can deliver that
inclusivity, which is required to help prevent violent
extremism and should be seen as integral to our efforts.
Let me conclude by also stressing that, of course,
the measures that we take against terrorism must always
comply with international law, including international
human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Today’s
debate, which follows logically on from yesterday’s
debate on civil aviation security, once again illustrates
the special importance that the Security Council
attaches to the fight against the scourge of terrorism.
Indeed, the multiplication and sophistication of terrorist
attacks throughout the world continually remind us of
the severity of that pernicious threat to international
peace and security. I therefore thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the Russian delegation for facilitating
this particularly timely meeting.
My thanks and welcome also go to Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov, head of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ambassador Amr
Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee;
and Mr. David Scharia of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. The quality of their
briefings on the multifaceted action of the United
Nations in its fight against terrorism helped to enrich
our discussions.
When the Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001),
establishing the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we could
not have imagined that, 16 years later, international
terrorism would have reached its current appalling
proportions. Rather than giving in to discouragement at
its apparent failure in finding adequate responses, in the
light of the scourge the international community must
adopt a coercive, inclusive and united long-term approach.
16/23

28/09/2017

To that end, the revision and streamlining of the
legal and institutional framework for the fight against
terrorism are imperative. That is why the Senegalese
delegation welcomed the establishment of the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the position of UnderSecretary-General at its head, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017. We
encourage the Office to strive for better coordination
among the various bodies, programmes and agencies
involved in counter-terrorism.
Terrorist movements increasingly use the Internet
and social media in their vile business of inciting
violence, recruiting foreign terrorist fighters, and
funding and planning terrorists acts. Those movements
take advantage of the flaws in financial systems and
national and international legal frameworks to raise
funds, including by trafficking in and selling oil,
kidnapping for ransoms, trafficking in persons, arms,
drugs and cultural goods, and other forms of extortion.
To prevent terrorists from pursuing their criminal
actions, States must now energetically implement the
relevant provisions of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624
(2005), 2133 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014) and 2253
(2015) by strengthening their cooperation in the field
of intelligence-sharing and better collaborating with
private providers to improve regulatory systems. I
pay tribute here to the outstanding work accomplished
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate in monitoring Member States’
implementation of the aforementioned resolutions.
Indeed, given the evolving and multifaceted nature
of terrorism, the ongoing increase in the number
of resolutions adopted by the Security Council
considerably broadens the scope of intervention
​​
of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, whereas human and financial resources
do not always keep up with such developments, which
could ultimately affect the effectiveness of that body.
By way of illustration, the country visits of
the Executive Directorate to assess the progress
of, challenges to and technical assistance required
by Member States could be better monitored and
evaluated on a regular basis, in consultation with the
countries concerned. Similarly, national, subregional
and regional specificities and constraints must be taken
into account in the context of building the capacities of
States to fulfil their obligations under Security Council
resolutions. In that context, it is important for Member
States, while maintaining their sovereignty, to adopt
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

national strategies and action plans that are based on
local realities and better adapted to socioeconomic and
security contexts.
In its efforts to implement measures to eliminate
international terrorism and violent extremism, Senegal
has adopted an approach that is based on prevention,
cooperation and rapid response. My country also
actively cooperates in the fields of international
counter-terrorism criminal justice; surveillance of
land, maritime and airport borders; and mutual legal
assistance in combating money-laundering and terrorist
financing. In addition, two laws were passed in 2007
that apply harsher penalties to terrorist perpetrators,
while a draft national strategy against terrorism and
violent extremism is under development.
Moreover, the promotion of dialogue and conflict
prevention, the involvement of populations through
the mobilization of young people, the empowerment
of women, education, capacity-building, the use
of religious leaders to deconstruct rhetoric and the
ideology of terrorist groups, and the facilitation of
access to employment are all essential components for
the prevention of violent extremism and can prevent the
radicalization of young people and their recruitment by
extremist organizations.
In conclusion, I solemnly reiterate my country’s
support for the Counter-Terrorism Committee, its
Executive Directorate and the Office of CounterTerrorism, while advocating for the strengthening of
their human and financial resources.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Ethiopian
presidency and the Russian Mission for organizing this
important informative meeting.
We are grateful for the briefing by the UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Office, Vladimir Voronkov, to whom we
wish the greatest success in the sensitive work assigned
to him. We are also grateful for the briefings by
Ambassador Aboulatta, in his capacity as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Mr. David Scharia,
Officer-in-Charge of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
The scenarios in which terrorism operates at the
local, regional and global levels are today one of the
greatest challenges facing the international community.
We therefore urgently call on the Security Council

S/PV. 8059

and the general membership to redouble their efforts
against this scourge by improving coordination and
international cooperation, using all the means provided
for by the Charter of the United Nations and their
commitments under international law.
Within the framework of the joint international
counter-terrorism effort, it is necessary to reiterate that
terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and
that those characteristics should in no circumstances
be used to justify measures aimed at fighting or
preventing it.
Bolivia, as a State that promotes the culture of
peace and, first and foremost, protects and guarantees
human rights and respect for international law, is
fulfilling its international obligations in the fight
against terrorism. We have implemented the provisions
set out in resolution 1373 (2001). We have codified
terrorism and terrorist financing as serious crimes.
And we have in place a domestic agency to prevent,
detect, investigate and implement monitoring measures
to avert the carrying out of terrorist acts. Likewise,
Bolivia is always collaborating and coordinating with
other countries in exchanging financial intelligence
to conduct investigations into suspect economic flows
that could be linked to money laundering or terrorist
financing. We have a normative framework in place
that enables us to adopt measures such as preventive
freezing of funds and other assets of individual or legal
entities — identified in lists published by the United
Nations — who could be linked to terrorism or the
financing of terrorism.
In addition, through its 2013 law on the control
of fire arms, munitions, explosives and other related
materials, Bolivia has at its disposal a concrete legal
framework to regulate the use and bearing of firearms,
explosives and other related materials. We have thereby
set up the relevant legal mechanisms for preventing,
combating and punishing crimes related to illegal
trafficking in weapons, firearms and explosives.
Against that backdrop, we call on the international
community to promote the active role of States in
combating terrorism. As we heard yesterday in the
meeting on aviation security (see S/PV.8057), technical
and financial cooperation are crucial to ensure that all
States can work on technical mechanisms that will help
us to build capacity to improve on making our fight
against terrorism much more effective.

17-3023217/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Given the threat posed by terrorism and violent
extremism to international peace and security, we
believe that we must look into what are the root causes
and its enabling forces around the world so as to make
the fight against the scourge more effective and avoid
us making the same mistakes again.
Let us be clear that the policies of regime change,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States have been some of the key reasons that
have led to the vacuums in Governments, weaker law
and order and the absence of control of their borders.
These factors have facilitated the work of terrorist
groups and extremists who find space to impose their
violent ideology and commit acts of destabilization,
including carrying out human rights violations that
could be tantamount to crimes against humanity.
Unfortunately, the victims of the acts committed
by terrorist organizations are civilians, including the
most vulnerable among them. This is reflected in the
high rate of violence against women we have witnessed,
as well as through the countless reports that the Council
has received, which point to the fact that sexual violence
perpetrated by grouops such as Da’esh, Boko Haram
and Al Shabaab is not only persistent, but an organic
part of their ideology. Based on the Secretary General’s
report (S/2017/249) on sexual violence in conflict
situations issued in April, the increase in the number of
women and female children subjected to sexual slavery,
as well as used as human shields and suicide bombers,
highlights their situation as expendable resources in the
terrorist system.
There is no denying that terrorism and armed
violence and instrinsically linked to the crime of
human trafficking and associated crimes. International
criminal groups and terrorist groups, which the Council
and all the countries of this Organization are fighting
against, earn money through human trafficking and
exploitation and they use the proceeds to finance their
terrorist activities. As a result, those resources are part
of the global financial system through money laundering
and tax havens. These resources tend to diminish or
eliminate checks, especially in terms of investment in
the tertiary sector, and they are used by the criminial
networks to legitimize their gains. Therefore, we believe
the international community must pool its efforts to
determine whether terrorist groups have access to the
international financial system via tax havens, including
taking steps to prevent it.
18/23

28/09/2017

We believe that all the efforts of the Security
Council and the United Nations to eliminate terrorism
must be backed by all its Members, who must seek
out and bring the perpetrators to justice: they must be
investigated, prosecuted and punished to the fullest
extent. Finally, we express our strong support for a
transparent and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and we call
on all States to commit to fighting this scourge.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
May I begin by thanking Ethiopia and the Russian
Federation for their iniative in convening today’s
open meeting. We welcome Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov. We stand ready to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Office under his leadership. We also wish to thank
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and Mr. Scharia, Officer-in-Charge of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for the briefings.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
The international community must use uniform
standards. We must resolutely fight terrorists no matter
where they are, what flag they fly, which country they
attack or whatever means they employ. In countering
terrorism, the sovereignty of the countries concerned
must be respected, the leadership role of the United
Nations and the Security Council must be given full
play and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations must be observed.
Terrorism must not be associated with any
particular ethnicity or religion. The international
community should promote the use of political means
and dialogue to address regional conflicts and eradicate
the root causes that give rise to terrorism. Countries
should enhance border control and law-enforcement
cooperation and disrupt the network by which terrorists
operate. More robust efforts should be made to combat
terrorism financing. The international community
should undertake pragmatic and results-oriented
cooperation by joining hands to combat the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes such as terrorist
propaganda, financing, recruitment, incitement
and planning.
In recent years, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), as an important platform of the Security
Council in dealing with counter-terrorism issues, has
closely monitored the new terrorist threats and trends
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and facilitated the comprehensive implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions by Member States. The
CTC works in close coordination with other United
Nations entities to advance the international counterterrorism agenda, which has produced positive and
effective results.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) is the executive arm of the
CTC. Through country visits and assessments, it
assists Member States in identifying deficiencies and
challenges they face, while facilitating the exchange of
counter-terrorism experience and providing technical
assistance to Member States. In that way, it plays an
important role in strengthening the capacity of Member
States to combat terrorism.
China supports the enhanced cooperation among
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
CTC, CTED and the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2001). On the basis
of the functions and responsibilities relating to counterterrorism as mandated by the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Office assists Member States
in the implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions of the Security Council and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Along
with the broader membership of the international
community, China will continue to strictly implement
the relevant Council resolutions and proactively
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation so
as to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Ethiopian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting with the view to
bringing greater coherence and focus to the issue. I
wish to take this opportunity to commend Ambassador
Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
to welcome Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Head
of the newly established Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and to thank Mr. Scharia for his briefing.
As others have reminded us, on this very day
16 years ago, in the aftermath of the attacks against the
United States, the Security Council took an important
step in addressing the scourge of terrorism by adopting
resolution 1373 (2001), a text that still represents a
milestone in the international community’s efforts in
tackling the terrorist threat. Since then, Member States
have been confronted with new challenges, including the
increasing flows of foreign terrorist fighters travelling

S/PV. 8059

to, or returning from, conflict zones the misuse of the
Internet and social media by terrorists and entities, as
well as the exploitation of trafficking by criminals and
terrorist networks.
In the years since the adoption of this important
resolution, its call on Member States to refrain from
providing any form of support to entities or persons
involved in terrorist acts, as well as its call on Member
States to strengthen their legal and institutional
capabilities to counter terrorism, could not be more
timely or valid. In that framework, we are strongly
committed to contributing to international efforts. In
particular, with respect to the anti-Da’esh coalition,
Italy co-chairs the working group on countering the
financing of terrorism. We are providing the second
contingent of the anti-Da’esh coalition, which provides
daily support to Iraqi authorities by training security
personnel in various fields, such as intelligence, law
enforcement, border patrol and street policing.
Italy recognizes the relevance of the ongoing work of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) — concerning the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities — and
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
We particularly appreciate efforts of CTED to assist
Member States in achieving the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions. We attribute great value to
the assessment visits of CTED to Member States. They
are vital tools for the identification of, inter alia, gaps,
challenges, good practices and general trends. All of
that knowledge should be made available to the relevant
United Nations bodies and should be instrumental in
prioritizing technical assistance interventions.
We also welcome the initiative undertaken by
CTED to update the 2009 Technical Guide in order to
reflect the requirements set by relevant resolutions of
the Council and provide Member States with a practical
reference tool that helps ensure the consistent analysis
of their implementation efforts. While acknowledging
the key role played by CTED in the counter-terrorism
framework of the United Nations, and in view of the
renewal of its mandate, it is our hope that the Directorate
will be provided with the necessary resources to
continue its important work.
A comprehensive approach to violent extremism
and terrorism is critical. The recent event mentioned by

17-3023219/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

other colleagues on preventing the use of the Internet
by terrorists, which was hosted by France, Italy and
the United Kingdom on the sidelines of the General
Assembly on 20 Septmber, can provide important
input for the strengthening of cooperation between
Governments and private companies. Italy is playing a
leading role in the fight against terrorism by focusing on
training and countering all forms of financial support
to terrorist groups, as well as through a strong response
to human trafficking, trafficking in cultural property
and illegal financial flows and money-laundering. That
is because terrorism and violent extremism cannot
be defeated through solely military means. We must
also consider and address the underlying forces that
facilitate violent extremism and the spread of messages
of hate. Therefore, we are committed to support any
intiatives that address the root causes of extremism,
focusing on, inter alia, countering radicalization in jails
and supporting youth programmes through the Office
of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth.
In that wider framework, Italy has fully supported
the process undertaken by the General Assembly
to further enhance the existing counter-terrorism
architecture and ensure the balanced implementation of
the four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy through the establishment of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, which
is headed by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov. We
think that the new body will provide a very important
added value, both in the prevention of, and in the
fight against, violent extremism. It is our hope that
the Counter-Terrorism Office will play a key role in
coordinating the several entities involved in the field of
counter-terrorism by contributing to the identification
of priority areas of intervention, as well as by taking
a proactive approach. At the same time, it should aim
to avoid task duplication and anything that might
significantly impact the mandate of other bodies.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine) I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov and other briefers for their
inputs to today’s discussion. We welcome the UnderSecretary-General and wish him the best in his highly
responsible work.
The past decades have been marked by the spread
of violent extremist ideologies and the emergence of
terrorist groups that are fuelled by them. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other groups have
grown from being regional menaces to global threats
20/23

28/09/2017

to international peace and security. Over the past
years, Ukraine has also accrued bitter experiences of
countering terrorist threats that have been fuelled by
external support for terrorist groups and organizations
in the east of my country.
The fight against terrorism has now firmly become
a key priority of the United Nations, leading to the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and subsequent
fundamental resolutions, as well as the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
2006. That also resulted in the establishment of key
Security Council and General Assembly bodies, such the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Although initially they had different mandates,
later development of the counter-terrorism norms of
the United Nations led to an overlap in the activities
of those bodies, as well as competition for resources,
influence and project ownership. Therefore, ensuring
mutually re-enforcing cooperation and avoiding
duplication of effort among United Nations bodies that
work on counter-terrorism-related issues remains an
ongoing challenge for the United Nations.
Ukraine has consistently supported the need
to enhance coherence and leadership of the United
Nations system in dealing with terrorist threats,
including by conducting a reform of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture. Therefore, the creation
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
is a welcome step in that direction. We expect that it
will mainstream counter-terrorism efforts within the
United Nations system and contribute to the proper
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, as well as to the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
In order to ensure that the stance of the United
Nations regarding countering terrorism remains strong,
we expect the new office to deliver the following: first,
show strategic leadership and commitment to action,
while addressing the conditions conducive to the spread
of terrorism on the basis of an all-Organization approach;
secondly, ensure appropriate resources and expertise
to provide policy advice on counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism; thirdly, strengthen its
strategic policy and programme guidance to Member
States through close cooperation with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
and forums; and, fourthly, enhance collaboration
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

among all United Nations entities operating in the field
and conduct outreach to civil society actors.
We recognize the central role of the CounterTerrorism Committee in overseeing the implementation
of specific counter-terrorism measures established by
the Security Council, monitoring the compliance of
States with their respective obligations and promoting
international cooperation in the field. We would like to
commend the work of CTED, which conducts country
visits on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
in order to assess the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2178). It also
detects possible gaps in the existing regulations using
a detailed survey tool, identifies the assistance needs
of States and facilitates the delivery of respective aid
by engaging in dialogue with prospective multilateral
and bilateral donors. In particular, we take positive
note of the recent update of the Technical Guide to
assist countries in their implementation efforts. That
work is vital for fostering the development of national
legislation and practices in criminal justice matters,
international cooperation, financial intelligence, border
security and law enforcement.
We have a very good experience of cooperation with
the Executive Directorate, which visited Ukraine in
2013. I would like to take this opportunity to underline
that we expect CTED to conduct a follow-up mission
to Ukraine in November, based on the CTC-approved
plan of visits for the period of 2014-2017. On our side,
we are keen to provide any necessary assistance in
its preparation.
Let me also touch upon the issue of the upcoming
revision of CTED’s mandate. We are pleased that
the CTEC programme of work of duly reflects all
of the new topics identified by the Council in its
recent resolutions. Yesterday, on aviation security
(see S/PV.8057), we discussed international judicial
cooperation, protection of critical infrastructure and
cultural property, countering terrorist narratives and
curbing the weapons supply to terrorists, all of which
are of particular importance to our common efforts.
New challenges may also arise that will require the
Council’s close attention.
However, given the drastic expansion of the
mandate of CTED, there is a need to ensure that its
planned activities are performed timely and that
Member States can fully benefit from its expertise.
CTED should therefore be provided with adequate

S/PV. 8059

capacities and resources. In that regard, Ukraine is ready
to provide its own contribution to the improvement of
the functioning of CTED, in particular through the
nomination of qualified experts for professional posts
to the enlarged entity. My delegation stands ready to
engage constructively in the process of the renewal of
the mandate of the Directorate at the end of the year.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
We are pleased to have taken the initiative to
convene this briefing meeting, together with our
Russian colleagues. We join other Security Council
members in congratulating Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov on his appointment as the head of the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism, as well as for his maiden
briefing to the Council, in which he outlined his vision
and priorities. I would also like once again to express
appreciation to Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing
today, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning Counter-Terrorism (CTC). We are also
thankful to David Scharia for sharing the perspective
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED).
The scourge of terrorism has been a major threat to
us all for decades now, and the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001)provided the international community with
a framework to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
The resolution established the Security Council
counter-terrorism architecture, including the CTC and
CTED, and laid the foundation for other resolutions.
We recognize and commend the indispensable role
of the CTC in monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
counter-terrorism.
We also appreciate the work of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate fo inimplementing
the decisions of the CTC, the expert assessments it
provides, as well as its assistance to Member States
in the implementation of resolutions on terrorism on
behalf of CTC. We particularly note the increase in
the number of country assessments and follow-ups in
facilitating technical assistance when that is needed by
the Member States concerned. In that regard, the CTC
and CTED have rightly contributed to enhancing the
capacity of Member States to prevent terrorist activities.
The adoption by the General Assembly of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, on 28 September 2006, was

17-3023221/23

S/PV.8059

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/09/2017

another milestone thatprovided a global framework for
enhancing national, regional and international efforts
to counter terrorism.

violent extremism, and we can see that implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
counter-terrorism is a matter of absolute necessity.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
has also played a very important role in implementing
the Strategy in that regard. The recent creation of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the appointment of
the Under-Secretary-General are very much welcomed.
We hope that will enhance greater coherence and
synergy among United Nations entities working on
counter-terrorism.

We have enacted an appropriate policy and legal
measures and an appropriate institutional framework in
that regard. In addition to what we are doing within
the framework of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and African Union, we are also
cooperating with the United Nations. The recent
comprehensive monitoring and promotional visit by the
CTC to Ethiopia is a case in point.

Although significant progress has been made by
Member States in implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
and other resolutions, what has been done remains
insufficient and terrorists continue to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. Today’s
briefing will help us to reflect on the achievements made
so far and the challenges that need to be addressed.

Therefore, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia’s readiness to continuing to work with Member
States, the United Nations and other stakeholders
in countering the menace of terrorism and violent
extremism, which are among the biggest international
peace and security threats of our time.

The CTED global implementation survey and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy clearly indicate that new and emerging
threats, including transnational organized crimes and
their linkage to terrorism financing and the use of the
Internet and other communications technologies by
terrorists, are posing an enormous challenge, and they
require greater attention. The challenge that developing
countries face in that regard is particularly enormous.
We believe that efficiently and effectively
addressing the issues of the compliance of Member
States with their obligations, establishing more
coordinated and enforcement mechanisms under
the auspices of the CTC and CTED to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions, ensuring better cooperation among
the relevant stakeholders and facilitating the provision
of technical assistance under resolution 1373 (2001) for
Member States when they need it, will go a long way in
facilitating implementation and addressing the new and
emerging challenges.
On its part, Ethiopia is striving to implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and other international and
regional counter-terrorism frameworks. In that context,
it is keen to work with all of the stakeholders in
existing and new regional and international corporation
platforms, but it is not only a matter of carrying
out our obligation. We find ourselves in a volatile
neighbourhood, which is facing threats of terrorism and
22/23

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Voronkov to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Voronkov (spoke in Russian): I would like to
thank all of the Ambassadors for their words of support.
Furthermore, I would like to note that I understand and
fully grasp the responsibility that has fallen to me. I
will endeavour in my work to rise to such expectations,
as well as those of Secretary-General António Guterres.
I stand ready to work closely with the CounterTerrorsim Committee and its Executive Directorate on
matters that are of mutual interest with regard to the
fight against terrorism.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Ambassador of the United Kingdom for
his question on how to better arrange the capabilities
of the United Nations to more effectively combat
violent extremism. We did a preliminary analysis of
the statements made in the General Assembly and all
of the priorities related to counter-terrorism raised by
Member States during the General Assembly session.
Preventing violent extremism and addressing the
drivers was the second most-important priority. There
are several guidelines that help to frame the work of the
United Nations on the prevention of violent extremism.
First, preventing violent extremism is anchored
in the first pillar one of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
17-30232

28/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, our focus is on preventing and addressing
the drivers as identified in the United Nations Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
Thirdly, our work is based on full respect for State
sovereignty and the principle of non-interference.
Member States take the lead at the national level, and
regional organizations at the regional level.
Fourthly, the role of the United Nations is to
support Member States and regional organizations,
upon their request, in developing national and regional
plans of action.
Fifthly, the plans of action put national Governments
and regional organizations at the forefront of efforts
to prevent violent extremism, and the United Nations
provides support to capacity-building initiatives.
I would also like to recall that the Secretary-General
has established an all-of-United Nations framework to
assist Member States in preventing violent extremism.

S/PV. 8059

At the highest level, the Secretary-General chairs a
high-level action group on preventing violent extremist,
made up of 22 relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and spearheads the implementation
of the Plan of Action across the United Nations system.
We at the Office of Counter-Terrorism will report to the
Secretary-General on those issues.
With regard to certain data, I would like to mention
that there are already 224 United Nations projects and
initiatives on preventing violent extremism, carried out
by 15 United Nations entities across all seven priority
areas of the United Nations Plan of Action. Eighty-two
of those projects are global, 67 are regional and 75 are
national. The national and regional projects are being
implemented in 77 countries across all regions upon
their request.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for the
clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-3023223/23
