V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Invites all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system engaged in operational activities for
development to adopt appropriate measures leading to a
greater use of the capacities of developing countries in local
or regional procurement of material and equipment, in train­
ing and in services, in facilitating the increased use of local
contractors, and in the recruitment of training, technical and
managerial personnel, bearing in mind decision 81/28 of 30
June 1981 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme; 163
11. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to include in his reporc
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session rec­
ommendations on specific ways and means of increasing
the participation of developing countries in the execution
of programmes and projects of the operational activities for
development of the United Nations system, bearing in mind
paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of Assembly resolution 35/81;
12. Invites the governing bodies of the organs, organ­
izations and bodies of the United Nations system engaged
in operational activities to take the action requested in para­
graphs 8, 9 and 11 of General Assembly resolution 35/81,
and invites the Secretary-General and the heads of those
organs, organizations and bodies to provide information on
the action taken by the governing bodies, and requests the
Director-General for Development and International Eco­
nomic Co-operation to include that information, together
with his own recommendations, in his reports to the As­
sembly at its thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth sessions and,
in preparing the recommendations requested in paragraph
18 of that resolution, to take into account the responses
made by the above-mentioned governing bodies and the
comments made thereon by delegations during the thirty­
sixth session of the Assembly;
13. Welcomes the establishment by the Secretary­
General of the consultative process in pursuance of para­
graph 6 of General Assembly resolution 34/213 of 19
December 1979, in which the Assembly called for consul­
tations with Governments, through the resident co-ordina­
tor, and for the participation of all organizations concerned
both at the country level and subsequently through the Ad­
ministrative Committee on Co-ordination. calls upon the
executive heads of the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to co-operate fully in
that process, and requests the Director-General for Devel­
opment and International Economic Co-operation to include
in his annual report information on the outcome of those
consultations;
14. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation to provide in his an­
nual report comprehensive statistical information on oper­
ational activities for development of the United Nations
system on the same basis as that contained in the annual
report for I 981, and to include separately in his report in­
formation pertaining to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Special Economic Assistance Programmes and the Fund of
the United Nations Environment Programme, as well as
information relating to administrative. programme and other
support costs incurred by organizations engaged in opera­
tional activities for development.
103rd plenary meeting
/7 December /98/

36/200.

133

nomic Order, 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to
which contains the International Dewelopment Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade, 35/81 of
5 December 1980 on the comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development and 35/83 of 5 De­
cember 1980 on the United Nations Development Programme,
Reaffirming the unique and important contribution which
the United Nations Development Programme is making to
the development efforts of developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-eighth session 162 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1981/59 of 22 July 1981 on the report of the
Governing Council,
Concerned at the shortfall of voluntary contributions in
relation to the assumed over-all average annual growth of
resources,
Aware that, together with efforts to obtain additional vol­
untary contributions, steps are being taken to increase fur­
ther the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the United
Nations Development Programme,
Noting that the Governing Council of the Programme has
decided to retain for the purposes of forward planning for
the third programming cycle, 1982-1986, an assumed over­
all average annual growth of resources of at least 14 per
cent,
Noting with appreciation the statement made before the
Second Committee on 24 September 1981 by the Admin­
istrator of the United Nations Development Programme, 165
Reaffirming the validity of the consensus of 1970, as set
forth in the annex to its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 De­
cember 1970,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Gov­
erning Council of the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme on its twenty-eighth session and the decisions
contained therein; 166
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/59;
3. Stresses that the realization of the goals and objec­
tives of the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade requires a renewed
emphasis upon technical co-operation and a significant in­
crease in the resources provided for that purpose;
4. Endors1:s also decision 81/37 of 27 June 198 I of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme 1 66 on streamlining and rationalizing the work of the
Governing Council;
5. Commends the efforts made by the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme to increase
further the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of the Pro­
gramme, and encourages the Administrator to continue to
intensify those efforts, taking account, inter alia, of the
need to restrain administrative expenditures in order to max­
imize programme delivery in accordance with paragraph 4
of decision 81/16 of 27 June 1981 of the Governing Council
of the Programme; 166
6. Exp,:esses its appreciation to all Governments of both
developed and developing countries which, at the 1981
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Ac­
tivities. announced contributions or their intention to con­
tribute to the United Nations Development Programme for
1982. in particular those Governments which have consis-

United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of

l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of _a New International Eco-

"'' Official Records of the General Assemhh. Thirtv-suth Session. S,•c­
ond Commirtee. 3rd meeting. para,. 19-24.
'"'' See Official Records o( the Economic and Social Council. /981.
Supplem,·nt No. II I E/1981 !h 1/Rev. 1). annex I

134

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

tently increased their voluntary contributions to the
Programme;
7. Expresses its deep concern nevertheless that the
likely shortfall in 1982 in over-all voluntary contributions
may adversely affect the proposed programme delivery for
the third programming cycle of the United Nations Devel­
opment Programme;
8. Urges all Governments, especially those whose vol­
untary contributions may not reflect their capacity to con­
tribute, to renew their efforts to provide the United Nations
Development Programme with the resources necessary to
establish a sound financial basis for the implementation of
the Programme's planned activities for the third program­
ming cycle, 1982-1986, which for the purpose of forward
planning would assume an over-all average annual growth
of resources of at least 14 per cent;
9. Strongly reiterates the need for a substantial and
real increase in the flow of resources for the United Nations
Development Programme on an increasingly predictable.
continuous and assured basis, and in that context welcomes
decision 81/37 of the Governing Council of the Programme
in which the Council decided to review this issue at its
twenty-ninth session;
10. Reaffirms the request of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme, in its decision
81/16, to the Administrator of the Programme to continue
consultations with donor countries with a view to reaching
the level of resources envisaged for 1982-1986 in order to
maintain the level of programme planning for participating
countries, as approved by the Governing Council for the
third programming cycle, 1982-1986;
11. Decides that, beginning in 1983, a broad policy
review of those funds and programmes which are under the
guidance of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme and managed by the Administra­
tor of the Programme should be undertaken on a biennial
basis, on the understanding that a brief report, including a
financial statement, on those funds and programmes should
be made available to the Governing Council in the inter­
vening years, and invites the Governing Council to act
accordingly.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/20L Establishment of the United Nations Popula­
tion Award
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Population Plan of Action, 167 adopted
by the United Nations World Population Conference, held
in 1974, and noting with satisfaction the significant contri­
butions made by the United Nations to the implementation
of that Plan,
Recognizing the economic and social implications of the
population trends particularly related to development, as
described in reports prepared by the United Nations and the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, which in­
dicate that world population is projected to grow from 4.4
billion in 1980 to approximately 6. I billion by the year
2000,
Recognizing the need to promote better awareness and
understanding of population issues, especially at the indi­
vidual and community levels of each country and in ac­
cordance with national plans and priorities,

Further recognizing the special significance of establish­
ing an award in order to promote that objective,
1. Decides to establish an annual award, to be named
the United Nations Population Award, for the most out­
standing contribution to the awareness of population ques­
tions or to their solutions, by an individual or individuals,
or by an institution, to be presented through the United
Nations;
2. Adopts the Regulations Governing the United Na­
tions Population Award. annexed to the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements, under the Regulations, for the com­
mencement of the Award in 1983, in consultation with the
Executive Director of the United Nations Fund for Popu­
lation Activities;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a Trust
Fund for the United Nations Population Award to receive
voluntary contributions for the Award;
5. Decides that all costs related to the Award should
be borne out of the Trust Fund.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
ANNEX

Regulations Governing the United Nations Population Award
Article I
AIM

The aim of the United Nations Population Award (hereinafter referred
to as "the Award") is to promote the solution of population questions
through encouraging the efforts of people in population-related activities
and increasing the awareness of population questions.

Article 2
AWARD

I. The Award shall be presented annually to an individual. to indi­
viduals or to an institution for the most outstanding contribution to in­
creasing the awareness of population questions or to their solutions. No
staff member, organ or organization of the United Nations system shall
be eligible for the Award.
2. The Award shall consist of a diploma, a gold medal and a monetary
prize, the amount of which shall be determined each year by the Secretary­
General on the basis of the investment income of the Trust Fund for the
Award.
3. The individual or individuals or the institution to receive the Award
sh.,ll be announced by the beginning of March each year. and the Award
shall be presented by the Secretary-General in the middle of June.

Article 3
FINANCIAL MATTERS

I. All financial resources related to the Award shall be composed of
the voluntary contributions made by Member States specifically for the
Award.
2. Contributions tor the Award shall be deposited in the Trust Fund
for the United Nations Population Award, to be established by the Se<:­
retary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 36/
201 of 17 December I98 I.
3. The Trust Fund shall be administered by the Executive Director
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities on behalf of the
Secretary-General.
4. All costs relating to the Award shall be financed from the investment
income of the Trust Fund. The administrative costs shall be kept as low
as possible.
5. The Executive Director of the United Nations Fund for Population
A<:tivities shall submit to the General Assembly an annual report concerning
the Award and the Trust Fund.

Article 4
167
Report of the United Nations World Population Conference, Bucha­
rest, 19-30 August /974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 75. XIIU).
chap I.

SELECTION OF LAUREATES

I. The individual or individuals or the institution to receive the Award
shall be selected. from among those nominated under article 5 below. by
