UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/17
29 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3888th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 May 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council strongly deplores the underground nuclear tests
that Pakistan conducted on 28 May 1998, despite overwhelming international
concern and calls for restraint. Reaffirming the Statement of its
President of 14 May 1998 (S/PRST/1998/12), on Indian nuclear tests of
11 and 13 May, the Council strongly urges India and Pakistan to refrain
from any further tests. It is of the view that testing by India and then
by Pakistan is contrary to the de facto moratorium on the testing of
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and to global efforts
towards nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. The Council
also expresses its concern at the effects of this development on peace and
stability in the region.
"The Security Council reaffirms the crucial importance of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). The Council appeals to India and Pakistan, and all
other States which have not yet done so, to become parties to the NPT, and
to the CTBT, without delay and without conditions. The Council also
encourages India and Pakistan to participate, in a positive spirit, in the
proposed negotiations with other States for a fissile material cut-off
treaty in Geneva with a view to reaching early agreement.
"The Security Council calls upon all parties to exercise maximum
restraint and to take immediate steps to reduce and remove tensions between
them. The Council reaffirms that the sources of tension in South Asia
should be reduced and eliminated only through peaceful dialogue and not by
the use of force or other military means.
"The Security Council urges India and Pakistan to resume the dialogue
between them on all outstanding issues, including all those that the
parties have already discussed, especially matters concerning peace and

98-14875 (E)

290598

/...

S/PRST/1998/17
English
Page 2

security, in order to remove the tensions between them and to enhance their
economic and political cooperation. The Council calls upon India and
Pakistan to avoid any steps or statements that could lead to further
instability or impede their bilateral dialogue.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
