27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the States of the region in giving
effect to the purpose of the present resolution.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3478 (XXX). Conclusion of a treaty on·the com•
plete and general prohihition of nuclear
weapon tests

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the urgent need for the cessation everywhere and by all of nuclear weapon tests, including
underground tests,
Expressing its deep concern over the fact that an
international agreenrent on the cessation of nuclear
weapon tests of all kinds has not yet been reached,
Convinced that the cessation of such tests would contribute to the reduction of the nuclear arms race as
well as to the further relaxation of international tension,
Reaffirming that the potential benefits of any peaceful application of nuclear explosions should be available to nuclear as well as non-nuclear States, in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 51 in such a
way as to exclude any possibility of peaceful nuclear
explosions being used for purposes incompatible with the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon
tests and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Also convinced of the need again to exert every effort for the early cessation everywhere and by all of
nuclear weapon tests, including underground tests,
l. Takes note of the draft treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests submitted to the General Assembly by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the text of which is annexed to
the present resolution;
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to enter
into negotiations, not later than 31 March 1976, with
a view to reaching agreement on the complete and
general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests, and invites twenty-4ive to thirty non-nuclear-weapon States,
to be appoirlted by the President of the General Assembly after consultations with all regional groups,112 to
participate in those negotiations, and to inform the
Assembly, at its thirty-first session, of the results of the
negotiations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be necessary for the negotiations
with a view to reaching agreement on the complete and
general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests and to
transmit to the group referred to in paragraph 2 above
all documents relating to the consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of agenda items
37 and 122;53
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the ítem entitled "Conclusion of
a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear weapon tests".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
151 Resolutdon 2373 (XXII), ami.ex.
15 2 For the report of the President of the General Assembly

on this matter, see A/10509.
53 For the wording of the items, see below pp. 162 and 168.

ANNEX
Union of Soviet Socialist Republies: draft treaty on the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests

The States Parties to this Treaty,
Proclaiming their intention to bring about, as speedily as
possible, the cessation of the nuclear arms race, the adoption
of effective measures towards nuclear disarmament and the
conclusion of an agreement on general and complete diBarmament under strict and effective international control,
Taking into account the appeals by the General Assembly
of the United Nations to put an end to nuclear weapon tests
in ali environments,
Noting that the prohibition of ali nuclear weapon tests
would be in the interests of strengthening peace and slowing
the arms race and would be a contribution to the process of
intemational détente,
Reaffirming that the potential benefits of any peaceful application of nuclear explosions should be available to nuclear as
well as non-nuclear States in conformity with the provisions of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 54
and of ,the present Treaty,
Noting the great posiitive significance of the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and
under Water, signeii in Moscow on 5 August 1963, 55
Stressing the importance of strict compliance with the abovementioneii Treaty up to the time of entry into force of this
Treaty,
Seeking to achieve the permanen,t cessation of all test explosions of nuclear weapons by all States,
Have agreed on the following:
ARTICLE 1
1. Each State Party to this Treaty undertakes to prohibit,
to prevent and to refrain from carrying out any test explosions
of nuclear weapons anywhere under its jurisdiction or control in
aill environments-in the atmosphere, in outer space, under
water and underground.
·
2. Each State Party to this Treaty undertakes to refrain
from encouraging, inciting, or in any way participati:ng in the
carrying out of nuclear explosions prohibited by paragraph 1
of this article.
ARTICLE 11

l. Control over compliance. with this Treaty shall be conducted by the States Parties, through their own national technical means of control, in accordance with the generally recognized rules of international law.
2. In order to promote the objectives of and ensure compliance with the provisions of · this Treaty, the Parties to the
Treaty shall co-operate in an id'ternational exchange of seismic
data.
3. In order to promote the objectives of and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Treaty, the Parties shall,
when necessary, consult one another, make inquiries and receive appropriate informatdon in connexion with such inquiries.
4. Any State Party to this Treaty whlch a.scertains that any
other State Party is acting in violation of obligations deriving
from the provisions of the Treaty may lodge a complaint with
the Security Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint
must contain all possible evidence confirming its validity and
a request for its consideration by the Security Coi.mcil. Toe
Counoil shall inform the States Parties to the Treaty of the
reswlts of its consideration.
ARTICLE

III

1. Toe provisions of article ,1 shall not apply to any underground nuclear explosions conducted by nuclear-weapon States
for peaceful purposes on the territory under their jurisdiction
and in compliance with the agreements under wh.ich, ·in accordance with article V of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
154 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
1111 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

28

of Nuclear Weapons, non-nuclear-weapon States are to benefit
from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions.
2. The explosions referred to in paragraph 1 of this article
shall be conducted as follows:
(a) In the case of non-nuclear-weapon States, in conformity with the provisions of article V of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;
(b) In the case of nuclear-weapon °"§ates, in conformity
with a procedure to be established under a special agreement
concerniing which the nualear-weapon States will conduct negotiations with due regard for the recommendations of the
Interna.tion.al Atomic Energy Agency on the subject and which
will be concluded as speedily as possible.

shall include a statement of the extraordinary circumstances
which it regards as having jeopardized its supre,me intere&ts.
ARTICLE VIII

This Treaty, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shaill be deposited
in the archives of the depositary Govemments. Duly certified
copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the de,positary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorizcd for
the purpose, have signed this Treaty. .
DoNE in . . . .
. . copies, at . . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . day
of ........ , .... .

ARTICLE IV

The prov1s10ns of this Treaty shall not affect obligations
assumed by the States Par,ties to the Treaty under other international agreements.
ARTICLE V

l. Any Party to this Treaty may propose amendments to
the Treaty. The text of any proposed amendment sball be
submitted to the depositary Governrnents, which shall circulate
it to ali Parties to the Treaty. Thereupon, if requested to do so
by one third or more of the Parties to the Treaty, the depositary Governmems shall convene a conference, to which
they shall invite ali the Parties to the Treaty, for the purpose
of considering such amendment.
2. Any amendment to this Treaty must be approved by a
majority of the votes of all the Parties to the Treaty, including the votes of ali nuclear-weapon States Parties to the Treaty.
The amendment shall enter into _force for each Party depositing
its instrument of ratification of the amendment upon the deposit
of such instruments of ratification by a majority of all the
Par-ties, including the nuclear-weapon States Parties to the
Treaty. Thereafter, it shall enter into force for any other Party
upon the depo9it of its instrument of rati&ation of the amendment.
ARTICLE VI

l. This Treaty shall be open to all States for signature.
Any Sta.te which does not sign the Treaty before its entry into
force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratifioa.tion by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification and accession shall be deposited with the Governments of ........ , which are hereby
designated the depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force upon the deposit of
the instruments of ratification by . . . . . . . . Governments, including the Governments of'al! nuclear-weapon States.
4. Por States whose in.struments of ratification or aocession
are deposited subsequeillt to the entry into force of this Treaty,
it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
S. Toe depositary Governments shall pronÍptly inform ali
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession, the date of the entry into force of this Treaty and the
date of receipt of any requests for convening a conference of
Parties to the Treaty or of other notifications.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE VII

l. This Treaty shall be of unlimited duration.
2. Each State Party to this Treaty shall, in the exercise of
its national sovereignty, have the right to withdraw from the
Treaty if it decides that e~traordinary circumstances, connected with the subject-matter of this Treaty, havé jeopardized
its supreme interests. It shall give notice of such withdrawal
to ali other Parties to the Treaty and to the Security Council
of the U-nited Nations three months in advance. Such notice

3479 (XXX). Prohihition of the development
and manufacture of new types of weapona
of mass destruction and new syateD18 of auch
weapons
The General Assembly,
Striving to strengtheri- international peace and security,
'conscious of the interest of nations in continuing
efforts to save mankind from the danger of the use of
new means of mass destruction, to limit the arms race
and to bring about disarmament,
Bearing in mind that modem science and technology
have reached a level where a serious danger arises of
the development of new, still more destructive trpes
of weapon1¡ pf mass destruction and of new systems of
such weapons,
Convinced that the prohibition of the development
and manufacture of new, still more destructive types of
weapons of mass destruction would serve the goal of
strengthening peace and preventing the threat of war,
1. Considers it necessary to take effective steps, by
concluding an appropriate intemational treaty or agreement, for the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons;
2. Takes note of the draft agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new ~ystems
of such weapons, submitted to the General Assembly
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution, as well as
points of view and suggestions put forward during thc
discussion of this question;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, to work
out the text of such an agreement and to submit a roport on the result3 achieved for consideration by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the discussion by the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session of the item entitled
"Prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and ncw
systems of such weapons";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-4irst session the item entitled "Prohibition of
the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
