(;encrai Assembl_v-F.lc,•01/h Session

RESOLUTION ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE

( d) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has violated its obJ,igations under the Geneva Conventions of
1949;
( e) The present authorities in H ungary have violated the human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the
Treaty of Peace with Hungary;
5. Condemns these acts and the continued defiance
of the resolutions of the General Assembly;
û. Reiterates ifs conccrn with the continuing plight
of the H ungarian people;
7. Considers that further efforts must be made to
achieve the objectives of the United Nations in regard
to Hungary in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter and the pertinent resolutions of
the General Assembly;
8. Calls upon the Cnion of Soviet Socialist Rcpub\ics and the present authorities in Hungary, in view of
cvidence contained in the report, to desist from reprcssive measures against the Hungarian people, to respect
the liberty and political independence of H ungary and
the l--l ungarian people's enjoyment of fundamental
human rights and freedoms, and to ensure the return
to Hungary of those Hungarian citizens who have been
<leported to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
l).
Rcquests the President of the eleventh session
of the General Assembly, H.R.H. Prince \Van \Vaithayakon, as the General Assembly's special representative
on the H ungarian problem, to take such steps as he
deems appropriate, in view of the findings of the Committee, to achieve the objectives of the United >J ations
in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 100-l
(ES-II) of 4 November 1956, 1005 (ES-II) of 9 Novemher 1956, 1127 (XI) of 21 November 1956, 1131
(XI) çif 12 December 1956 and 1132 (XI) of 10 January 1957, to consult as appropriate with the Committce
cluring the course of his endeavours, and to report ami
make recommenclations as he may cleern advisahle to
the Ceneral Assembly;
10. Dccidcs to place the Hungarian item un the
provisional agenda of the twelfth session of the General
Assembly.
677 th plcnary meeting,
N Septcmbcr 1957.

1133 (XI). Question considered hy the second
emergency special session of the General
Assemhly from 4 to 10 Novemher 1956
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1132 (XI) of 10 January
1957, estabJ.ishing a Special Committee, consisting of
representatives of Australia, Ceylon, Denmark, Tunisia
and Uruguay, to investigate, and to establish and maintain direct observation in H ungary and elsewhere,
taking testimony, collecting evidence and receiving information, as appropr,iate,
H aving now rcceived the unanimous report of the
Special C0mmittee on the Problem of H ungary, 1
Regretting that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the present authorities in Hungary have failed
to co-operate in any way with the Committee,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary for its work;

2.

Endor ses the report of the Committee;

3. Notes the conclusion of the Committee that the
events which took place in Hungary in October and
N ovember of 1956 constituted a spontaneous national
uprising;
4. Finds that the conclusions reached by the Committee on the basis of its examination of ail available
evidence confirm that :
(a) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, has deprived Hungary of its J.iberty and political independence and the Hungarian people of the exercise of their
fondamental human rights;
( b) The present Hungarian régime has been imposed on the Hungarian people by the armed intervention of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
( c) The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has
carried out mass deportations of Hungarian citizens to
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics;
1 Official Records of the General Asscmbly, Elcvcnth Session, S11pp/c111ent !Va. 18 (/\./3592).

I
