S/2018/619

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 June 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-second submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017) and
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), in which the Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available t o agencies of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for May 2018.

__________________
1

18-09778 (E)

Input provided by the Office of the United Nations High Commi ssioner for Human Rights, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Mine Action Service, the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

210618

*1809778*

S/2018/619

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: May 2018
1.
During the reporting period, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
solidified its control over eastern Ghutah and gained control of Yarmouk camp and
surrounding areas, following sustained military operations that resulted in deaths,
injuries and damage to civilian infrastructure in those locations. As a result, there has
been a reduction in the number of people in besieged locations. Both eastern Ghutah
and Yarmouk camp are now categorized as hard-to-reach areas for humanitarian
organizations. Access to those areas remained unauthorized by the Government
except for one visit made to eastern Ghutah by representatives of United Nations
agencies in mid-May.
2.
Some 35,000 people were displaced from northern Homs and southern Hama,
and 9,650 others were displaced from Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham, in Rif Dimashq,
following local agreements providing for evacuations. The United Nations was not a
party to those agreements, nor was it involved in the evacuations. In total, nearly
120,000 people are reported to have been displaced following local agreements since
mid-March.
3.
A large proportion of the population of eastern Ghutah, some 160,000 people,
remained displaced across the Syrian Arab Republic throughout the reporting period,
including an estimated 44,000 at sites for internally displaced persons in Rif Dimashq
Governorate and some 40,000 who had been authorized to move out of those sites
through a system of sponsorship, following security clearance. T he Government
reported that approximately 13,500 people had returned to eastern Ghutah by the end
of May.
4.
Reports of increased military operations in the south-western part of the Syrian
Arab Republic raised concerns about further escalation in the area and related
humanitarian consequences. Humanitarian organizations continued their contingency
planning and response preparedness efforts, including through cross -border
humanitarian operations.
5.
In the north-western part of the country, the humanitarian response to the needs
of people displaced to the Tall Rif‘at area of Aleppo Governorate as a result of military
operations in Afrin district, and to Nubl, Zahra’, Fafin and surrounding villages,
continued. Restrictions on the movement of people displaced from Afrin remained a
concern, although some returns to Afrin district were reported in late May. Access for
Damascus-based United Nations agencies and implementing partners from within the
country to Afrin district itself remained cut off. Cross-border non-governmental
organizations had regular access to Afrin district.
6.
In Idlib Governorate, fighting between government forces and non -State armed
opposition groups, as well as among non-State armed opposition groups, continued to
be reported. The continued arrival of newly displaced people under evacuation
arrangements in northern rural Homs, southern rural Hama and Yalda, Babila and Bayt
Saham further stretched humanitarian response capacities and placed additional
pressure on host communities in both Idlib and Aleppo Governorates.
7.
United Nations humanitarian assistance reached millions of people in need,
including more than 2.17 million who received food assistance through regular
deliveries to government-controlled areas. Access to hard-to-reach and besieged areas
remained challenging. Facilitation letters were provided for inter-agency convoys to

2/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

Talbisah and Tulul al-Humr. While those convoys proceeded on 30 May, United
Nations personnel were not permitted to participate, on security gro unds.

3.
Since the adoption by the Security Council on 24 February 2018 of its resolution
2401 (2018), in which the Council demanded a cessation of hostilities, military
conflict has continued in many parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. Throughout May,
air strikes, artillery shelling and sniper fire were reported in the governorates of
Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Dayr al-Zawr, Homs, Hama, Damascus, Rif Dimashq,
Dar‘a and Qunaytirah as military operations continued between the Government and
its allied forces, and non-State armed opposition groups. Sporadic clashes occurred
between government forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces in Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate.
4.
The reporting period saw a reduction in the number of people in areas
categorized as besieged as the Government regained control of Yarmouk camp, in
southern Damascus Governorate, following sustained military operations that
resulted in deaths, injuries and damage to civilian infrastructure. N o United Nations
access to Yarmouk camp was authorized by the Government during the reporting
period, although the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) was permitted to carry out a rapid needs assessment in
neighbouring Yalda on 28 May. By the end of the reporting period, UNRWA had
reported that Yarmouk camp itself, home to more than 160,000 people before the
conflict, was largely empty and in ruins. According to the Agency ’s estimates, as few
as 100 Palestine refugees remained inside the camp as of late May. The reporting
period also saw a reduction in the number of people in areas categorized as hard to
reach, as humanitarian access improved in a number of areas that had recently come
under localized agreements.
5.
Following military escalation in northern Homs and southern Hama
Governorates, some 35,000 people were displaced after the conclusion of local
agreements between representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and non-State armed opposition groups. An additional 9,650 people were evacuated
from Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham, in Rif Dimashq. Those evacuees were
transported to the north-western part of the country, where they were able to access
humanitarian assistance delivered through cross-border operations. In addition,
between 900 and 1,200 fighters of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
members of their families were evacuated to a desert area between the eastern part of
Homs and western Dayr al-Zawr, and an estimated 400 family members of ISIL
fighters were evacuated to north-western Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations
was not a party to these agreements, nor was it involved in the evacuations.
6.
A significant proportion of the population of eastern Ghutah remain ed displaced
throughout the reporting period, including an estimated 44,000 people in sites for
internally displaced persons in Rif Dimashq Governorate and a similar number who
had been authorized to move out of those sites through a system of sponsorship,
following security clearance. An additional 66,365 people from eastern Ghutah
remained in various locations in the north-western part of the country, following
several rounds of evacuations in March and April. The Syrian authorities reported that
some 13,500 people had returned to eastern Ghutah by the end of the reporting period.
7.
United Nations personnel visited Saqba and Kafr Batna, in eastern Ghutah, on
14 May and observed the resumption of some services and commercial activity.
However, damage to civilian infrastructure was extensive, with a clear need for a
significant scaling-up of humanitarian assistance and protection activities. This visit

18-09778

3/22

S/2018/619

marked the first time that United Nations personnel had been granted access to eastern
Ghutah since 15 March, when an inter-agency convoy delivered assistance for 26,100
people. Since then, assistance has been provided only through the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and other local organizations. The United Nations continued to call for
expanded regular access to allow for needs to be fully assessed and for assistance to
be further scaled up in eastern Ghutah, including in Duma.
8.
Reports of significant military mobilization in the south-western part of the
Syrian Arab Republic contributed to concerns about a furth er escalation in the area
and related humanitarian consequences. Syrian forces were reported to have dropped
flyers over various communities in Dar‘a Governorate, calling on opposition fighters
to enter into reconciliation agreements or face a military offensive. Humanitarian
organizations continued their contingency planning and response preparedness
efforts, drawing on cross-border assistance deliveries.
9.
The humanitarian situation in Idlib Governorate remained of great concern
during the reporting period, with air strikes, clashes between armed groups,
overcrowding and severely stretched basic services contributing to the deepening of
the suffering of both displaced people and host communities. Some 80,000 newly
displaced people had arrived in Idlib between March and the end of the reporting
period. Humanitarian organizations in the area reported that keeping pace with the
growing needs was increasingly challenging, and cross-border assistance remained a
critical part of efforts in that regard. Half of the 2.4 million people in Idlib are
internally displaced, with many having had to flee more than once.
10. Turkish forces, along with Syrian non-State armed opposition groups affiliated
with Operation Euphrates Shield, continued to carry out Operation Oli ve Branch in
Afrin, in Aleppo Governorate. The United Nations and its partners continued to
respond to the needs of people displaced from Afrin district to the Tall Rif ‘at area and
to Nubl, Zahra’, Fafin and surrounding villages. Efforts to register the di splaced also
continued in those locations. Restrictions on the movement of people displaced from
Afrin remained a major concern, although several hundred vehicles were reportedly
able to proceed to Afrin city through a crossing point in Ibin village betwee n 21 and
26 May. Humanitarian access to Afrin district from within the Syrian Arab Republic
has not yet received the necessary approvals from the Syrian authorities.
Humanitarian organizations based in Turkey with access to Afrin district continued
to provide assistance, including United Nations assistance. The United Nations and
partners conducted a rapid needs assessment during the reporting period. Findings
indicated that needs remained high, with most health-care facilities in rural areas
closed, many service providers having fled the area and a large proportion of schools,
markets and bakeries not yet functional, owing to the continued absence of staff,
workers and tradespeople.
11. Diplomatic engagement by my Special Envoy for Syria to meaningfully
relaunch the United Nations-facilitated Geneva process continued in May with
representatives of the Astana guarantors, composed of Iran (Islamic Republic of), the
Russian Federation and Turkey, and the Small Group of the Global Coalition,
composed of France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. My Special Envoy
reminded interlocutors of the need for robust and proactive international dialogue and
consensus to create the minimum conditions necessary for a credible political process.
12. Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey met in Astana on
14 and 15 May and agreed to hold joint consultations of their high -level
representatives with my Special Envoy in order to create conditions to facilitate the
beginning of the work of the constitutional committee in Geneva. Soon thereafter, my
Special Envoy received an initial list of names for the constitutional committee from
4/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, a second meeting of the
Working Group on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the
identification of missing persons was held, with the participation of the three Astana
guarantors, the United Nations and experts from the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Figure I
Key dates in May 2018

30 May
Convoy to Talbisah and
Tulul al-Humr, United
Nations personnel not
permitted to participate

13. Military campaigns against ISIL continued during the reporting period. The
United States-led coalition increased offensive activity against ISIL throughout May,
including on the Iraq-Syrian Arab Republic border. Fighting between government
forces and ISIL in the areas of Yarmouk camp and Hajar al-Aswad, in southern
Damascus, continued until a ceasefire deal was reportedly negotiated, followed by
the evacuation of hundreds of ISIL fighters and civilians to the Syrian desert in Homs
and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic stated
that it had reassumed its full authority over those areas, bringing under its control the
entire capital and its surrounding areas. Government forces also continued their
campaign against ISIL in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, where government forces seized
additional areas. The Syrian Democratic Forces continued their assault against ISIL
in Dayr al-Zawr and Hasakah Governorates, where they gained additional territory.
Non-State armed opposition groups battled ISIL in the western countryside of Dar ‘a
Governorate.
Protection
14. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and to damage
and destroy civilian infrastructure. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into
populated areas, killing and injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital
infrastructure. Communities were littered with explosive hazards that killed and
injured civilians and impeded humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive
devices in some areas added to the complexity of the explosive hazard threat. The
many civilian casualties and the scale of the destruction of civilian infrastructure
remained a strong indication that violations of the fundamental rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and in particular of the prohibition on the launching
of indiscriminate attacks, continued.
15. During the conflict with ISIL, Raqqah city was littered by a comp lex array of
explosive hazards, including unexploded ordnance, landmines and improvised
explosive devices, that posed a direct risk to civilians and to humanitarian and
construction workers. Explosive hazards remaining from conflict with ISIL continued
18-09778

5/22

S/2018/619

to be a major threat to civilians returning to Raqqah city as well as to humanitarian
and construction workers, even though the number of victims diminished during the
reporting period. United Nations partners saw an average of between 10 and 15 blast related civilian injuries and deaths per week, down from 50 per week in late 2017.
However, the number of child victims, especially boys, increased as a result of greater
numbers of families returning and children playing outside in dangerous areas.
16. Fighting continued to have an impact on civilian infrastructure, including
medical facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information
received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), civilian casualties occurred in various governorates, possibly in violation
of international humanitarian law (see annex). OHCHR has documented alleged
violations committed by parties to the conflict, including government forces and their
allies, non-State armed opposition groups and their allies, and Security Councildesignated terrorist groups.
17. In addition to violations documented by OHCHR, the Government provided the
Office with information on alleged violations. The United Nations cannot
independently verify those allegations. Three notes verbales, dated 2 May, were sent
by the Syrian Arab Republic to OHCHR. In the first, the Syrian Arab Republic
informed the Office of “civilian deaths and injured civilians, as a result of the terrorist
attacks committed by the terrorist armed groups targeting the residential
neighbourhoods of Damascus in the Syrian Arab Republic, using mortars and missiles
mortars, during the period from 22 December 2017 to 22 April 2018. Those terrorist
attacks with mortars amounted to 2,984 mortars, and resulted in 161 civilian deaths
and 892 injured civilians”. In the second note, it informed the Office of “shelling with
mortars and missile attacks, perpetrated by terrorist armed groups, targeting the
residential neighbourhoods of Almidan, Kfar Souseh, Nahr Eisheh, Azzahira,
Alqadam and Daf Alshok in Damascus city in the Syrian Arab Republic, on the 25th,
27th and 28th of April 2018, which amounted to 13 mortars. Those terrorist attacks
resulted in one civilian death and eight injured civilians, most of them children and
women, as well as in physical damage to private and public property and
infrastructures”. In the third note, the Syrian authorities informed the Office of
“shelling with mortars and missiles attacks, perpetrated by terrorist ar med groups,
targeting residential neighbourhoods of Nahr Eisheh, Sbeineh, Alqadam, Almidan,
Azzahirah and Assayida Zeinab in Damascus city in the Syrian Arab Republic, on the
22nd, 23rd and 24th of April 2018, which amounted to 22 mortars. Those terrorist
attacks resulted in seven civilian deaths and 40 injured civilians, most of them
children and women, as well as in physical damage to private and public property and
infrastructures”. On 15 May, the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations and other international organizations in Geneva sent another note
verbale to OHCHR in which it informed the Office of “shelling with mortars and
missiles attacks, and sniping cases perpetrated by terrorist armed groups, targeting
residential neighbourhoods of Alqazaz, Daf Ashok, Commercial Bourj Damascus,
Almaysat Square, Almidan and Azzahirah in Damascus city in the Syrian Arab
Republic, from the 8th to the 11th of May 2018, which amounted to 10 mortars. Those
terrorist attacks resulted in 5 civilian deaths and 26 injured civilians, most of them
children and women, as well as in physical damage to private and public property and
infrastructure”. On 25 May, the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations and other international organizations in Geneva sent an additional
note verbale to OHCHR in which it informed the Office of “shelling with mortars and
missiles attacks perpetrated by terrorist armed groups, targeting residential
neighbourhoods of Victoria Bridge, Almidan, Asekh Mheddin and Azzahira in
Damascus city in the Syrian Arab Republic, on the 16th and 17th of May 2018, which
amounted to 5 mortars. Those terrorist attacks resulted in 2 civilian deaths and 32

6/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

injured civilians, most of them children and women, as well a s in physical damage to
private and public property and infrastructures”.
18. Notwithstanding the call upon the Syrian authorities by the Human Rights
Council, in its resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including
through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote
human rights, OHCHR reporting remained limited, given that the Government had
not granted it access to the country.
19. The United Nations and its health partners verified two attacks impacting
health-care facilities and personnel during the reporting period. On the morning of
2 May, health sector partners reported air strikes on the Specialized Hospital in Kafr
Zayta town, in northern rural Hama. The air strikes resulted in the death of one staf f
member and caused massive damage to the hospital building. On 12 May, in Idlib
city, a large explosion occurred in front of the Governorate Hospital, killing 12 people
and injuring at least 60 others, in addition to causing damage to the hospital ’s
intensive care unit and its emergency and children’s departments. The hospital was
closed as a result. Health partners also reported an alleged missile and barrel bomb
attack on a makeshift hospital in Rastan city, in northern rural Homs Governorate. On
12 May, a mobile medical clinic was reportedly hit by fragments of a rocket -propelled
grenade as it was parked in a garage beside the offices of a local non -governmental
organization, which caused material damage.
20. Education facilities also continued to be affected by the fighting, with an attack
carried out on 28 May on al-Bashaer College in Nawa city, in rural Dar‘a Governorate,
in which armed men entered the school through its roof before opening fire on
students and teaching staff, injuring one student. Staff reported that the reason for the
attack had been a refusal to pay fees demanded by the unidentified armed group. An
additional attack was alleged to have taken place in Dana city, in northern rural Idlib
Governorate, when a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded near
al-Sina‘a School for Girls, resulting in a large fire. No casualties were reported in
relation to the incident.
Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to re ach millions
of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian
assistance provided from within the country by United Nations agencies based in
Damascus to regularly accessible locations in government-controlled areas reached
more than 2.17 million people with food assistance through 2,180 deliveries.
2.
Only two inter-agency humanitarian convoys of lifesaving relief, food and
medical supplies were deployed in May, namely, to the hard -to-reach locations of
Talbisah, in northern rural Homs, and Tulul al-Humr, in southern Hama. The Syrian
Arab Red Crescent delivered United Nations multisectoral assistance for 92,750
people in those two locations. The convoys also delivered food assistance for 12,000
in nearby Jabiriyah village. United Nations personnel were not permitted to
participate in the two convoys, because security approvals had not been received from
the Syrian authorities.
3.
Cross-border assistance, authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2393 (2017), remained a vital part of the
humanitarian response. In May, 440 trucks (19 consignments) delivered lifesaving
assistance to more than 1 million people through cross-border deliveries. The United

18-09778

7/22

S/2018/619

Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic continued its ope rations
in Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
4.
The United Nations estimates that, as at 30 May 2018, some 1.5 million people
were living in hard-to-reach and besieged locations in the Syrian Arab Republic. That
number included 8,100 people living in locations b esieged by armed opposition
groups (compared with 11,100 in April 2018), namely, Fu‘ah and Kafraya, and
1,483,964 people living in hard-to-reach areas (compared with 2.04 million in April
2018). This update relates to the improvement of humanitarian access in a number of
areas that recently came under localized agreements, as well as to recent changes in
the lines of control in Yarmouk, following a military offensive by the Government
and allied forces.

21. Under the United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for May and June, access
was requested to 20 locations in besieged and hard-to-reach areas, with the objective
of reaching 860,200 people. In May, two inter-agency convoys were authorized to
deploy to the hard-to-reach locations of Talbisah, in Homs, and Tulul al-Humr, in
Hama, providing multisectoral assistance to 92,750. Food assistance was also
provided to 12,000 in nearby Jabiriyah village (see table 1). United Nations personnel
were not permitted to participate, on security grounds.
Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, May 2018
Requested target
(number of beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries reached

Type of
assistance

Talbisah and Tulul
al-Humr

92 750

92 750

Multisectoral

Jabiriyah

12 000

12 000

Food

Date

Location

30 May
30 May

Figure II
Percentage of people reached each month in besieged areas through
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations,
October 2017–May 2018
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

October

8/22

November

December

January

February

March

April

May

18-09778

S/2018/619

22. The United Nations estimates that, as at 30 May 2018, approxima tely 8,100
people were living in besieged locations in the country (compared with 11,100 in
April 2018), namely, Fu‘ah and Kafraya, and 1.48 million people were living in hardto-reach areas (compared with 2.04 million in April 2018). This update relates t o the
improvement of humanitarian access in a number of areas that recently came under
localized agreements, as well as to recent changes in the lines of control in Yarmouk,
following a military offensive by government and allied forces. An area is conside red
by the United Nations to be besieged when it is surrounded by armed actors, with the
sustained effect that civilians, including the sick and the wounded, cannot leave it on
a regular basis and humanitarian assistance cannot regularly enter it. The two
remaining besieged locations in the Syrian Arab Republic are besieged by non -State
armed opposition groups.
Figure III
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, May 2018

104,750 people reached
People reached in hard-to-

People reached in

reach areas

besieged areas

104,750

0

Cross-line convoys

2

7%

0%

Proportion of people reached
in hard-to-reach areas

Proportion of people reached in besieged areas

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas: 1.48 million
Number of people in besieged areas: 8,100
Table 2
Besieged locations, May 2018
Governorate

Location

Idlib

Fu‘ah

5 900

Non-State armed opposition groups

Idlib

Kafraya

2 200

Non-State armed opposition groups

Total

Population

Besieged by

8 100

23. Lifesaving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 100
treatments were rejected or removed from the inter-agency convoy to Talbisah and
Tulul al-Humr in May, according to the World Health Organization. Details regarding
the treatments and supplies removed are shown in table 3.

18-09778

9/22

S/2018/619

Table 3
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, May 2018
Location

Talbisah and Tulul
al-Humr

Number of
treatments

100

Types of supplies

Oxytocin injection 10 international units in 1 ml ampoule;
ketamine hydrochloride USP, equivalent to ketamine 50 mg/ml
vial; Triprolidine hydrochloride 1.25 mg + pseudoephedrine
hydrochloride 30 mg + guaiphenesin 100 mg/5 ml syrup;
dobutamine hydrochloride 280 mg, equivalent to dobutamine
base 250 mg/20 ml vial; Gelofusine colloidal plasma volume
substitute solution for infusion; 4 per cent w/v succinylated
gelatin in saline; IV plastic container; Ecoflac plus in 500 ml
bottle; electric operation table with advanced options;
Phenobarbitone; reduced in quantity: syringe Luer 5 ml,
disposable; Heparine Medis; adrenaline 1 mg/1 ml ampoule;
sterile hypodermic syringe without needle for single use, 5 ml;
salbutamol 0.2 per cent, solution for inhalation, by M&G/Syria.

Humanitarian response
24. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached millions of people
in need through all available access routes, including: (a) humanitarian operations
from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby humanitarian deliveries reach those
in need without crossing conflict lines; (b) cross-line convoys, whereby assistance
from within the country is delivered across conflict lines; and (c) cross -border
deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those in need from Iraq, Jordan and
Turkey (see tables 1 and 2). In addition to the United Nation s and its partners, the
Government and non-governmental organizations continued to deliver lifesaving
assistance to people in need. Local authorities in many areas controlled by non -State
armed opposition groups also continued to provide services where pos sible.
25. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries to
locations across the country. Such deliveries are undertaken by United Nations
agencies based in Damascus to regularly accessible areas. In May, all of the 2,180
official requests submitted by the World Food Programme to the Syrian authorities to
obtain facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to locations across the
country were approved. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) submitted 32 requests for facilitation letters for the movement of
core relief items and livelihood kits, all of which were approved. More than 1,177,000
children and mothers were reached with primary health-care and immunization
services during May. In addition, an estimated 721,000 children and pregnant and
lactating women were provided with nutritional supplements and services. A total of
200,000 children benefited from essential learning materials and remedial education,
and 215,000 children benefited from protection and psychosocial support services.
Approximately 2.82 million people received food assistance and 1.83 million
benefited from water, sanitation and hygiene services and supplies.

10/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

Table 4
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, May 2018
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration

Number of
people reached

8 400
39 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 711 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

3 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

422 000

United Nations Population Fund

270 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

291 000

World Food Programme

2 820 000

World Health Organization

698 000

26. Military escalation in eastern Ghutah ceased during the reporting period. As a
result of the fighting in earlier months, some 160,000 were displaced, with
approximately 44,000 staying at nearby sites for internally displaced persons in May
and a similar number of people authorized to move out of those sites through a system
of sponsorship, following security clearance. Moreover, according to the Syrian
authorities, some 13,500 people had moved back to eastern Ghutah as of late May.
Humanitarian access to assist civilians in need in eastern Ghutah remained
challenging. The United Nations did not receive permission to conduct needs
assessments or deliver humanitarian assistance inside the enclave. A hi gh-level
mission of heads of agencies was allowed to visit Saqba and Kafr Batna, in eastern
Ghutah, on 14 May; however, a full assessment of needs has yet to be authorized.
Assistance has been provided by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and other local
partners. In addition, the United Nations continued to provide assistance to displaced
people at displacement sites in Rif Dimashq and to evacuees in Idlib and northern
Aleppo Governorates through implementing partners.
27. Following military escalation in northern Homs, the local agreement between
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and non-State armed opposition groups
was implemented in the beginning of May, with approximately 35,000 people
evacuated to Idlib and Aleppo Governorates. An estimated 217, 500 people remained
in the area, and the United Nations was unable to access the area on a regular basis.
On 30 May, however, the United Nations provided assistance through two
inter-agency convoys to the hard-to-reach areas of Talbisah and surrounding villages
in Homs, as well as to Tulul al-Humr, in Hama Governorate. The distributions were
conducted by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, owing to the fact that United Nations
personnel were not permitted to participate in the convoys, lacking the necessary
approval from the Syrian authorities for security reasons.
28. An estimated 134,000 people remained displaced from Afrin district in the Tall
Rif‘at, Nubl, Zahra’ and Fafin areas of Aleppo Governorate. People displaced from
Afrin to Tall Rif‘at and other areas have largely been accessible to humanitarian
organizations operating from Aleppo. Humanitarian access to Afrin city from within
the Syrian Arab Republic has not yet received the necessary approvals from the Syrian
authorities. While some United Nations food and health-care assistance has been
delivered across the border, assistance was arranged in cooperation with the Turkish
authorities in these areas.

18-09778

11/22

S/2018/619

29. In Raqqah, an estimated 132,000 people have returned to Raqqah city since the
withdrawal of ISIL. Most returnees have settled in areas with comparatively less
infrastructure damage and explosive hazard contamination. Scaling up the
humanitarian response and capacity has been challenging because of the high levels
of contamination from mines and unexploded ordnance, which pose significant
threats to the returnees and humanitarian workers. A United Nations needs assessment
conducted on 1 April found extensive damage to infrastructure (80 per cent of
buildings damaged or destroyed) and significant gaps in assistance and basic services.
While the position of the United Nations remains that conditions are not safe for
return, assistance is now being scaled up on the basis of the assessment findings,
largely through non-governmental organization partners present in the city. A total of
11 non-governmental organizations are providing multisectoral assistance, of which
3 have opened offices in the city. No United Nations missions took place during the
reporting period.
30. Cross-border deliveries continued from Iraq, Jordan and Turkey under the terms
of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017)
(see figure IV and table 3). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified
the Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its
destination and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached.
31. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations authorized under resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2393 (2017) in Iraq, Jordan and Turkey. During the reporting period, the
Mechanism monitored the delivery of 19 consignments by seven United Nations
agencies, consisting of 440 trucks, from the three border crossings: 10 from Bab al
Hawa (305 trucks), 6 from Bab al-Salam (76 trucks) and 3 from Ramtha (59 trucks).
There were no concerns or questions about the humanitarian nature of the
consignments sent. The United Nations provided 48 -hour notice to the Government
regarding all shipments. Once in the country, United Nations partners e nsured that
shipments arrived at the designated warehouses. Independent third -party companies
contracted by the United Nations ensured independent verification of the assistance
arriving at the warehouses and monitored the distribution and/or service provi sion.
The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the
Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
32. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 818 cross-border
consignments, with more than 20,679 trucks (13,987 through Bab al -Hawa and 2,131
through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; 4,539 through Ramtha from Jordan; and 22
through Ya‘rubiyah from Iraq). Those operations complement and support the aid
provided by international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide
services to millions more from neighbouring countries.
33. During the reporting period, the United Nations and its implementing partners
delivered food assistance to more than 1 million people from three cross -border entry
points through Turkey and Jordan. Moreover, the United Nations conducted health
and medical deliveries, providing nearly 370,000 treatments through th e cross-border
mechanism. In the northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) delivered winter kits, child protection assistance,
nutrition, education, health and water, sanitation and hygiene supplies through a
number of cross-border shipments. Almost 100,000 people were reached with water,
sanitation and hygiene supplies and interventions. More than 37,800 children and
adults received several emergency services, including mine risk education, which was
delivered to internally displaced persons and host populations in schools and camps,
while psychosocial support, case management services and parenting programmes
were delivered in child-friendly spaces and community outreach programmes. More
12/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

than 398,500 children and women of child-bearing age received access to primary
health-care services. Some 800,000 children under the age of 5 had access to
immunization services. Curative and preventive nutritional interventions were
delivered to 81,470 children under the age of 5 and to 35,131 pregnant and lactating
women in north-western Syrian Arab Republic (Aleppo, Idlib and Hama).
Approximately 69,662 children between the ages of 6 and 59 months and 11,519
pregnant and lactating women were screened for acute malnutrition usi ng mid-upperarm circumference. Out of the screened children and women, 683 children were found
to be severely acutely malnourished and were referred for appropriate treatment. A
total of 21,513 pregnant and lactating women received education/counselling o n
optimal childcare and feeding practices.
34. In the southern parts of the Syrian Arab Republic, more than 440,000 people
benefited from improved access to clean water through the operation and maintenance
of water and sanitation systems. Of those people, more than 50,360 received
emergency water, sanitation and hygiene interventions, including with regard to
household water treatment, the provision of hygiene kits, and the rehabilitation and
repair of sanitation facilities. UNICEF partners also continued to provide lifesaving
nutritional services to beneficiaries in 13 communities in Dar ‘a and Qunaytirah
Governorates. More than 4,000 children (2,034 boys and 1,974 girls) under the age
of 5 were screened for acute malnutrition. Of those screened, 20 childre n (8 boys and
12 girls) were diagnosed with severe acute malnutrition. The detected cases were
enrolled in the therapeutic and supplementary nutritional programme and received the
required nutritional interventions from six health centres and one mobile cl inic.
Preventive nutritional services were also provided for 2,638 children under the age of
5, and 880 pregnant and lactating women received micronutrient supplementation to
prevent or treat micronutrient deficiencies. In addition, 2,572 pregnant and lact ating
women received counselling services with respect to infant and young child feeding
practices. More than 1,000 children (544 boys and 515 girls) benefited from
structured and sustained child protection and psychosocial support services, and 24
children (9 boys and 15 girls) were put under case management. A total of 45
individuals (6 men and 39 women) received support in the area of parental care and
engagement through parenting programmes. In addition, more than 6,000 individuals
benefited from initiatives to raise awareness about child protection issues.
35. UNHCR and its partners continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis -affected populations.
By the end of May, 15,545 protection interventions had been conducted, reaching
384,413 individuals, including 317,109 benefiting from general protection activities,
4,483 benefiting from child protection activities and 62,821 reached through more
than 2,388 awareness-raising campaigns across 12 governorates on the prevention of
and response to sexual and gender-based violence. As at 31 May 2018, the total
number of functioning UNHCR-funded community centres and mobile units stood at
95 community centres, 17 satellite centres and 76 mobile units, supported by 2,178
outreach volunteers. This network provided protection-related services, including
community mobilization, child protection, legal aid, the prevention of and response
to sexual and gender-based violence, livelihood services, and services for persons
with specific needs, to benefit some 2.6 million internally displaced persons,
returnees, host communities and other crisis-affected people across 12 Syrian
governorates. In May, 60,160 internally displaced persons in Damascus, Rif Dima shq,
Suwayda, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Hasakah
were direct beneficiaries of the UNHCR legal assistance programme, including
counselling; awareness sessions on various legal topics, including civil
documentation and women’s rights; and lawyers’ direct interventions before courts
and administrative bodies. Moreover, the United Nations Population Fund reached
more than 270,000 people, carrying out activities relating to reproductive health and
18-09778

13/22

S/2018/619

the prevention of and response to sexual and gender-based violence and youth-related
violence. Also during the reporting period, UNRWA distributed a total of 64,322 food
parcels to 125,598 Palestine refugees. In addition, the second round of cash
distributions for 2018 started on 13 May 2018; by 31 May, a total of 241,864
individuals had received cash assistance through the regular cash distribution round.
In addition, 2,822 Palestine refugees displaced from Yarmouk and eastern Ghutah
benefited from a one-time payment of $70 per family.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, May 2018
(Thousands)

Nutrition
Non-food
items/shelter

Education

Health

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Table 5
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries by sector and
by district, May 2018

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Governorate

District

Aleppo

Bab

–

10 800

–

3 000

–

15 000

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

142 220

89 300

–

–

27 495

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

10 200

–

1 860

–

1 945

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

9 070

246 100

–

224

–

–

Dar‘a

Sanamayn

340

10 010

–

–

–

38 000

Dar‘a

Dar‘a

15 432

24 285

150 186

1 800

25 000

254 145

Dar‘a

Izra‘

17 190

8 230

1 596

1 080

–

120 470

Hama

Muhradah

–

2 700

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

117 115

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

47 500

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

316 700

248 700

14 800

–

86 755

Idlib

Idlib

10 120

52 100

–

–

–

3 500

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

15 600

–

834

–

–

Qunaytirah

Fiq

–

292

–

–

–

6 000

Qunaytirah

Qunaytirah

4 841

6 155

–

–

–

67 400

36. The Russian Federation sent informational bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Oth er Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.
14/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

Visas and registrations
37. A total of 47 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in May. Of these, 1 5 were approved and 32
remained pending. Of the 114 new visa applications submitted in March and April
2018, 95 were approved in April and 9 in May, while 10 remained pending. A total of
85 United Nations visa renewal requests were submitted in May, of whi ch 61 were
approved, 1 was rejected and 23 remained pending. An additional 26 requests for visa
renewals submitted in April were approved in May. For some United Nations entities
in the Syrian Arab Republic, a significant number of staff are not yet in pla ce or
cannot be replaced owing to the non-issuance of visas for months, formal requests
notwithstanding.
38. A total of 23 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. Agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, air strikes, the regular exchange of indirect arti llery fire and asymmetrical
attacks. As a result of activities relating to the armed conflict, significant areas of
operation became highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance, explosive
remnants of war and landmines, which pose an elevated risk to the i mplementation of
United Nations activities in those areas.
40. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including: 22 staff members of the United Nations and organizations of the
United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66 staff
members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international
and national non-governmental organizations are also reported to have been killed.
41. A total of 25 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 24
UNRWA staff members) are being detained or are missing.

III. Observations
42. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations and its partners are running the
world’s largest humanitarian operation. It continues to save lives every day. In 2017,
multisectoral aid operations reached an average of at least 7.8 million people in need
each month. That said, I am deeply concerned by the negative trajectory of
humanitarian access in the Syrian Arab Republic this year. As I have stated before,
2018 has seen what can be described only as a collapse in the ability of the Unit ed
Nations and its humanitarian partners to reach people across conflict lines from within
the Syrian Arab Republic. The scale of needs remains immense, with more than 13
million Syrians in need, of whom nearly 1.5 million are located in hard -to-reach and
besieged areas across the country. These people — in places such as northern rural
Homs, Duma, Fu’ah, Kafraya and southern Damascus — are some of the most
desperate in the country. Just eight inter-agency convoys have reached some of these
areas so far this year, providing humanitarian assistance to only 273,000 people. That
is a mere fraction of the number of people whom the United Nations and its partners
intended to reach under the bimonthly humanitarian convoy plans. Facilitating rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian assistance for civilians in need is a legal obligation of
all parties to the conflict. It is an important and irrefutable tenet of international
18-09778

15/22

S/2018/619

humanitarian law, which the Security Council, in its resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions, seeks to implement. I again ask for the support of all Member
States to ensure that humanitarian assistance can be provided in a rapid, safe,
unimpeded and sustained manner to those who are in the grea test need.
43. Humanitarian needs remain staggering. Renewed international engagement in
support of principled humanitarian action in the Syrian Arab Republic is critical. To
translate the determination expressed at successive conferences in Kuwait, Londo n
and Brussels, we urgently need to see all pledges to the United Nations -coordinated
appeals for the Syrian Arab Republic and the region turned into contributions,
including through the pooled funds that provide direct support to front -line
responders. The United Nations and its partners remain committed to delivering
prioritized, needs-based, lifesaving assistance and protection across the Syrian Arab
Republic.
44. Although the number of people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas has been
reduced, significant protection concerns remain. Besieged areas have come under
government control after prolonged periods of heavy fighting and restricted
humanitarian assistance following local agreements providing for the relocation of
thousands of people, under difficult conditions. The United Nations is not a party to
these agreements, nor is it involved in evacuations. I once again urge all parties to
refrain from any action that might force civilians to flee their habitual residence.
45. The creation of a calm, safe and neutral environment across the Syrian Arab
Republic that will enable all Syrians to express confidence in a political process is
paramount. In that context, de-escalation must remain a priority. I continue to urge
parties to act with restraint, in accordance with international law, and to avoid
escalatory acts that could worsen the suffering of the Syrian people. I continue to
express my alarm at provocative actions that risk a new conflagration in the region,
and call upon regional actors to exercise maximum restraint. Moreover, all parties to
armed conflict must respect civilians and civilian objects, including civilian
infrastructure, and take constant care to spare them throughout their military
operations.
46. I reiterate that those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. Such a step is central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I also reiterate my call for the situation
in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court, and call upon all
parties to the conflict, all States, civil society and the United Nations system as a
whole to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution o f Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. I also strongly encourage the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, in line with Human Rights Council resolutions S -18/1 and 19/22, to
cooperate with OHCHR, including through the establishment of a field presence with
the mandate to protect and promote human rights. Similarly, in line with Human
Rights Council resolution S-17/1 and subsequent resolutions, I call on the Syrian
Government to allow the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic access to the Syrian Arab Republic in order to carry out its
work.
47. There is no military solution: the United Nations-facilitated political process
remains the only viable avenue for a sustainable end to conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. My Special Envoy will continue his efforts to meaningfully relaunch the
United Nations-facilitated political process and to establish a constitutional
committee, with the final agreement on its mandate, terms of reference, powers and
rules of procedure and the selection criteria for its composition reached under United
16/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

Nations auspices in Geneva, and engage all relevant parties to that end, as he exercises
his prerogative within the framework of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The
efforts of the international community, including members of the Security Counci l, to
end the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic are critical.

18-09778

17/22

S/2018/619

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians, recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, May 2018 *
Damascus and Rif Dimashq Governorates
• On 9 May, one civilian man and his wife were reportedly killed an d one civilian
was injured when strikes hit an area in western Rif Dimashq Governorate. The
victims were reportedly from the Shaykh Miskin area of Dar ‘a Governorate,
driving their vehicle close to where the strike hit as they were driving from Izra ‘
city, in Dar‘a, to Damascus city.
• On 9 May, unidentified strikes hit various residential areas in Damascus city
and allegedly resulted in civilian casualties, in addition to damage to
infrastructure. Between 1100 and 1130, explosions hit “Damascus tower 18” and
the Maysat roundabout in Damascus city, reportedly killing 3 civilians and
injuring at least 23 others. The strikes reportedly resulted in significant damage
to infrastructure and several vehicles in the area.
• On 16 May at around 1100, ground-based strikes reportedly hit a residential area
near the Awqaf building, in the vicinity of the Victoria Bridge in Damascus city,
reportedly killing 11 civilians and injuring at least 11 others.
• On 18 May, strikes hit the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levan t (ISIL)-held area
of Hajar al-Aswad in southern Damascus and reportedly killed three civilian
women.
• On 18 May, strikes hit the ISIL-held Yarmouk refugee camp area in southern
Damascus and reportedly killed two civilian women and a 6 -year-old boy.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 3 May, strikes hit the opposition-held city of Harak, in eastern Dar‘a,
reportedly killing one civilian and injuring at least two others.
• On 9 May at around 2030, strikes hit the neighbourhood of Arba ‘in in the
opposition-held Dar‘a al-Balad, in Dar‘a city, reportedly killing two civilian
women and a 2-year-old child and injuring at least six other civilians, including
one woman and four children.
• On 17 May, one male journalist was reportedly killed when strikes hit a
residential area in the opposition-held town of Sayda, in eastern Dar‘a.
• On 22 May, one male civilian was reportedly killed as a result of small arms fire
exchanged between different armed opposition groups in Jallayn town, in
western Dar‘a.

* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments
on the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate relates to
compliance with Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a
comprehensive listing of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during t he
reporting period.
18/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

Aleppo Governorate
• On 4 May, a piece of unexploded ordnance detonated in one of the streets in the
opposition-held town of Darat Izzah, in western Aleppo, reportedly killing two
civilians.
• On 4 May, mortar rounds hit a residential area in the Shahba ’ neighbourhood of
government-held Aleppo city and reportedly injured at least three civilians.
• On 5 May, a piece of unexploded ordnance detonated in one of the streets in the
opposition-held town of Hayyan, in northern Aleppo Governorate, reportedly
killing two children.
• On 4 May at around 2200, a prominent armed opposition fighter from the Hamza
Division in Bab city, in north-eastern Aleppo, raided the private al-Hikmah
Hospital along with a number of other fighters and reportedly physically
assaulted two male nurses and one female nurse over a delay in providing
medical assistance to one of the assailant’s relatives. Shots were fired in the air,
and the hospital had to close down and temporarily transfer all staff and
operations to the nearby al-Salam Hospital in the city. On 5 May at around 0500,
the hospital staff were reportedly attacked again while at the al -Salam Hospital
by the same perpetrators, and one male nurse was allegedly beaten. The attacks
provoked anger in the community, and civilians approached the local “police”
headquarters, demanding that action be taken against the perpetrators. The
Turkish army reportedly intervened to try to control the situation. The
perpetrators were reportedly turned in to the “police” by the Hamza Division on
5 May, but released a few days later.
• On 6 May, armed clashes using both light and heavy weapons reportedly erupted
between armed opposition fighters from the Ahrar al-Sharqiya and Ahrar
al-Sham armed opposition groups in Bab city. The eruption of violence ca me a
few hours after the alleged murder of 10 male civilian internally displaced
persons from Dayr al-Zawr Governorate who had recently arrived in Bab city
along with other internally displaced persons from the Qalamun area of Rif
Dimashq Governorate. The 10 murdered civilians had reportedly been shot in
the head at a checkpoint, in the vicinity of the Centre roundabout, set up by
armed members of the Waki family, which has links to armed opposition groups.
Reports received by the Office of the United Natio ns High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) confirmed that several checkpoints had been erected
by Ahrar al-Sharqiya and Ahrar al-Sham, which exchanged fire and imposed
movement restrictions on civilians. The armed clashes reportedly resulted in the
killing of three civilians, including one woman, and the injury of 19 other
civilians, including women and children.
• On 6 May, mortar rounds hit residential areas in the Nile Street, Mashru ‘ 3000
and Hamdaniyah neighbourhoods of government-held Aleppo city, reportedly
killing one civilian woman and injuring seven other civilians.
• On 11 May, an improvised explosive device detonated inside a house in the
Ma‘adi neighbourhood of government-held Aleppo city, reportedly killing three
civilians and injuring at least three others.
• On 21 May, one civilian — an internally displaced person from Jindayris town,
in Afrin district in north-western Aleppo — was reportedly killed when armed
fighters from the People’s Protection Units manning one of the checkpoints in
Beneh village, in Shirawa district in northern Aleppo, fired in the air in an
attempt to prevent dozens of civilians gathered at the checkpoint from returning
to Afrin district.

18-09778

19/22

S/2018/619

• On 24 May at around 1900, an improvised explosive device attached to a
motorbike detonated in the middle of a marketplace on Ra‘i Street in oppositionheld Bab city and reportedly injured 12 civilians, including 4 children.
• On 30 May, armed clashes erupted between two armed opposition groups in Bab
city and reportedly injured three civilians.
• On 31 May, an improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike detonated
in a busy shopping area in Jarabulus city, in eastern rural Aleppo Governorate,
reportedly killing at least four civilians, including two children, and inj uring a
number of other civilians.
Idlib and Hama Governorates
• On 2 May at around 1500, strikes hit a residential area in the opposition -held
village of Mishmishan, in western rural Idlib. The strike destroyed a one -storey
home, reportedly killing six civilians (three women and three children) from the
same family.
• On 2 May at around 1000, strikes hit the Specialized Hospital in the opposition held town of Kafr Zayta, in northern Hama, reportedly killing one civilian
female staff member and injuring five other civilian staff. The hospital
reportedly sustained significant damage and was closed down.
• On 3 May, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in the vicinity
of the International Rescue Committee building on the road between the
opposition-held cities of Dana and Sarmada, in northern Idlib, reportedly killing
4 civilians, including 1 woman and 1 Committee staff member, and injuring 10
other civilians. The explosion caused significant damage to the building.
• On 4 May at around 2200, strikes hit a residential area in opposition-held Naqir
village, in southern Idlib, reportedly killing 4 civilians, including 2 women and
1 child, and injuring 12 other civilians. The strikes reportedly caused significant
damage to several houses in the area.
• On 6 May at around 1530, strikes hit the Qal‘ah residential neighbourhood in
opposition-held Jisr al-Shughur city, in western Idlib, reportedly killing four
civilians, including one woman, and injuring five other civilians. The strikes
caused significant damage to several buildings in the neighbourhood.
• On 8 May at around 1300, strikes hit a residential area in opposition -held Naqir
village, in southern Idlib, reportedly killing three children and injuring three
other civilians, including one woman and one child, all from the same family.
• On 9 May at around 2000, strikes hit a residential area in opposition-held Ma‘arr
Zaytah village, in southern Idlib, reportedly killing nine civilians from one
family, including two women and six children.
• On 12 May at around 2030, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
detonated in the vicinity of the Justice Palace in the opposition-held city of Idlib,
reportedly killing 14 men and injuring 28 others. OHCHR received the names
of only seven of the victims. The attack was allegedly targeting a prison operated
by the Levant Liberation Organization inside the Justice Palace building.
Preliminary information indicated that many of those killed were ISIL fighters
who had been held by the Levant Liberation Organization, with other
unconfirmed reports indicating that non-conflict-related prisoners held in the
prison were also killed. The attack reportedly resulted in significant damage to
the building, neighbouring houses and a nearby health -care facility known as
the Governorate Hospital.

20/22

18-09778

S/2018/619

• On 15 May at around 1000, a strike hit a residential area in the opposition -held
city of Ariha, in southern Idlib, reportedly killing two female children.
• On 16 May at around 0900, an unidentified explosio n hit two cars driving along
an agricultural road near opposition-held Mansura village, in north-western
Hama, reportedly killing six civilians, including one child and four women.
• On 22 May at around 1000, unidentified armed men on motorbikes reported ly
opened fire on a bus that was transporting civilians from government -held Aqrab
village, in south-western Hama, to the adjacent government-held village of Kafr
Qadah, reportedly killing three civilian passengers and injuring seven others.
The bus came under attack while they were allegedly travelling to a “settlement
centre” located in Kafr Qadah, approximately 8 km east of Aqrab, in order to
“settle” their situation as required under a local agreement reached between
armed opposition groups, on the one hand, and the Governments of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Russian Federation, on the other. Aqrab village had been
taken over by the government forces and their allies on 2 May, after the
agreement.
• On 26 May at around 1200, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
detonated in a residential area known as Street 30, in the opposition -held city of
Idlib, reportedly killing four civilians, including two children, and injuring
scores of others. The explosion caused significant damage to several buil dings
in the area.
• On 30 May at around 0030, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
detonated in a street in the opposition-held city of Dana, in northern Idlib
Governorate, with no casualties reported. Shortly thereafter, as civil defence
first responders were extinguishing a fire, another improvised explosive device
detonated at the location, reportedly injuring four civilians, including three civil
defence staff members.
• On 31 May at around 1230, an unidentified explosion hit and destroyed a threestorey building in the Maydan neighbourhood of the opposition-held city of
Ariha, in southern Idlib Governorate, reportedly killing three children from the
same family and injuring two other children and two civilian women.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 1 May at dawn, air strikes hit several homes in ISIL-held Fadil village, in
the vicinity of the Tall al-Jabir area of southern Hasakah Governorate,
reportedly killing at least 21 civilians, including 6 women and 13 children from
two families.
• On 11 May, strikes hit a residential area in the ISIL-held Hammadi village, in
the Abu Hamda area of southern Hasakah, and reportedly killed eight civilians
(five women and three children) from one family.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 12 May between 1000 and 1100, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device detonated in the vicinity of the Sa‘a roundabout in the centre of the
Syrian Democratic Forces-held city of Raqqah, reportedly killing two civilians
and injuring at least three others.

18-09778

21/22

S/2018/619

Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 21 May, two children, 16 and 12 years old, were killed as a result of the
detonation of a piece of unexploded ordnance on a street in the Asharah area of
eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 23 May, two children were killed and two other civilia ns injured as a result
of the detonation of a piece of unexploded ordnance on a street in the Syrian
Democratic Forces-held city of Kharayij, in the Mayadin region of eastern Dayr
al-Zawr.
• On 31 May at around 0500, strikes hit a residential area in the town of Baghuz,
in the rural Albu Kamal region of eastern rural Dayr al -Zawr, killing nine
civilians, including two children, and injuring at least two other civilians,
including a woman.

22/22

18-09778
