S/PRST/2005/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5135th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 March 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statement by its President
(S/PRST/2004/43) dated 19 November 2004.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
18 February 2005 (S/2005/89), reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
“The Security Council welcomes the progress made in the Somali
national reconciliation process, in particular the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG)’s ongoing relocation efforts, expects further progress in
this regard and stresses the need for the international community to provide
strong political, financial and capacity-building support for these efforts.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in support of the
TFG. The Council reiterates its support for the African Union’s efforts in
assisting the process of transition in Somalia. The Security Council recognizes
the African Union’s readiness to play an important role in a future peace
support mission in Somalia. Such a mission must be carefully considered and
planned and would require the support of the Somali people.
“The Security Council urges all Somali factions and militia leaders to
cease hostilities and encourages them and TFG to enter into immediate
negotiations for a comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire agreement leading to
final disarmament, and welcomes the willingness of the United Nations to
provide advice in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude to all those donors who
have supported the peace process in Somalia and encourages donor countries,
regional and subregional organizations to contribute to the reconstruction and

05-25917 (E) 070305

*0525917*

S/PRST/2005/11

rehabilitation of Somalia, in particular through efforts coordinated by United
Nations agencies.
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of the Coordination
and Monitoring Committee (CMC), chaired jointly by the Prime Minister of
the TFG and the United Nations, through which donor countries and regional
and subregional organizations can provide support to the efforts of the TFG.
“The Security Council stresses that improving the humanitarian situation
is an essential component of support for the peace and reconciliation process.
The Security Council strongly believes that ensuring humanitarian access to all
Somalis in need and providing guarantees for the safety and security of aid
workers is an immediate priority and obligation of the TFG.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Political Office in Somalia (UNPOS) and its leading role in coordinating
support for the TFG to implement the agreements reached at the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference and establish peace and stability in
Somalia. The Security Council takes note of the need to expand the United
Nations presence as proposed in the report of the Secretary-General of
18 February 2005 (S/2005/89). The Security Council concurs with the
Secretary-General that a further enhanced role for the Organization in Somalia
must be incremental and should be based on the outcome of discussions with
the TFG.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the peace process in
Somalia and the commitment of the United Nations to assist the regional and
subregional efforts in this regard.”

2
