S/2017/357*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2299 (2016)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Secretary Council resolution
2299 (2016), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three
months on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments related
to Iraq and provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Ira q since
my last report (S/2017/75) and the briefing of my Special Representative to the
Security Council on 2 February 2017.

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Political situation
2.
The Iraqi security forces, including the popular mobilization forces, the
Peshmerga, and local fighters, with support from the international counter -Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) coalition, continued to make progress in the fight
to liberate Mosul and Ninawa from ISIL following the liberation of eastern Mosul
on 24 January. On 19 February, Prime Minister Al Abadi ordered the start of
military operations to liberate western Mosul. With the support of the international
counter-ISIL coalition, Iraqi security forces made advances, reaching old Mosul and
liberating, by the end of March, about half of western Mosul.
3.
In a statement on 22 March in Washington, D.C., the 68 members of the
international counter-ISIL coalition commended their Iraqi partners, who have
liberated more than 60 per cent of territory previously held by ISIL. Coalition
members committed to continued military support to defeat ISIL. They underscored
the need to protect civilians and to provide full and immediate humanitarian access
to United Nations agencies and their partners. They emphasized stabilization
support for the return of internally displaced persons and public safety in liberated
areas. They stressed that long-term recovery would stem from good governance, the
provision of services, and sound security arrangements for all communities.
Coalition members expressed support for the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq and for the efforts of the Government to enhance public services,
reinforce inclusive governance, reduce corruption, decentralize designated federal
authorities, ensure the rights of all Iraqi citizens and promote national and local
reconciliation and accountability for crimes by ISIL.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 5 May 2017.

17-06390* (E)

080517

*1706390*

S/2017/357

4.
At the meeting, Prime Minister Al Abadi argued against containing ISIL,
stressing the need to completely eliminate it. He affirmed his Government’s
commitment to decentralization, economic reform, combating corruption and
working with all Iraqis, including young people. He noted that the popular
mobilization forces are now a part of Iraq’s armed forces, and that the Popular
Mobilization Commission Law brings fighters who have defended Iraq under the
command and control of the State. He reiterated that the popular mobilization forces
must not enter into elections and that no weapons must be outside the control of the
Government.
5.
During the visit of Prime Minister Al Abadi to the United States of America
from 19 to 23 March, President Trump and the Prime Minister affirmed the
commitment of their countries to a partnership aimed at rooting out terrorism and
promoting security, political, economic, cultural and educational cooperation. In the
joint readout from the meeting, it was stated that the security partnership was a vital
component of the national security of both the United States and Iraq.
6.
National reconciliation remained high on the political agenda of Iraq. Ammar
al-Hakim, Chair of the National Alliance, visited the Kurdistan region of Iraq
between 4 and 6 February. While there, he discussed the National Settlement
Initiative of the National Alliance, as well as relations between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan region of Iraq. He held meetings with the Kurdistan
Regional President, Massoud Barzani, and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, Nechirvan Barzani, the Secretary-General of the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan and former President of Iraq, Jalal Talabani, the politburo of the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and representatives of the Movement for Change
(Gorran).
7.
On 20 February, Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr issued a statement detailing 29
recommendations for Iraq. The recommendations include language on national and
community reconciliation, reconstruction, the return of displaced persons, fair
treatment of detainees and the integration of the popular mobilization forces into the
Iraqi security forces. The proposal also recommends the establishment of a body to
investigate human rights violations and consider the issues of minorities, in
coordination with specialized governmental and parliamentary institutions, in
addition to forming an Iraqi relief committee that would have access to affected
areas.
8.
On 30 and 31 March, I visited Iraq. While there, I met with Prime Minister Al
Abadi, the President of Iraq, Fuad Masum, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim
al-Jaafari, President Barzani and Council of Representatives Speaker Salim
al-Jubouri, among others. During my meetings, I discussed the ongoing operation in
Mosul and the protection of civilians, national dialogue and reconciliation, relations
between the Kurdistan region of Iraq and Baghdad and the rights of minorities,
among other issues.
9.
In my meeting with Speaker Al Jabouri and several other Sunni political
leaders, I received a document from the Iraqi Forces Coalition outlining their vision
for national reconciliation, namely, the Historic Settlement Initiative. Former
Speaker Mahmoud al-Mashhadani, the Chair of the Committee tasked with
preparing the document, expressed the hope that it would bring about a more
inclusive State. He explained that the goal of the Historic Settlement Initiative was
to build confidence and to facilitate a historic settlement. The same day, the
Muttahidun Coalition, led by Vice-President Osama al-Nujaifi, issued a statement
rejecting the Historic Settlement Initiative, emphasizing that it did not include the
views of all Sunnis.

2/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

10. The implementation of the Popular Mobilization Commission Law saw limited
progress. On 9 March, the Council of Representatives adopted a non-binding
resolution calling for wage parity among equivalent ranks in the popular
mobilization forces and the Iraqi army, in accordance with the law. On 21 February,
the Council of Ministers instructed the Department of Disarmament and Militia
Integration of the Office of the Prime Minister to transfer elements formerly
belonging to the Awakening Forces (“Al-Sahwa”) to the popular mobilization forces
or the Iraqi security forces and to conclude the Department’s operations in October
2017, in line with the 2017 Federal Budget Law.
11. On 17 January, the Council of Ministers announced that Provincial and District
Council elections would be held on 16 September 2017, based on the
recommendation of the Independent High Electoral Commission. According to the
Commission, the adoption by the Council of Representatives of an updated legal
framework for Provincial and District Council elections was required by 15 March
to allow adequate time for preparations, but that deadline lapsed without prog ress.
Amendments to the Law on the Provincial and District Council Elections (Law
No. 36 of 2008, as amended), the Law on the Independent High Electoral
Commission (Law No. 11 of 2007) and the Law on the Council of Representatives
Elections (Law No. 45 of 2013) remain under consideration by the Council of
Representatives. On 9 February, the Council of Representatives appointed an
internal, ad hoc commission in charge of selecting a new Board of Commissioners
of the Independent High Electoral Commission after the term of the current Board
ends on 20 September 2017. The Council of Representatives debated a
postponement of the Provincial and District Council elections to 2018, in which
case they would be held concurrently with parliamentary elections scheduled for
April 2018.
12. Political parties maintained interest in the electoral calendar and the legal and
institutional framework. On 8 February, thousands of protestors loyal to Muqtada
al-Sadr demonstrated outside the Green Zone, calling for amendments to t he legal
framework and the dismissal of the Board of Commissioners of the Independent
High Electoral Commission. On 11 February, several thousand protestors tried to
reach the perimeter of the Green Zone. In the ensuing violence, at least 4 people
died and at least 25 were injured, prompting Prime Minister Al Abadi to order an
investigation. Following Al-Sadr’s subsequent calls for “silent demonstrations” to
reiterate demands for electoral reform, additional peaceful protests took place on
17 February. On 24 March, Al-Sadr addressed another demonstration in Baghdad’s
Tahrir Square, calling for continued peaceful protests until demands for electoral
reform were met.
13. Coordination and cooperation between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government continued in the ongoing Mosul military operation
and the ensuing humanitarian challenges. Between 4 and 6 February, the President
of Iraq, Fuad Masum, travelled to Erbil and Sulaymaniyah to meet President
Barzani and former President Talabani, among others. Upcoming elections, regional
and international political developments and relations between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan region of Iraq were reportedly discussed.
14. On 7 and 8 March, Prime Minister Al Abadi visited Erbil and Sulay maniyah,
underscoring the need for national unity after the defeat of ISIL. After their meeting
in Erbil, Prime Minister Al Abadi and President Barzani praised the unprecedented
military cooperation between the Iraqi security forces and the Peshmerga. Duri ng a
speech at the Sulaimani Forum on 8 March, Prime Minister Al Abadi re -emphasized
the need for national unity in “winning the peace”. In Sulaymaniyah, he met with
representatives of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and representatives of the
Movement for Change (Gorran).
17-06390

3/16

S/2017/357

15. Key issues between Baghdad and Erbil remain outstanding, including
managing security in liberated areas, oil exports, revenue -sharing, budget
implementation of article 140 of the Constitution of Iraq and disputed internal
boundaries. On 30 March, during my visit to Erbil, President Barzani stated the
intention to hold a referendum on the status of the region in 2017. He added that
while the aim was not to immediately declare independence, the result would show
the world the will of the people. On 2 April, the leadership of the Kurdistan
Democratic Party and of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan agreed to form a joint
committee to build consensus ahead of discussions with the federal Government.
16. On 2 March, the head of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan in Kirkuk told the
media that he had ordered Peshmerga forces to enter a pumping facility of the State run Northern Oil Company in Kirkuk and temporarily halt production. Tensions
subsided during Prime Minister Al Abadi’s visit to the Kurdistan region of Iraq,
which was followed by an announcement by the federal Ministry of Oil that it had
already increased the capacity of the Kirkuk oil refinery and would do so again
before the end of the year.
17. At the request of the Governor of Kirkuk, Najmaldin Karim, on 14 March, the
Kirkuk Provincial Council adopted on 28 March a decision to raise the flag of the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, alongside the Iraqi flag, in front of local government
buildings. A spokesperson for the federal Government and parliamentarians
representing the Iraqi Turkmen Front called the act unconstitutional. On 21 March,
UNAMI issued a press release expressing concern and cautioning against unilateral
steps that jeopardized harmony among Kirkuk’s many ethnic and religious groups.
On 26 March, 50 civil society representatives protested peacefully against the public
position of UNAMI in Erbil. The Head of the Department of Foreign Relations of
the Kurdistan Regional Government, Falah Mustafa Bakir, also expressed concern
about the stance of UNAMI during his meeting with my Special Representative. On
29 March, Turkmen minority representatives staged a peaceful protest in Kirkuk
demanding that the Provincial Council decision of 28 March be rescinded. On
1 April, the Council of Representatives adopted a resolution to lower the Kurdistan
region of Iraq flag at Kirkuk local government buildings, sparking reactions in
Kirkuk, Erbil and Baghdad. On 3 April, Speaker Jubouri and President Masum, as
well as my Special Representative, met separately with the heads of the Iraqi
Kurdish parliamentary bloc to find a way forward. On 4 April, the Kirkuk Provincial
Council voted in favour of rejecting the Council resolution.
18. On 5 and 6 April, a joint Kurdish Democratic Party and Patriotic Union of
Kurdistan delegation visited Baghdad to hold separate meetings with Prime Minister
Al Abadi, President Masum and Speaker Jubouri. The delegation included President
Barzani’s Chief of Staff, Fuad Hussein, Secretary of the Political Bureau of the
Kurdistan Democratic Party, Fadel Mirani, and member of the Political Bureau of
the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, Adnan Mufti. Relations between Erbil and
Baghdad, political and security developments and efforts to solve economic and
other matters pertaining to relations between Baghdad and Erbil were discussed.
19. Efforts to reactivate the Kurdistan Regional Parliament and secure a political
agreement in the Kurdistan region of Iraq continued without results. The Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan finalized its road map for inter-party discussions. The Kurdistan
Islamic Union, the Kurdistan Islamic Group and the Kurdistan Islamic Movement
explored a joint proposal on a negotiated solution. The agenda for negotiations and
its sequencing reportedly continued to pose challenges to further progress.
20. On 21 February, the Kurdistan Regional Government signed a deal with the oil
company Rosneft. The Minister of Natural Resources of the Kurdistan Regional

4/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

Government, Ashti Hawrami, stated that the two -year agreement would allow for
debt repayment and infrastructure investment.
21. Iraqi authorities and staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) met in
Amman, from 5 to 17 March, to discuss the 2017 consultation on article IV of the
IMF Articles of Agreement and the second review of Iraq’s 36-month Standby
Arrangement approved by the IMF Executive Board on 7 July. In a statement, IMF
noted the Government’s fiscal adjustments, supported by the financial assistance of
the international community, which have led to a narrowing of the country’s current
account deficit. In the statement, it was noted that real gross domestic product
(GDP) growth in 2016 was sustained at 11 per cent, but that the non-oil economy
had experienced an 8 per cent contraction, owing to the conflict and the fiscal
consolidation, and that fiscal pressures remained significant. On 13 March, the
global credit rating agency Fitch changed its outlook on Iraq from “negative” to
“stable” and affirmed its B- rating. During his visit to the United States, P rime
Minister Al Abadi met with delegations from the World Bank and IMF; both
expressed their commitment to continuing to support Iraq.
22. On 27 March, the Minister of Culture, Faryad Ruwandizi, welcomed the
adoption of Security Council resolution 2347 (2017), in which the Council
condemned the unlawful destruction of cultural heritage and the looting and
smuggling of cultural property in the context of armed conflicts, notably by terrorist
groups. The Minister advised that the resolution would facilitate the retrieval of
artefacts smuggled out of Iraq by ISIL.

B.

Mosul campaign: protection of civilians
23. After the retaking of eastern Mosul from ISIL, civilians and security forces
there continued to be subjected to rocket, mortar and drone strikes by ISIL, which
incurred casualties. There were unconfirmed reports that ISIL had carried out
attacks, using weaponized chemical agents, in Mosul and surrounding areas, in
which 2 civilians died and 21 others, mostly children, were allegedly wounded.
Prime Minister Al Abadi described the reports on the use of chemical weapons as
inaccurate. The Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations, Mohamed
Ali Alhakim, also said there was no evidence of the use of chemical agents. The
World Health Organization continued to work with the Department of Health and
civil protection workers to ensure that people who might have been exposed to
chemical agents were identified and treated.
24. During their advance on ISIL positions in western Mosul, Iraqi security forces
continued to face heavy small arms, rocket and mortar fire, suicide car bombs,
ambushes and sniper attacks by ISIL on a daily basis. ISIL continued to use
civilians as human shields and to booby trap locations where civilians were being
held with explosive devices, resulting in significant civilian casualties.
25. UNAMI received reports of civilian casualties resulting from operations by the
security forces as well as air strikes carried out by Iraq an d the international
counter-ISIL coalition. Between 16 and 23 March, a number of air strikes on ISIL
positions in western Mosul reportedly resulted in significant civilian casualties. On
17 March, an air strike targeted ISIL snipers and equipment located o n and near a
house in al-Jadidah/al-Risalah neighbourhoods in western Mosul. Witnesses told
UNAMI that ISIL had forced 140 civilians to remain in the house as human shields,
while its fighters launched sniper attacks from the roof and booby trapped the hou se
with improvised explosive devices. As a result, at least 61 civilians were killed,
although other sources reported much higher casualties. The United States Central
Command issued a statement on 26 March acknowledging that its forces had

17-06390

5/16

S/2017/357

conducted air operations in the area on 17 March and that it had launched a formal
Civilian Casualty Credibility Assessment to establish the facts of the incident. Prime
Minister Al Abadi confirmed that Iraqi authorities had also opened an investigation
into the incident.
26. On 20 March, an unattributed air strike targeted ISIL militants located on the
roof of a house in Nabi Jarjees neighbourhood in western Mosul. The air strike
killed 11 members of one family, including three children and two women, and
wounded five others, including a child. Reportedly, ISIL had forced the civilians to
stay in the house. On 22 March, an unattributed air strike hit a residential house in
Rajm Hadid neighbourhood in western Mosul. ISIL was using the house to launch
attacks on Iraqi security forces and had forced children and a number of adults to
remain inside as human shields. The air strike killed a seven-year-old girl and
trapped eight other children under the rubble, who were subsequently rescued.
27. The Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq issued a statement on 24 March
underscoring the responsibility of all parties to do everything possible to protect
civilians, including prohibition against the use of people as human shields and the
indiscriminate use of firepower. On 28 March, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, stressed that, as ISIL
intensified the use of civilians as human shields, the protection of civilians must
remain paramount. Condemning ISIL for ruthlessly exploiting civilians, he
cautioned that the conduct of air strikes on ISIL locations in such an environment
might have a lethal and disproportionate impact on civilians. He urged Iraqi security
forces and their coalition partners to ensure compliance with obligations under the
international humanitarian law principle of precaution, to consider all tactical
options with a view to avoiding civilian loss of life and to reduce the impact of
operations on civilians to an absolute minimum.
28. On 3 April, commenting on the situation in Mosul, Prime Minister Al Abadi
referred to the lack of capacity to accommodate all internally displaced persons
seeking to leave Mosul. He urged residents to stay in their homes, highlighting the
risk of their being attacked by ISIL or being used as human shi elds. Iraqi security
forces dropped leaflets appealing to residents to stay in their homes and
recommending that they maintain their distance from ISIL combat positions.
29. UNAMI received a small number of reports of violations committed by Iraqi
forces, which it has referred to the Government for investigation. For example, 34
Sunnis fled from Tilkaif district, Ninawa governorate, to Mosul on 8 February, after
a Christian commander belonging to the popular mobilization forces allegedly
issued an ultimatum to vacate the district.
30. Preparations to liberate Tal Afar also progressed. Popular mobilization forces
retained control of the major highway near Tal Afar that connects Mosul to Iraq’s
border with the Syrian Arab Republic and continued their operations west of the
town to prevent the reopening of ISIL supply and escape routes.
31. ISIL retained control of Hawijah district in Kirkuk governorate and areas in
western Anbar governorate and maintained a limited presence in Salah al -Din and
Diyala governorates. On 15 February, an ISIL suicide vehicle-borne bomb killed at
least 5 people and wounded 20 in the Habibiyah neighbourhood of Baghdad. On
16 February, another vehicle-borne bomb killed at least 51 civilians and injured at
least 45 in Baghdad’s Bayaa’ neighbourhood. On 4 April, suicide bombers attacked
police in Tikrit, and in the ensuing clashes, at least five ISIL militants were killed
and dozens of police and civilians were killed or wounded.
32. On 24 February, the Iraqi air force conducted strike s against an ISIL target in
the Syrian town of Abu Kamal, located approximately five kilometres from the
6/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

Iraqi-Syrian border. Prime Minister Al Abadi stated that the air strikes in Abu Kamal
and concurrent air strikes in the town of Husaybah, Anbar governo rate, were in
response to the ISIL attacks in the Habibiyah and Bayaa’ neighbourhoods of
Baghdad. The Iraqi Joint Operations Command confirmed that the Iraqi air strikes
in Abu Kamal had been coordinated with the Syrian Arab Republic. On 8 March,
Prime Minister Al Abadi emphasized the Syrian Government’s consent to the strikes
and pledged additional strikes on ISIL targets in the Syrian Arab Republic, should
the security of Iraq be threatened.
33. On 3 March, media reported that clashes between Peshmerga forces,
comprising Syrian Kurdish elements, and the Sinjar Resistance Units, a mostly
Yazidi militia with connections to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, had erupted in
Sinuni subdistrict of Ninawa governorate, south of Sinjar. The two sides reportedly
quickly agreed on a ceasefire but tensions persist, raising concerns of another
escalation. On 14 March, clashes broke out between Peshmerga forces and
demonstrators supporting the Kurdistan Workers’ Party in Khanasur town near
Sinjar, which left 10 people injured and 1 dead. In a public statement, the Ministry
of the Interior of the Kurdistan region of Iraq accused the Kurdistan Workers’ Party
of provoking the Peshmerga.

C.

Regional and international developments
34. Iraq continued its engagement with regional countries, international
organizations and the wider international community to promote political, military,
humanitarian and economic cooperation. Prime Minister Al Abadi attended the 2017
Munich Security Conference held from 17 to 19 February, a longside President
Barzani. Both thanked the international community for supporting Iraq’s fight
against terrorism and held a series of separate bilateral meetings with world leaders.
On 26 and 27 February, President Barzani travelled to Turkey, where he met with
the President, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and the Prime Minister, Binali Yıldırım.
35. At the Summit meeting of the League of Arab States (LAS), held on 29 March
in Jordan, Prime Minister Al Abadi met bilaterally with Arab counterparts to rally
support for the fight against ISIL and for humanitarian, economic and development
assistance to Iraq and to discuss regional cooperation between Iraq and other Arab
countries. He reiterated the importance of supporting the national unity of Iraq and
respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity. In the final Summit statement, it
was affirmed that the stability and territorial integrity of Iraq were cornerstones of
Arab security. Following the visit on 25 February of the Saudi Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Adel al-Jubeir, to Iraq, Prime Minister Al Abadi met with King Salman bin
Abdulaziz al-Saud of Saudi Arabia on the margins of the LAS Summit. Saudi
assistance for humanitarian and stabilization efforts in liberated areas and bilateral
trade were among the key issues discussed.
36. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, participated in the thirtyfourth session of the Human Rights Council, in Geneva. Iraq currently serves as
Deputy Chair of the Council.
37. Iraq received high-level visits from a number of international counter-ISIL
coalition partners, including the United States, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Italy and Tunisia. Iraq also received high -level visits from the
Russian Federation and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
38. On 26 January, the Council of Ministers of Iraq discussed the terms of
reference and endorsed the budget for the Iraq-Kuwait joint boundary technical
project, which had been previously formulated during a workshop hosted by the
United Nations Secretariat in New York from 24 to 27 October 2016. Erroneous

17-06390

7/16

S/2017/357

media reports on the discussion of the Council of Ministers caused domestic
controversy over the Khor Abdullah waterway, which is not part of the joint
boundary technical project. That led to public demonstrations. On 30 January, the
Council of Representatives established an ad hoc committee on the Khor Abdullah
waterway. On 10 February, while in Cairo, Speaker Jubouri discussed the issue with
the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kuwait, Marzouq al-Ghanim, assuring him
that Iraq was committed to good relations with its neighbour . During the workshop
in October, Iraq and Kuwait had agreed that the confirmation of the project should
be officially communicated to the Secretariat no later than 30 December 2016. The
terms of reference have yet to be endorsed by the Council of Ministers .
39. On 14 March, Prime Minister Al Abadi spoke with Turkish Prime Minister
Yıldırım about bilateral relations, the fight against ISIL and regional developments.
Prime Minister Yıldırım confirmed that Ankara was working to assist displaced
persons in Iraq. Prime Minister Al Abadi reiterated his long -standing call for the
withdrawal of Turkish troops from Iraq. Turkish air strikes continued to target the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, with at least 10 instances
reported since 3 February. The Turkish authorities issued public statements
expressing concern about the raising of the Kurdish flag in Kirkuk, noting that such
action was not compatible with the Iraqi Constitution. The Spokesperson of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran also publicly raised
concern.
40. On 16 December 2015, 27 Qatari nationals were abducted in Muthanna
governorate. On 18 December, Prime Minister Al Abadi informed the Prime
Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al -Thani, that the Iraqi
authorities were working to secure their release. On 21 April 2017, all the Qatari
abductees were released to the Iraqi Ministry of the Interior and later handed over to
an envoy from Qatar, who travelled with the abductees to Doha on the same day.
41. The Executive Order of the President of the United States of 27 January, which
imposed temporary measures to restrict entry into the United States of citizens of
seven countries, including Iraq, prompted unfavourable reactions in Iraq. Another
Executive Order of the President of the United States, issued on 6 March, excluded
Iraq from the list of countries affected, noting the positive steps taken by its
Government. On 6 March, a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq
welcomed the exclusion of Iraq, adding that it reinforced the United States-Iraqi
strategic alliance.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
42. My Special Representative continued his engagement with government
officials, parliamentarians, representatives of political parties, women’s groups,
civil society and religious and community leaders to advance inclusive political
dialogue and national reconciliation in post-ISIL Iraq. He called for intensified
efforts to overcome divisions ahead of the post-liberation phase, in order to
strengthen political management and governance, combat corruption , improve
public service delivery and protect human rights.
43. Referring to the National Settlement Initiative put forward by the National
Alliance, my Special Representative continued to urge all Iraqi parties,
representatives of Iraq’s diverse communities, and civil society groups, including
women and young people, to outline their vision for national reconciliation, as the

8/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

Iraqi Forces Coalition had done in its Historic Settlement Initiative. He visited the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan and the United States to solicit support for Iraq.
44. In January, UNAMI launched a series of events called “Iraq: Youth and
Coexistence”, aiming to incorporate the voices and vision of Iraq’s young
generation in the national reconciliation process, with a view to bu ilding a united
post-ISIL Iraq, based on the principles of equality, citizenship and peaceful
coexistence. On 28 January, 18 February, 18 March, 25 March and 8 April, my
Deputy Special Representative for Political and Electoral Affairs chaired youth
forums in Basra, Erbil, Najaf, Baquba and Sulaymaniyah, respectively.
45. As the electoral process gets under way, UNAMI has engaged with the
constitutional and political leaders of Iraq, the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the Legal Committee of the Council of Representatives to discuss
the electoral calendar and potential amendments to the electoral legal and
institutional framework. My Special Representative has underlined that decisive
actions are needed to allow for a timely holding of the electio ns, including
parliamentary elections in April 2018.
46. After the violent demonstration in Baghdad on 11 February, UNAMI
condemned the intimidation and threats of violence against the Independent High
Electoral Commission, its staff and their families, while encouraging institutional
and legal reforms. Further, the Government of Iraq was called upon to provide the
current Commission with all necessary support and protection until it is replaced
through existing legal and democratic mechanisms.
47. UNAMI continued to promote participation by women in the elections and the
peacebuilding and reconciliation process, including the National Settlement
Initiative and the Historic Settlement Initiative. The Mission engaged with the Iraqi
National Reconciliation Commission to support the integration of gender
perspectives into its work. On 20 March, UNAMI hosted a consultative forum with
civil society organizations on the participation and representation of women in
electoral processes.
48. In continued support for dialogue between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government, UNAMI leadership met regularly with
representatives of both Governments and with political parties. They urged political
leaders in the Kurdistan region of Iraq to chart a way o ut of the political and
constitutional crisis in the region.
49. My Special Representative travelled to Kirkuk on 15 March and underscored
to Governor Najmaldin Karim the need to promote political dialogue and abstain
from steps that would adversely affect the situation in the governorate. He
highlighted the importance of close coordination between the local authorities and
the United Nations on humanitarian, stabilization and development activities. They
discussed preparations for Provincial Council elections in the governorate.
50. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura,
visited Iraq from 28 February to 3 March, in the context of the implementation of
the 2016 joint communiqué by Iraq and the United Nations on prevention o f and
response to conflict-related sexual violence. She met with senior political leaders in
Baghdad, Erbil and Dahuk, religious leaders, civil society and service providers. In
addition, my Special Representative for Iraq visited Shekhan, Ninawa governora te,
on 14 March, where he met with Prince Tahsin Beg, spiritual leader of the Yazidis,
Baba Sheikh and other key community leaders. In follow-up to Security Council
resolution 2299 (2016), UNAMI has appointed a Senior Women’s Protection
Adviser to strengthen capacity and support the Government’s efforts to implement
the joint communiqué. UNAMI continued to advocate for amendments to the family
17-06390

9/16

S/2017/357

protection draft law in accordance with international standards, which is under
consideration by the Council of Representatives.

B.

Electoral assistance
51. Following the decision of the Council of Ministers that Provincial and District
Council elections would be scheduled for 16 September 2017, the Independent
Commission started preparatory activities, including electronic voter identification
and electronic ballot counting, with technical support from UNAMI. As at 3 April,
biometric data of more than 10 million voters, around 49 per cent of whom are
women, had been collected and were being cross-checked, prior to finalizing the
voters list. A separate process for the biometric registration of internally displaced
persons continued. As at 2 April, the Commission had approved the registration of
24 political parties out of the 240 that had submitted their application for
registration as at that date. The Commission also opened the process for the
accreditation of agents and observers for the elections.
52. On 1 March, UNAMI invited the Chairs of both the Independe nt High
Electoral Commission and the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral Commission to
provide a joint electoral briefing for the Erbil-based diplomatic community. The
Chair of the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral Commission emphasized the
need for support by the international community. UNAMI confirmed that the
memorandum of cooperation of 8 October 2015 between the Independent High
Electoral Commission and the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral Commission
was the basis for extending United Nations support.
53. On 12 March, the Council of Representatives invited UNAMI to send a
representative to the ad hoc parliamentary committee tasked with the selection of
the next Board of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral Commission.
The Mission will participate in the process, in an advisory capacity. UNAMI also
continued to engage with the relevant committees in the Council of Representatives
on electoral reforms.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
54. Armed conflict, terrorism and acts of violence continued to take a terrible toll
on civilians. Between 3 February and 3 April 2017, at least 908 civilian men,
women and children were killed and at least 1,163 wounded, bringing the total
number of civilian casualties in Iraq since the beginning of the armed conflict in
January 2014 to at least 80,521 (28,023 killed and 52,498 wounded).
55. UNAMI received innumerable reports of serious and systematic violations of
international humanitarian law and gross abuses of human rights perpetrated by
ISIL. The organization continued to use civilians and civilian infrastructure and
private homes as shields. In contravention of international law, ISIL conducted
organized terrorist activities directly targeting civilians. In addition, sources indicate
that there may be 1,739 Yazidi women and girls who remain in ISIL enslavement.
56. ISIL continued to target civilians in areas retaken by Iraqi security forces,
including through suicide attacks, indirect fire and weaponized drones. For example,
on 10 February, two attacks by ISIL fighters wearing explosive vests targeted two
restaurants in eastern Mosul, killing at least 12 civilians and wounding at least 26.
On 4 February, indirect fire hit a residential area in south-east Mosul, killing 12
civilians, including four women and two children. ISIL markedly increased the use
of weaponized drones to target civilians in retaken areas of Mosul. For example, on

10/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

23 February, a drone attack in eastern Mosul killed 12 civilians and wounded 9
others.
57. On 5 March, ISIL forced some 50 civilians into a house in western Mosul and
later used them as human shields. On 6 March, the Iraqi security forces rescued 48
civilians still kept in the house. ISIL punished civilians refusing to join the group.
On 20 February, ISIL demolished five houses of civilians who refused to fight for
the group. It continued to punish civilians accused of cooperating with Iraqi security
forces. For example, on 11 February, ISIL reportedly abducted 10 men in Hawijah,
Kirkuk governorate. On 2 March, ISIL militants publicly executed nine civilians in
western Mosul.
58. ISIL claimed responsibility for attacks targeting civilians in areas other than
Ninawa and Baghdad. The group also targeted Salah al-Din governorate. On
8 March, an attack by four individuals wearing explosive vests targeted a wedding
in a village in the southern Bayji district, reportedly killing 27 people and wounding
23 others. On 15 March, a vehicle laden with explosives detonated in Tikrit, killing
8 civilians and injuring another 40, as well as three members of the Iraqi security
forces.
59. On 9 February, Iraqi security forces discovered two mass graves in Rutbah,
Anbar governorate, reportedly containing the remains of some 25 security force
members and civilians killed by ISIL in 2014. On 25 and 26 February, an area close
to Azba village, about 10 kilometres south of Mosul, was retaken. It contains a
sinkhole where it is alleged by Iraqi security sources that ISIL has buried thousands
of bodies. The site is surrounded by improvised explosive devices and booby traps
and is not yet secure. As with other suspected mass grave sites, the number of
victims and the details surrounding their murders can be determined only after
systematic exhumation has taken place.
60. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), received reports of 92 incidents of
violations against children, affecting 180 children, between 3 February and 6 April.
At the time of reporting, 70 of those incidents, affecting 136 children, had been
verified. Forty-nine of the verified incidents involved killing and maiming primarily
in Ninawa governorate, with 60 children confirmed killed and 49 maimed. Twenty
cases of recruitment and use by ISIL were also verified, while seven children were
verified to have been abducted in Anbar. Two schools in Ninawa were confirmed to
have been damaged as a result of conflict. UNAMI continues to advocate that the
protection of civilians be at the forefront of the planning of military operations.
Prime Minister Al Abadi has publicly reiterated his Government’s commitment to
the protection of civilians and to ensuring justice and accountability for human
rights violations and abuses committed in relation to the conflict. Religious
authorities have spoken out. In weekly sermons, the representative of Grand
Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani stressed the importance of protecting civilians and
minimizing damage to civilian property and called for humane and fair treatment of
detainees. The Shia Endowment continued providing humanitarian relief to civilians
affected by the fighting, while popular mobilization forces launched a campaign to
provide humanitarian assistance to displaced persons from Mosul on 17 March.
61. UNAMI continued its support to the committee of experts appointed by the
Council of Representatives to oversee the process of nominations for the new Iraqi
High Commission for Human Rights. The United Nations is a full member of the
committee pursuant to the law establishing the Commission. Nominations closed in
May 2016. Prior to the holding of candidate interviews in March 2017, members of
the committee attempted to remove the United Nations representative from the
committee, insisting that the United Nations was only an ob server. The United
17-06390

11/16

S/2017/357

Nations representative subsequently stopped attending the meetings of the
committee and called on the Speaker of the Council of Representatives to suspend
the work of the committee until the matter was resolved.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
62. An estimated 500,000 civilians are living under ISIL control in the western
districts of Mosul and remain at extreme risk. At least half of them are children.
Civilians who have fled the city report severe shortages of basic food, clean
drinking water, fuel, medicine and infant formula. Fighting in the densely populated
old city, where up to 400,000 reside, continues to be fierce. Three mobile trauma
stabilization points are operating near the front lines and three field hospitals are
treating injured civilians. Since military operations began on 17 October, over 6,000
wounded people have been sent to hospitals for trauma care. Two one -stop
integrated service centres for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have been
established and mobile teams are providing psychosocial support and referrals for
displaced women and girls who have survived gender-based violence.
63. Although the Iraqi security forces have committed to a humanitarian concept
of operations, fighting in western Mosul has been more intense than in the east, with
greater impact on civilians, in terms of displacement and destruction. By early
April, close to 250,000 civilians had fled western Mosul; another 250,000 are likely
to leave in the weeks ahead. The Ministry of Migration and Displacement and
humanitarian partners will soon have up to 19 emergency camps and sites to receive
newly displaced people, located east, south and north of Mosul. With displacement
increasing, urgent efforts are under way to expand space in camps nearest to the
city.
64. During the fighting in eastern Mosul, more than 550,000 civilians stayed in
their homes. Of the more than 161,000 who fled, more than 90,000 have returned to
their homes. The remaining 70,000 are housed in emergency sites and camps. Since
October, partners have reached 1.8 million people from Mosul and its environs with
emergency response packages, including both displaced people and people who
were able to stay in their homes. UNICEF continues to truck more than 2.3 million
litres of water daily into eastern Mosul. More than 673,000 people have received
household kits, more than 1 million have received food parcels and 640,000 people
have received medical care. Health partners have already set up four trauma
stabilization points and two more are presently being established. A 50 -bed field
hospital has been opened outside of Hammam al-Alil. Markets and commercial
routes have begun to reopen and 455 schools are now functioning.
65. The humanitarian operation in Iraq remains one of the largest and most
complex in the world. As many as 11 million people are expected to require some
form of humanitarian assistance in 2017, including more than 3 million currently
displaced persons. Partners worry that as many as 1.2 million additional people may
be forced to flee their homes during the year, depending on the intensity of the
military campaigns to retake Mosul, Tal Afar, Hawijah and other areas. The
Humanitarian Response Plan, which was launched in Brussels in December 2016,
seeks $985 million to respond to the needs of the 6.2 million vulnerable Iraqis,
including families returning in increasingly large numbers to retaken areas. Already
more than 1.6 million people have returned to their communities but remain
vulnerable to shocks, with many requiring humanitarian assistance.
66. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization continued to expand. By April 2017, more than 500 projects
were under way or had been completed in 22 liberated towns and districts in Anbar,

12/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

Ninawa, Salah al-Din and Diyala governorates. The projects rehabilitated basic
grids, put people to work, helped businesses to reopen, boosted Government
capacity and facilitated community-level reconciliation. More than 200 projects are
under way in eastern Mosul and retaken areas in Ninawa, including the
rehabilitation of water treatment plants, electrical substations, schools and health care facilities. In preparation for the liberation of western Mosul, additional
specialists have been recruited and supplies and equipment pre -positioned and
readied for use. Medical equipment has already been supplied to health facilities
treating injured civilians fleeing western Mosul. The first 45 projects under the
expanded stabilization channel of the Funding Facility are under way. They are
designed to rehabilitate medium-sized public institutions, which generate large
numbers of jobs in liberated cities, and to stabilize the agricultural, transport and
electrical corridors between districts. A pilot project to address the needs of women headed households is being implemented in peri-urban areas, where local
governments are concerned about possible reradicalization. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund and the International
Organization for Migration are supporting programmes in retaken areas in the
agriculture, health, education, livelihoods, youth, peacebuilding, management of
gender-based violence and housing sectors. The United Nations Mine Action
Service continued to provide coordination and technical advice to organizations
working on protection issues and conducting survey, clearance and risk education.
In support of stabilization, 1,350 explosive devices and homemade explosives were
cleared from critical infrastructure. Furthermore, advocacy by the Mine Action
Service resulted in an agreement to embed military engineers in civilian clearance
teams, which will address the inability of civilian entities to conduct demolitions,
and reduce the direct threat of explosive stockpiles.
67. Partners continued to support the Government to elaborate a new national
development plan and Iraq’s second poverty reduction strategy. In anticipation of a
reconstruction conference after the liberation of Mosul, the United Nations country
team commenced work on a recovery and resilience framework with i ntegrated
programmes in transitional justice, reconciliation, economic diversification, returns,
security sector reform, the delivery of basic services, survivor support, governance
and anti-corruption, and the prevention of violent extremism.

E.

Security and operational issues
68. On 30 October 2016, the Department of Safety and Security activated an Iraq
humanitarian support cell in Erbil, to support humanitarian and stabilization
activities related to anti-ISIL operations in Ninawa. From 1 November 2016 to
23 February 2017, 170 missions were conducted, including 11 missions with very
high residual risk and 159 missions with high residual risk. The United Nations
security management system continued to work with Government authorities to
ensure that security measures were in place during humanitarian and stabilization
activities.
69. Construction and renovation in the integrated United Nations compound in
Baghdad continue. Fifty-seven new accommodation units were added in Baghdad in
January and 79 new accommodation units are projected to be completed in June
2017. Another 116 new accommodation units are scheduled for completion by
August 2018 and planning has commenced for 250 additional office spaces. In
addition, the renovation of infrastructure, offices and other facilities is planned. As

17-06390

13/16

S/2017/357

part of its greening initiatives, the Mission started producing 240 kWs of electricity
on 28 February, through solar panels.

IV. Observations
70. During my visit to Iraq, I delivered a message of solidarity to the Iraqi people,
Government and institutions as the country continues in its fight against terrorism. I
called attention to the need to support internally displaced persons in Iraq during a
visit to Hassan Sham camp. I welcomed the commitment of the coun try’s leaders to
civilian protection and national reconciliation and pledged the ongoing support of
the United Nations as the Government seeks to bolster aid delivery to needy
populations and rebuild Iraqi institutions. I also expressed the need to find an
adequate mechanism of effective accountability for crimes committed by ISIL.
71. As the Iraqi forces continue their progress in their fight against ISIL, action
that brings the country closer to long-term peace and stability is imperative.
Dialogue, which results in inclusive political solutions, is critical. I therefore urge
all of Iraq’s main components, minority communities, religious and community
leaders and civil society groups, including those representing women and young
people, to engage in discussions to achieve an historic national settlement. Their
own visions of national reconciliation, such as the National Settlement Initiative of
the National Alliance and the Historic Settlement Initiative received from the Iraqi
Forces Coalition, will be indispensable for creating a broad-based, representative
debate about sustainable peace. Efforts by countries of the region and other
international partners to support Iraq in this process are encouraged and welcome.
The United Nations will continue to use its good offices and act as a facilitator, in
coordination with the Government.
72. Progress towards national reconciliation will be vital in the aftermath of the
liberation operations. Restoring peaceful coexistence among all components in
Mosul and Ninawa governorates, including minority groups, is essential to instil
country-wide confidence in the possibility and promise of a national settlement. All
necessary actions should be taken to enable the safe and voluntary return of
internally displaced persons, including from minority communities, and to protect
fully their civil and political rights, including their enfranchisement in the
forthcoming elections. I encourage the Government to continue its efforts to put in
place effective governance and security arrangements in Ninawa governorate.
73. I call upon Iraqi leaders to put in place a comprehensive legal and institutional
framework for elections and to conclude the selection of the incoming Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral Commissi on in a timely and
inclusive manner. The current Commission needs to expedite the registration of
political parties. The United Nations will continue to provide technical assistance,
as requested, and to promote inclusivity and the active participation of women in
politics.
74. The stability and unity of Iraq hinge on the rule of law, based on a legal
framework that upholds inclusiveness and equality. I urge the Government and the
Council of Representatives to adopt the outstanding priority legislation, inc luding
the Justice and Accountability Law, the Anti-Terrorism Law, the Federation Council
Law, the Provincial Powers Act and the Components’ Rights Law.
75. As military operations wind down, Iraqis will expect concrete steps towards
eradicating corruption, improving service delivery and decentralizing governance.
This will require vigorous cooperation among all stakeholders. The participation of
women in all decision-making processes is vital.

14/16

17-06390

S/2017/357

76. The continued cooperation and coordination between the Iraq i security forces
and the Peshmerga are welcome. A commitment to address all outstanding issues
between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government is needed.
The visit by Prime Minister Al Abadi to the Kurdistan region of Iraq is an
encouraging step. Additional steps need to be taken to enhance dialogue, including
on the management of security in liberated territories, oil exports, revenue -sharing,
Peshmerga salaries, disputed internal boundaries and the return of internally
displaced persons to their places of origin, in accordance with humanitarian and
human rights principles.
77. I call upon the political leaders of the Kurdistan region of Iraq to redouble
efforts to make substantial progress towards ending the political stalemate in th e
region, which has kept the Kurdistan Regional Parliament from convening since
October 2015.
78. During my participation in the thirty-fourth Summit of LAS in Jordan, I
welcomed the progress in retaking territories from ISIL and expressed readiness to
cooperate with Prime Minister Al Abadi and all Iraqi leaders towards an inclusive
system of governance in which all communities are represented, respected and safe.
The visit to Baghdad by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia and the
Prime Minister’s meeting with the King of Saudi Arabia are of note, including the
attendant steps to enhance cooperation, trade and investment. I commend efforts by
the countries of the region to support Iraq and engage with the Government,
including through the provision of humanitarian assistance, with full respect for the
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Government of Iraq is
encouraged to expedite efforts for the Iraq-Kuwait joint boundary technical project,
which was agreed last October, to start without further delay.
79. The protection of civilians is paramount to restoring sustainable peace and
long-term stability in Iraq. Minority communities remain particularly vulnerable. I
urge the Government and the international coalition to remain s teadfast in their
commitment to keep the protection of civilians at the centre of the military
operations against ISIL, to keep their procedures and tactics under review with the
aim of avoiding civilian casualties and to reduce the impact of operations on
civilians to an absolute minimum. The appeal by religious authorities to prioritize
the protection of civilians is welcome. Reports of forced evictions of civilians in
liberated areas and the obstruction of the return of displaced persons to liberated
areas are concerning. I urge the Government to investigate reported violations of
humanitarian and human rights laws and norms, including with regard to detainees
suspected of terrorism or support to ISIL, and to bring perpetrators to justice in an
expeditious, transparent manner that upholds the rule of law and promotes
reconciliation. Creating the conditions for a safe, voluntary and dignified return of
internally displaced persons is critical.
80. The terrible toll on civilians exacted by armed conflict, terrorism and acts of
violence is deplorable. Women and children continue to suffer disproportionately.
ISIL continued to use civilians as human shields and to target civilians in retaken
areas, including through suicide attacks, shelling and weaponized dron es. ISIL
continued to punish civilians for allegedly cooperating with Iraqi forces and claimed
responsibility for mass-casualty attacks in areas other than Ninawa. As ISIL has lost
territory, more mass graves have been uncovered, including in Ninawa, Anbar and
Babil governorates. Reports were received of alleged use of weaponized chemical
agents by ISIL. I am appalled by the group’s organized, systematic and gross
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and I strongly
condemn the atrocities perpetrated by ISIL.

17-06390

15/16

S/2017/357

81. The commitment of the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence in Iraq, as
expressed by the Prime Minister of Iraq and the Prime Minister of the Kurdi stan
Regional Government to my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
during her visit to the country is welcome. I am encouraged by positive steps
already taken to implement fully the joint communiqué on prevention of and
response to conflict-related sexual violence in Iraq, including the appointment of
high-level focal points to work together with the United Nations and the
international community during the implementation phase.
82. While humanitarian agencies prepared for months prior to the Mosul
operation, a crisis of this scale is nearly unmanageable. The Government and the
United Nations have constructed 17 emergency sites around the city but space is
limited and many, including all of the sites to the south, are already full.
Humanitarian partners are working to expand space, but it is a race against time to
ensure that camp expansion keeps pace with new displacements. If the number of
civilians fleeing the city increases quickly, there will not be enough space.
Humanitarian partners are working with the Government on a contingency plan to
transfer people to 13 camps further away from Mosul, where space exists.
83. Continued stabilization activities through the UNDP Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization will be critical to consolidate military gains and to help to
set the conditions for people’s returns to their homes. This successful programme
has disbursed or committed the majority of its funding, and current reserves and
pledges will last until the end of April. To continue immediate stabilization
activities, $500 million in new commitments will be needed, including $400 million
for remaining phases in Mosul and $100 million for the 8 to 10 areas yet to be
retaken.
84. Lastly, I would like to express my appreciation to my Spec ial Representative
for Iraq, Ján Kubiš, his two Deputies and all United Nations national and
international staff, for their efforts to fulfil the United Nations mandate in Iraq
under challenging circumstances.

16/16

17-06390
