S/PV.7903

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7903

rd meeting
Tuesday, 21 March 2017, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/206)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-07323 (E)
*1707323*

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/206)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Monseigneur Marcel Utembi, President of
the National Episcopal Conference of the Congo; and
Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala of the Common Cause
Network.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/206, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity you have offered
me to speak to the Security Council today about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As emphasized in the report (S/2017/206) of the
Secretary-General dated 10 March on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
2/13

21/03/2017

Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2017/206),
the political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has undergone profound changes
over the past months, thereby requiring an adjustment
of the priorities and approach of MONUSCO.
The full implementation of the political agreement
of 31 December 2016, which paves the way, in the
clearest possible manner, to the holding of elections,
requires the full support of the United Nations.
Some impediments will have to be removed. The
ruling majority and the Rassemblement have opposing
views on how to appoint the Prime Minister, as well
as on the allocation of key roles in the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Defence and Justice
in the transitional Government that will be formed.
The role that the National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo (CENCO) could play in the finalization of the
special provisions is also a source of discord.
The death of Etienne Tshisekedi had a significant
impact on the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, further delaying the finalization
of the special provisions, the appointment of the
Prime Minister and the establishment of the national
agreement and electoral process monitoring committee.
As long as the political dialogue remains at
an impasse, there is a risk that tensions will rise. In
February, some of the seminaries and parishes of the
Catholic Church in Kananga, Kasai, Kinshasa and
Lubumbashi in Katanga were attacked, presumably
because of increased frustration among certain
segments of the population at seeing the political
process stall.
However, I wish to note that in the past few days
the situation seems to be moving in the right direction.
The appointment of the Deputy Secretary-General of
the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès social, Félix
Tshisekedi, as President of the Rassemblement, and of
Pierre Lumbi, a representative of the Groupe des sept
opposition coalition, to the head of the Conseil des sages
of the Rassemblement resulted in the resumption of
negotiations on the special provisions under the auspices
of CENCO on 16 March. In addition, the Presidents of
both houses of Parliament called for an irreversible and
credible electoral process and expressed their support
for the efforts of CENCO.
Notwithstanding the delays in the political process,
significant progress has been made in updating the
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

voter registry. To date, more than 19 million voters
have been enrolled, and the enrolment process is about
to begin in the two remaining enrolment areas.
The logistical and technical support of MONUSCO
to the enrolment process will come to an end at the
end of this month. At that time MONUSCO will have
transported approximately 3,000 tons of enrolment
material through the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
If authorized by the Security Council, MONUSCO is
willing to provide technical and logistical support to
the electoral process that goes beyond the updating of
the voter registry.
(spoke in English)
The deteriorating security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a source
of major concern. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, violence and threats to civilians
are no longer concentrated in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. Communitybased violence and inter-ethnic clashes have spread
from areas already affected by armed conflict, such as
the Kivus, to Tanganyika, the three Kasai provinces,
Lomami and Kongo Central. Armed group activity in
the east has also increased, particularly of late with the
resurfacing of former elements of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23).
The conduct of coordinated operations by the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) and MONUSCO against armed groups in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have helped maintain military pressure on the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and the Force de résistance
patriotique de l’Ituri, disrupting their activities. The
FARDC has also been involved in actions against
former M-23 elements who had recently crossed into
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The resurgence of violence in certain areas in
the rest of the country has been exacerbated by the
uncertain political situation, as well as the manipulation
of grievances for political ends, and the provision of
support to armed militias by some political actors. The
increasing use of self-defence militias acting along
ethnic lines points to a growing sense of insecurity and
uncertainty. The risk of electoral violence also remains
high, mainly in urban areas. The potential for violence is
likely to increase further the longer the implementation

S/PV.7903

of the 31 December agreement is stalled, thereby
prolonging the current political uncertainty.
The spread of violence has been characterized by
a significant increase in human rights violations. The
year 2016 witnessed a 30 per cent increase in human
rights violations as compared to 2015, with MONUSCO
documenting a total of 5,190 human rights violations
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
State agents were responsible for 64 per cent of those
violations, and armed groups were responsible for the
remaining 36 per cent. I am particularly concerned
by reports of the excessive use of force, human rights
violations and the presence mass graves in the Kasai
provinces. I have encouraged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to conduct thorough
investigations and to ensure that the perpetrators of
those acts are held to full account. MONUSCO of
course stands ready to provide its full support for the
carrying out of those investigations.
I would like to emphasize again that only political
solutions can address and halt the rising levels of
violence now being witnessed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. For our part, MONUSCO
remains fully engaged in protecting and promoting
human rights and the political space and is strongly
engaging with the relevant authorities on a regular basis
to ensure that perpetrators of human rights violations
are held accountable for their actions and are brought
to justice. MONUSCO is also strictly applying the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy for
any and all support provided to State security actors in
the implementation of its mandate.
I am also deeply concerned about the deteriorating
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The continued
depreciation of the Congolese franc, which has lost
over 30 per cent of its value in the past year, the lack
of foreign-currency reserves and the fiscal shortfall
are having an increasing impact on the livelihoods of
Congolese citizens, and will continue to do so in the
coming months.
Those developments are coupled with a
deteriorating humanitarian situation due to the
intensifying violence. A total of 2.2 million persons are
currently forcibly displaced. In Tanganyika province
alone, violence forced approximataely 102,000 persons
into displacement in the last quarter of 2016, while

17-073233/13

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

21/03/2017

the violence in the Kasais had displaced an estimated
225,000 persons by the end of January this year.

motivated violence in key urban centres where there is
no police or FPU presence.

The 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan is funded
at just over 60 per cent, putting pressure on the
humanitarian community to respond to these new
displacements. At the same time, refugees from South
Sudan continue to cross into the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees having registered
28,000 refugees in areas close to the border by January
of this year.

The primary responsibility for the implementation
of the agreement rests with its signatories and will
require the same level of commitment and compromise
that led to its signing, on 31 December. MONUSCO will
continue to provide support for the implementation of
the agreement, while also supporting efforts to address
the mounting threats faced by the civilian population
during the transition period.

As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the 31 December agreement provides a clear
path towards the holding of elections, setting the stage
for MONUSCO’s drawdown and exit. The Mission’s
main strategic objective during the coming months
will therefore be to support the establishment of an
environment conducive to the timely holding of peaceful,
credible and inclusive elections, in accordance with the
provisions of the agreement. Accordingly, MONUSCO
has already undertaken adjustments to its posture and
operations. The Mission will continue to make such
adjustments as may be required in the months ahead to
ensure that it is well positioned to use the full range of
tools and resources at its disposal to support the political
and electoral process, contribute to the protection of
civilians and assist with stabilization efforts.
The Mission has provided its full support to the
CENCO-led dialogue efforts and in the updating
of the voter registry. It has strengthened its civilian
and military presence and operations in new areas of
concern outside the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, specifically the Kasais and
Tanganyika. We have also initiated a process of shifting
key functions from Goma to Kinshasa, in order to
strengthen the Mission headquarters. I have requested
that the MONUSCO protection-of-civilians strategy be
revised to address the threat to the civilian population
from armed groups.
The report of the Secretary-General also sets out a
package of measures aimed at enhancing the ability of
the MONUSCO force to support the achievement of the
Mission’s strategic objectives in the current challenging
security context through the adoption of a more mobile,
flexible and agile posture. The Secretary-General has
recommended the deployment of two additional formed
police units (FPUs) to help the Congolese authorities
address the potential threat of electoral and politically
4/13

I thank you again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council today. I look forward
to the ensuing discussions.
The President: I thank Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.
Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): The
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo (CENCO)
would like to sincerely thank the President of the
Security Council for having invited us to brief the
members of the Council on the sociopolitical, security
and economic situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the run-up to the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
We would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the ongoing support of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. To that end, resolution 2277
(2016) calls upon the political and social stakeholders
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage in
an open and inclusive political dialogue on the holding
of the presidential election in accordance with the
Constitution. This two-stage dialogue, convened by the
President of the Republic, led to the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement signed on 31 December
2016 at the Kinshasa Interdiocesan Centre, whose rapid
and full implementation CENCO strongly urges.
With regard to the socio-political situation, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently in the
throes of a sociopolitical, security and economic crisis
of increasingly alarming proportions. All the elected
bodies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
exceeded their mandate, a first in the history of our
country since its independence.
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Since the drafters of the Constitution did not
envisage such a state of affairs, the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement signed at the Kinshasa
Interdiocesan Centre is the only road map that could
rescue the country from its current institutional
crisis. Unfortunately, the special provisions for the
implementation of the agreement have met with
difficulties in being concluded. While the population
is eagerly awaiting elections, the political status quo
resulting from the intransigence of the negotiators on
the remaining points of divergence, and kept in place
by political chicanery and a lack of genuine political
will, runs the risk of indefinitely postponing the full
implementation of the 31 December agreement. It is
also worth mentioning the delays in the implementation
of measures designed to ease political tensions in
the country.
The security situation, which is characterized by
bloody clashes and human rights violations, remains
a source of concern for a large part of the country,
particularly in the Kasai provinces, where the rebellion
against the central authorities, waged by Chief Kamuina
Nsapu militia forces, is spiralling out of control.
We deplore the hundreds of deaths, the exploitation
of minors, who are being doubly victimized — by
recruitment by the militias and the disproportionate
acts of repression by the police — the interruption of
schooling, the dearth of humanitarian assistance and
the imminent risk of famine. There is even talk of mass
graves. In the same area, two United Nations experts
were abducted, as well as one interpreter and three
motorcycle taxi drivers.
The Lord’s Resistance Army is operating in the
far north, together with the Mbororo, with the goal
of fomenting misery among the local population.
In North Kivu, in particular in the Вегi and Lubero
territories, a series of massacres of the population
continues. In Tanganyika, the deadly clashes between
the Bantu and the Twa that have resulted in the forced
displacement of families are still simmering. There are
continuing tensions in Kongo Central and in Kinshasa,
which experienced deadly confrontations on 19 and
20 September and on 19 and 20 December 2016.
I should point out that the Catholic Church is also
a victim of this tense and insecure situation. It has
been targeted all over the country by hoodlums and
insurgents who accuse it of not doing enough to enable
the authorities to implement the New Year’s Eve 2016
agreement. We deplore the physical and verbal threats

S/PV.7903

that have been made to clerics in a number of dioceses,
where some bishops have received threatening phone
calls from insurgents. Some Church buildings, including
presbyteries and convents, have been attacked, burned
and looted.
With regard to the economy, the sociopolitical
crisis, which is exacerbated by the generalized
insecurity throughout the country, is not good for the
nation’s economic health. The value of the Congolese
franc is falling daily against foreign currencies. Many
public and private companies are idle, and it is the
people who are the first victims, since their purchasing
power is not enough to meet their basic needs.
What does the National Episcopal Conference
of the Congo want from the Security Council? If
this crisis continues, it runs the risk of rendering the
agreement of 31 December obsolete and delaying the
elections scheduled for December 2017, or indeed even
calling for a referendum or amending the Constitution.
In that regard, in the wake of the extraordinary meeting
of the Assembly of Bishops on 20 to 25 February,
CENCO appealed to the people of the Congo in an
address entitled “Say no to the deadlock”. We believe
that the only way to control the crisis is through the
comprehensive implementation of the New Year’s Eve
agreement and the formation of a national Government
that possesses enough legitimacy, as well as the trust
of the Congolese people, to enable it to organize the
elections and ensure a democratic transfer of power.
Based on that, CENCO recommends, first, that the
Security Council give political, diplomatic and legal
support at the international level to the agreement of
31 December, as the only realistic road map that can
enable the Democratic Republic of the Congo to emerge
from the crisis. Secondly, we recommend that the
Council support the institutions created on the basis of
the agreement. Thirdly, the Council should renew and
strengthen MONUSCO’s mandate by reactivating its
Intervention Brigade in order to ensure the security of
the civilian population and give logistical support to the
next elections.
Where the international community is concerned,
particularly the African Union, the European Union,
Great Britain and the United States of America,
we recommend, first, that they provide substantial
financial and logistical support to the organization of
the forthcoming elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Secondly, we urge them to provide

17-073235/13

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

21/03/2017

humanitarian assistance to all the victims of the
atrocities I have mentioned. Thirdly, they should put
pressure on the political and social stakeholders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit to
effectively implementing the agreement of 31 December.
And, lastly, they should collaborate with the Congolese
authorities in conducting an independent and objective
investigation aimed at identifying those responsible for
the massacres that have occurred, particularly in Beni,
Tanganyika and the Kasai provinces, and for the bloody
clashes in Kinshasa.

unemployment; galloping depreciation of the currency,
which brings with it reduced purchasing power and
makes life more precarious; corruption, human rights
violations and restrictions on fundamental freedoms
such as the right to peaceful protest — for example,
young people being confronted as they demand a
healthier environment — obstacles to people’s access
to basic social needs; the deterioration of infrastructure
and so on and so forth. We can sum it up by saying that
we have a failed State. Our citizens can no longer trust
their institutions.

The President: I thank Monseigneur Utembi for
his briefing.

Need I remind the Council that it is a well-known
fact that it is women, the elderly and children who are
the first victims in such situations? How many times
in this Chamber have we talked about the sexual
violence that has been done to women in my country
or their and their children’s dreadful living conditions
on the streets or accused of witchcraft? I am not going
to revisit that. But I must point to the weakness of a
judicial system that, despite some efforts, has been
unable to provide a genuine response to the demands
of justice. What is there to say about women’s low rate
of participation in decision-making? We should recall
that of 32 participants in the meetings of the National
Episcopal Conference of Congo (CENCO) only three
were women — less than 10 per cent, the average in
most of the country’s institutions, when male-female
parity is enshrined in our Constitution.

I now give the floor to Ms. Kalala.
Ms. Kalala (spoke in French): Fate often has
surprises in store for us. Almost 11 years ago, I was here
in this Chamber to discuss the problem of child soldiers
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and how to end
it (see S/PV.5494). I remember that we were pleased to
see that there had been progress on the problem, but
we noted that it had yet to be eliminated among the
armed groups that were still active in the eastern part
of the country. At the time I was Minister for Human
Rights on behalf of civil society in the transitional
Government. To be exact, it was July 2006, on the eve
of our country’s first free, credible and transparent
elections, which we were all eagerly looking forward
to. And here I am again today, against all expectations,
with another opportunity to address the Security
Council on the subject of the sociopolitical situation
in my beloved country, for which I am honoured and
very grateful.
While at that time the future looked bright, today
we are compelled to admit that our efforts to achieve
national cohesion have been crushed and that the issue
of child soldiers is once again on the agenda. Since
the presidential election of 2011, and in the wake of
the failure to hold the elections that were supposed
to bring the transfer of power in 2016, we are in the
grip of a profound crisis, linked to the legitimacy of
our institutions. Since that time we have had to deal
with the outbreak of new insurgent movements such
as the Kamwina Nsapu militia in Kasai Central and
Bundu dia Kongo in Kongo Central and the fighting
between Twa and Bantu communities in Tanganyika.
We are also witnessing the Мouvement du 23 mars (M23) reconstituted; a resurgence of petty criminality;
a stagnant economic sector and its corollary,
6/13

In order to respond to this dysfunctional State,
political dialogue has emerged as the only way out of
the crisis, as Monseigneur Utembi, President of the
National Episcopal Conference of Congo, so eloquently
said just now. In the firm belief of the reality of this,
and aware that our long-suffering peoples are no longer
willing to accept the path of arms, civil society has
engaged in political negotiations under the auspices
of both the African Union and CENCO, whose
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement was
signed on 31 December 2016.
Unfortunately, three months later, the process
seems to have stalled. The signing of the specific
arrangements to define the manner of implementing
the agreement is overdue. The political actors are
unable to honour the commitments they made freely.
Unfortunately, every delay takes us further away from
the possibility of holding of presidential, legislative
and provincial elections, set for December 2017. No
electoral calendar has been published thus far, and the
people are increasingly tense.
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

That is why we believe it is urgent to collaborate
with the African Union to further support CENCO’s
mediation efforts to swiftly set up a Government
and, above all, a national council to follow up the
implementation of the agreement, an institution charged
with ensuring proper preparations for the elections and
compliance with the road map. It should be borne in
mind that such actions would contribute to the rapid
implementation of a purely Congolese solution to
the crisis.
I now turn to the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Civil society welcomes the Mission’s actions both in its
social and peacekeeping efforts and in its support for the
electoral process. The people remember the successful
operations it carried out jointly with the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo to fight
various armed groups, including the M-23. However,
people cannot explain the increase in killings in the east
of the country, particularly in Beni, where not a week
goes by without unimaginably cruel murders reported.
The online circulation of those images have been met
with total indifference on the part of the international
community. “I am Beni” does not seem to garner as
much attention as “I am Paris” or “I am Munich”.
The Congolese people are still traumatized by the
memories of attacks on villages located near MONUSCO
camps, while the Mission did nothing to protect them.
We are told that MONUSCO is a peacekeeping force
that cannot impose peace. Go explain that to the poor
citizens who see that the Mission has weapons and
expect only its protection. I will perhaps be tactless in
saying that this stance revolts both civil society and the
population, which likens MONUSCO to a force that
counts the dead. That is why, even as we welcome the
renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate, civil society calls
upon the United Nations to reinforce it so as to enable
the soldiers to play a more proactive and deterrent role.
They must prevent incidents, not give in to them.
Since opportunity makes the thief, I would like to
raise the painful issue of children fathered by members
of United Nations contingents and abandoned after they
are conceived. How can those innocent children be
compensated for that injustice? Many grow up penniless
in Goma, Kisangani, Mbandaka or elsewhere? Many
have joined the ranks of street children, which we call
“schégués” or “kulunas”. I think that it would not be too
much to ask for the Council to consider that issue and

S/PV.7903

to respond in a way that acknowledges the situation and
provides care for those children — because those who
ought to bring hope cannot instead bring despair. We
wish to keep hope alive.
The President: I thank Ms. Kalala for her briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has asked for the floor because it believes
that the purpose of briefing meetings of the Security
Council is precisely that — to inform the membership
on the work of the Council and, at the same time, for
members to express their country’s opinion, belief or
position on the issue under consideration in the Council.
In that connection, I welcome Mr. Léonard She
Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Integration of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and I thank Monseigneur Utembi
and Ms. Kalala for their important briefings. We also
convey our deep gratitude to Mr. Maman Sidikou, his
entire team and the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the work they
carry out in very complex conditions.
I reiterate the commitment of Uruguay to restoring
stability and peace to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, not only as an elected member of the Security
Council but also as a consistent MONUSCO troopcontributing country for the past 16 years.
The broad and inclusive political agreement
reached on 31 December, thanks to the important
mediation role of the National Episcopal Conference of
the Congo (CENCO), offers a viable path to the holding
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections — thus
empowering the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
move towards a more stable future. Nevertheless, nearly
three months after it was signed, the implementation
of the new political agreement remains stalled due to
differences among signatory parties concerning the
carrying out of the transition arrangements.
As the Secretary-General indicatein his report
(S/2017/206), the most pressing task for the United
Nations is to closely collaborate with its primary
regional and international partners to support the
implementation of the transition arrangements spelled
out in the political agreement and to contribute to
creating a favourable environment for the holding of

17-073237/13

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

21/03/2017

elections and the peaceful transfer of power as quickly
as possible — December 2017 at the latest, pursuant to
the agreement.

agreement that they themselves signed. The people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo deserve stability,
democracy and peace in their country.

Uruguay is concerned about certain negative trends
in the country for several months now. One of these is
that insecurity is no longer primarily limited to the east
of the country, but rather has spread to other areas such as
the provinces of Kasai, Central Congo and Tanganyika.
Violence between communities and challenges to the
authority of the State are on the rise, to such a degree
that the United Nations has also been a victim, with the
recent disappearance of two members of the Group of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004). Similarly, the threat
of violence in the main urban zones is also increasing
as the election approaches.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Another alarming trend is the significant increase
in violations of human rights, owing primarily to
the shrinking democratic space. Uruguay reiterates
that protecting and respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms is the responsibility of the
national authorities, just as they must themselves
show the greatest restraint in their responses to the
legitimate protests of the population. Similarly, we call
upon members of the opposition to act responsibly in
ensuring peaceful demonstrations.
In the coming days, the Council will be negotiating
the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate. Uruguay
believes that the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to renew MONUSCO’s mandate are valid, responsible
and are adapted to the reality on the ground. In that
regard, we are of the view that, in addition to lending
its good offices and support to the political process,
which is crucial at this time, MONUSCO must have an
appropriate mandate and resources that would increase
its ability to protect civilians and monitor human rights
issues, especially where there is high risk of urban
violence during the upcoming electoral period.
In a highly tense political situation, in which the
security environment has deteriorated and there have
been serious violations of human rights, it is very
difficult to understand the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s Government’s attempt to reduce the scope of
MONUSCO and seek an exit strategy.
In conclusion, I should like to make it very clear
that there is no more time now for political games.
It is time for the political actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to commit to implementing the
8/13

Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): First, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. My delegation
is particularly honoured to see the United Kingdom — a
friend — steering the Council’s deliberations. I would
like to thank the Council for this opportunity to speak
at today’s meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres and to
convey to him best wishes on behalf of my Government
as, like his predecessor, he discharges the noble mission
assigned to the United Nations to bring much-needed
peace to countries throughout the world, including my
own. On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the Security
Council for its continued and tireless efforts over the
past several years to preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country and ensure its peace
and stability.
My delegation takes note of the report (S/2017/206)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), which was presented by
Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. To clarify, I believe that it is important to
revisit a number of points in the report, in particular with
regard to the political situation, the electoral process,
the security situation, the human rights situation
and the strategic dialogue between the Government
and MONUSCO.
With the regard to the political situation, the
Congolese political class as a whole, as well as other
stakeholders in the country, have expressed a legitimate
need for an inclusive political dialogue to address the
sociopolitical crisis that my country faces. In that
regard, on 28 November 2015, His Excellency President
Joseph Kabila Kabange called for an inclusive
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

national political dialogue following eight months of
preliminary talks with the opposition. That dialogue
led to two agreements — one signed on 18 October 2016
at the headquarters of the African Union, following
mediation by the African Union, headed by Mr. Edem
Kodjo, and the other signed on 31 December 2016 at
the Archdiocese of Kinshasa under the auspices of the
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo (CENCO).
Although both agreements sought to explore ways and
means to organize free, democratic and transparent
elections by consensus-based management of the
pre-electoral period, the dialogue held on 18 October
2016 was considered to be non-inclusive because the
Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de
la République démocratique du Congo acquises au
changement, the Front pour le Respect de la Constitution
and a section of civil society did not participate. CENCO
also suspended its participation.
After evaluating the two agreements, it must
be acknowledged that the same issues raised at the
headquarters of the African Union were also addressed
at the Archdiocese of Kinshasa during the signing
of the agreement on 31 December 2016, and they
received identical comments. Such issues included the
commitment of all parties to scrupulously respect the
Constitution and the country’s laws; the affirmation
of the continuity of the State and its institutions; the
appointment of a Prime Minister from the opposition;
the establishment of a monitoring structure for the
agreement; the holding of presidential, legislative,
national and provincial elections, in that order; the
election calendar and the recognition of the Independent
National Electoral Commission as the organizer of the
country’s elections.
The political situation is currently dominated
by the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016, as well as the finalization of its
specific arrangements. At this stage, two points of
divergence remain in implementing the agreement. They
are related to the procedures for presenting candidates to
be appointed to the post of Prime Minister and to replace
the president of the national council for the monitoring
of the agreement. The specific arrangements govern the
appointment of the Prime Minister; the setting up of the
Government; the implementation of the national council
for the monitoring of the agreement; the timetable for
implementing the agreement; the revitalization of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and the

S/PV.7903

renewal of the Conseil supérieur de l’audiovisuel et de
la communication.
With regard to the appointment of the Prime
Minister, the Rassemblement is asked to present a list
of the names of at least three candidates for that post,
from among which the Head of State will appoint one,
in accordance with article 78 of the Constitution. The
President of the national council for the monitoring
of the agreement was appointed by consensus and its
new President should be appointed in the same manner.
Given that the President of the national council for the
monitoring of the agreement should be a member of the
opposition, the Government asks the opposition, and in
particular the Rassemblement, to resolve its dissension
and agree on a candidate to replace the Etienne
Tshisekedi. The Government would like to reassure the
Council that it is in no way delaying the implementation
of the agreement. The delay in the process is due to
extraneous circumstances, in particular the death of
Mr. Tshisekedi, which forced the National Episcopal
Conference of the Congo to suspend its work. We believe
that, with the resumption of negotiations on 16 March,
the parties will find a way to reach agreement on those
points of divergence.
Turning now to issue of elections, in his end-ofyear speech to the nation on 31 December 2016, the
President stated that he was determined to continue
the process of organizing elections. In that regard,
the Government is working to marshal the resources
necessary to meet the needs of the Independent National
Electoral Commission. Operations to revise the
election calendar that began in July 2016 are ongoing
throughout the country’s various provinces. It should
be noted that of the 25 provinces, in addition to the city
of Kinshasa, work has already been carried out in 13 of
them. The Independent National Electoral Commission
has already started to provide election materials in the
13 remaining provinces. To date, nearly 20 million
voters have already been registered, of the 41 million
who are expected to be registered throughout the entire
country. It goes without saying that the significant
results achieved thus far by the Independent National
Electoral Commission are essentially due to the efforts
of the Government, which covers the various costs of
operations on its own.
With regard to support from our partners, it should
be pointed out that of the $123 million in multipartner
funds earmarked for the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral
au Congo, only 6 per cent of the total has been funded.

17-073239/13

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In addition, according to the information we have,
that minimal funding is granted to non-governmental
organizations and churches. On 31 July, the Independent
National Electoral Commission intends to conclude
all stages and address all technical demands related
to the complete revamping of the electoral registry,
which is the precondition for the holding of elections.
As the Independent National Electoral Commission
mentioned in its report submitted to the groups of
experts of the Fifth Committee on the occasion of its
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
February — a copy of which was also submitted to the
Council — MONUSCO support faces some challenges,
which disrupts the schedule and causes delays in the
provision of election materials. To give one example, in
a province north of Bangui, of the 20 rotations planned,
MONUSCO has organized only two flights and another
private aircraft flight carrying three tons, thereby
delaying operations by several days.
The Government is committed to sparing no
effort to allow the Independent National Electoral
Commission, along with support from the entire
Congolese political class, to set the stage for a peaceful,
credible and transparent electoral process. It therefore
calls on the international community as well as all
partners to effectively engage in the mobilization
of resources to promote elections in my country by
removing all preconditions.
In the area of security, I believe that it is useful
to point out that the 148 territories that make up the
administrative subdivisions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are under the authority of the Congolese
State, which was not the case a few years ago. That
positive development should therefore be noted despite
occasional hotspots marked by tension.
The report under consideration highlights the
worrying situation dominating the east of my country
with the continued presence of the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Lord’s Resistance Army and the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), as
well as several national armed groups. With regard to
that issue, I must reassure the Security Council that
our armed forces, who have made great sacrifices in
combating the negative forces, remain determined to
persevere in their noble mission until those criminals
are completely eliminated so that our people can live
sustainably in peace and contribute to the development
of their country.
10/13

21/03/2017

To achieve that goal, our armed forces will continue
to cooperate with MONUSCO. Given the mixed results
achieved through that cooperation, however, my
Government believes that an assessment must be made
to objectively identify gaps in the implementation of
commitments so as to enable us to achieve improved
operational efficiency of the forces. It is unacceptable
that the United Nations largest peacekeeping mission
in the world, which has been in my country for
approximately 20 years, is unable, with the means at its
disposal, to end a crisis situation that has persisted for
several years.
In that regard, the renewal of MONUSCO’s
mandate, which we support, must take into account
the expectations of the Congolese people, whose
most ardent wish is to see the negative forces and
the various armed groups that are teeming in the
eastern part of the country be completely eradicated.
To achieve that end, it is imperative to strengthen
the operational effectiveness of the United Nations
forces, in particular the force Intervention Brigade,
so that it can carry out the mission for which it was
established — a mission that it carried out so well at the
beginning of its mandate. Strengthening effectiveness
must be accompanied by: first, the addition, if necessary,
of a second Intervention Brigade unit; providing
adequate means and equipment to effectively combat
the asymmetric threats encountered on the ground;
and better cooperation and information-sharing with
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC), especially with regard to information
gathered by drones.
In March 2016, my Government informed the
Council (see S/PV.7654) of the situation concerning
the former rebels of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
when it noted the disappearance of many of them from
the Bihanga military camp in Uganda in which they
were cantoned. As the Council will note, those former
rebels, who, in line with the Nairobi Declaration, had
committed to never again resorting to weapons as a
means of negotiation and to become a political party,
have largely shown their bad faith through deliberately
violating their commitments. Members of the Council
will recall that, in accordance with the Nairobi
Declaration, the President of the Republic pushed
through a vote on an amnesty law so as to facilitate the
return of those former combatants. Among the former
combatants eligible for repatriation pursuant to that
law, only a small number has agreed to be repatriated
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

from Uganda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite all the steps that the Government has taken to
convince those who remained to return to the country,
no satisfactory results have been reached.
In the same vein, the ultimatum of 15 December
2015 of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) for the unconditional repatriation of all
Congolese and non-Congolese members of the M-23 who
took refuge in Uganda was rejected by the leadership of
the M-23, which has taken those former rebels hostage.
My Government condemns the military activities of
the former rebels and calls on the Council to consider
sanctions against them in accordance with the decision
taken in New York on 29 September 2015 by the Heads
of States signatories to the framework agreement at
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. Moreover, my country deplores the
duplicity and lack of frank cooperation on the part of
certain neighbouring countries in resolving the issue.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is therefore
asking the Council to call upon them to respect the
commitments to which they freely subscribed under the
framework agreement, convert them into actions and
find political solutions to the obstacles preventing the
repatriation of the former rebels.
With regard to the presence of fighters from the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army within
the opposition in our country, without rehashing the
details of that issue, it is important to stress that the
letters addressed to MONUSCO on 1 October 2016 and
to the Council on 9 January respectively reflect my
Government’s position clearly. As specified in those
two letters, my country calls on the United Nations to
take the necessary steps to evacuate those combatants
from our territory so as to spare us from reliving a
situation similar to the one that we went through with
the FDLR.
With regard to the latter negative force, I believe
that it is important to remind the Council of the 340
FDLR combatants who voluntarily surrendered two
years ago, as well as their dependents, who remain
even today cantoned in transit camps in Kanyobagonga,
North Kivu, Walungu, South Kivu and Kisangani in
the province of Tshopo. Although we appreciate the
treatment of those former combatants by MONUSCO,
my Government renews its appeal, before the Council,
to the international community for their repatriation to

S/PV.7903

their country of origin or their resettlement to a third
country other than those of the Great Lakes region. My
Government is unable to comprehend the fact that the
international community, which has always insisted
on the eradication of that negative force, has so far not
received a favourable response to that appeal, which
could serve as an act of encouragement to convince those
among them who have not yet laid down their weapons.
I should like to bring up the situation of the two
members of the United Nations Panel of Experts whom
we have lost track of and who have gone missing in
Kasai. My Government deplores that disturbing
disappearance and is committed to making every effort
to find out more. At present, my country’s security
forces are actively carrying out investigations in
cooperation with MONUSCO to locate them.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without saying
a word about the situation concerning the tensions that
have been felt in certain parts of the country. With
regard to the members of the Kamuina Nsapu militia,
an agreement was reached with family members of
the Customary Chief of that group. Following that
agreement, on 19 March 2017, the members of the
militia agreed in Kananga to lay down their weapons.
In Tanganyika, the Government’s efforts have led to an
amicable settlement of the conflict between the Luba
and the ethnic Twa, or pygmy, communities. In Kongo
Central and Kinshasa, calm has returned among the
followers of Bundu dia Kongo with the arrest of Ne
Muanda Nsemi.
With regard to the issue of the strategic dialogue, it
should be recalled that that meeting was held from 9 to
19 March 2016 in Kinshasa between the Government and
MONUSCO and yielded the following agreements that
were signed onto by both parties. In all areas concerned,
including North and South Kivu, reduction of the force
is justified. In other areas such as the provinces of
Tshopo, Tanganyika and Haut-Uélé, the presence of the
force is not justified with the exception of the civilian
protection unit. Concerning the majority of the residual
security challenges, the MONUSCO force, with the
exception of the Brigade Intervention, is no longer
the answer. Almost all the actions to be undertaken
are ultimately and essentially the responsibility of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Government therefore calls on the Security
Council to formally recognize the conclusions of the
Joint Working Group signed by both parties and recall
the need to organize the second phase of the strategic

17-0732311/13

S/PV.7903

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

dialogue so as to set the timetable for the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the actual reduction of the force,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo calls for an
assessment to be conducted with the Government and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with the
participation of the partners in the region, including
the Southern African Development Community and the
ICGLR, to reconcile the requirements of the reduction
of the force with the imperatives of robustness
and effectiveness.
With regard to the issue of human rights, the
situation concerning fundamental freedoms in
the Democratic Republic in no way feeds into a
deliberate policy of violations of human rights.
Accordingly, that falls within the scope of individual
responsibilities, the derogation of which in all cases
cannot go unpunished. In that regard, ad hoc bodies
have the task of complementing the Government in
improving the promotion and protection of human
rights in a constructive partnership, and not in a useless
confrontational struggle. The presence of the Joint
United Nations Office on Human Rights attests to the
fact that my country has accepted that that structure
can represent the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights within its territory
and that the Government is cooperating with it to the
best of its ability.
However, the credibility of the reports produced
by that entity poses a problem, as often they are not
supported by evidence. I would like to recall that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains among
the countries that cooperate with the international
community in the promotion of human rights. In
July and August 2016, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Chairperson
of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and clearly recognized at the end of the mission that
significant progress had been made by the Government
in this area.
In order to avoid the sad experience of the events
of 19 and 20 September 2016, as a result of excesses
of some opposition supporters who attacked people
and property, public political demonstrations were
temporarily suspended on an exceptional basis. With
regard to freedom of public protest, the Constitution and
12/13

21/03/2017

the law on public protest establish only an intelligence
system in order allow the administrative authorities
to supervise demonstrators in accordance with the
indicated itinerary and schedule. Nonetheless, public
authorities remain primarily responsible for public
order and security. In this respect, they may take the
protective measures necessary in a democratic society
to safeguard public order and avoid irreparable damage.
The material damage resulting from the events
in Kinshasa on 19 and 20 September 2016 has been
well documented by the Ministry of the Interior. The
Prosecutor General opened investigations in order to
identify and punish perpetrators. Of the 172 alleged
perpetrators brought before the competent courts,
73 have been acquitted, 83 were sentenced to between
1 month and 20 years of prison, and about 20 minors
were brought before juvenile courts. Public disorder
accompanied by serious violations of citizens’ rights,
which was recently orchestrated by the followers of the
Bundu dia Kongo movements, in the Kongo Central and
Kamwena Nsapu in Kasai, are to be condemned. With
regard to this last point, a video disseminated on social
networks was the subject of investigations carried out by
a team of senior magistrates of the Prosecutor’s Office.
At this stage of the investigation, the Military
Prosecutor announced, at a press conference on
Saturday, 18 March in Kinshasa, that seven suspects, all
elements of the FARDC, including two majors serving
as Commander and Deputy Commander of Operations,
were arrested. The operations and field investigations
resulted in the arrest of the alleged suspects for the
following offenses: war crimes by murder, war crimes
by maiming, war crimes by cruel and inhuman and
degrading treatment, and refusal to report crimes
committed by persons subject to military jurisdiction.
Similarly, concerning the malicious destruction in
February 2017 of the Catholic Church property in both
Kinshasa and Lubumbashi, the court has been tireless
in its efforts to identify and punish the perpetrators.
In terms of sexual violence, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is now on the path to consolidating the
progress made in its policy to combat this scourge
in all its forms. Since 2013, the Secretary-General’s
preliminary report on conflict-related violence reveals
a decline in cases of sexual violence in my country. This
noticeable decline is the result of systematic work to
combat impunity carried out by the judiciary in general
and, specifically, by the military judiciary.
17-07323

21/03/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In the light of those considerations, my Government
believes it is now necessary for a far-reaching dialogue
with the United Nations to remove the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from the list of countries with high
levels of rape. Along the same lines, the Government
has been active in the fight against child recruitment
in our armed forces. These efforts were reflected in an
audit carried out in 2015 by an independent Swedish
firm — MO Consulting — in collaboration with
UNICEF, which confirmed the absence of children
in our armed forces. In view of those results, my
Government also requests the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to be removed from the list of countries
whose armies recruit and use children.
With regard to the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, resettlement and repatriation programme,
a budget of $85 million had been agreed to fund the
various activities of the programme over four years by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its partners.
In accordance with that budget, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo committed $10 million,
MONUSCO committed $8 million and the World Bank
and other partners are to provide $67 million. Besides
my country and MONUSCO, which have disbursed
their share, only the World Bank and Sweden have
pledged and disbursed $21.5 million. A significant gap
of about $50 million remains unfunded.
Despite this situation, of the 12,205 ex-combatants
from the different armed groups active in the east of
the country, to date 4,812 have been reintegrated and
demobilized, 3,763 have been demobilized and returned

S/PV.7903

to their respective communities for reintegration
after completing a vocational training programme,
529 ex-combatants of M-23 have been demobilized
and returned to their communities, and 25 foreign
combatants were handed over to MONUSCO for
repatriation to their countries of origin.
The wish of the Congolese people and that of my
Government is that the next extension of the MONUSCO
mandate brings us peace once and for all by putting
an end to the daily tragedy that the people of in the
eastern part of my country have been experiencing for
many years.
In conclusion, I wish to express my Government’s
thanks to Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, for their commitment and dedication to the
cause of my country and to the Great Lakes region.
The President: I would like to thank warmly all
of our briefers, in particular Monseigneur Utembi
and Ms. Kalala for travelling to New York to brief the
Security Council. Their briefings have provided us
with an invaluable insight at an important moment for
their country.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

17-0732313/13
