A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/241
28 April 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 113 (d)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/49/802/Add.2)]
49/241.

Payment of repatriation grant to staff
members living in their home country while
stationed at duty stations located in
another country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on payment of
repatriation grant to staff members living in their home country while
stationed at duty stations located in another country, 1/
Recalling section II.D of its resolution 48/224 of 23 December 1993 on
the United Nations common system, in which it requested the International
Civil Service Commission to study further the practices of the organizations
of the United Nations common system regarding the granting of expatriate
entitlements to staff members living in their home country while stationed at
duty stations located in another country, with a view to harmonizing the
practices of the organizations with those of the United Nations, and to make
recommendations thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session,
Noting the decision of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in
Judgement No. 656, Kremer, Gourdon,
1.
Reiterates its decision that the repatriation grant and other
expatriate benefits are limited to staff who both work and reside in a country
other than their home country;

1/

A/C.5/49/59.

95-77269
/...

A/RES/49/241
Page 2

2.
Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations contained in the annex to the present resolution;
3.
Decides to re-examine the issue of entitlement to repatriation and
other expatriate benefits to staff members living in their home country while
stationed at duty stations located in another country during its fifty-first
session, in the light of the report by the International Civil Service
Commission requested in section II.D of its resolution 48/224.
100th plenary meeting
6 April 1995
ANNEX
Amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations
Article III
Salaries and related allowances
Replace the first sentence of regulation 3.2 (a) with the following text:
"Regulation 3.2: (a) The Secretary-General shall establish terms and
conditions under which an education grant shall be available to a staff
member residing and serving outside his or her recognized home country
whose dependent child is in full-time attendance at a school, university
or similar educational institution of a type that will, in the opinion
of the Secretary-General, facilitate the child’s reassimilation in the
staff member’s recognized home country."

Article V
Annual and special leave
Replace regulation 5.3 with the following text:
"Regulation 5.3: Eligible staff members shall be granted home leave
once in every two years. However, in the case of designated duty
stations having very difficult conditions of life and work, eligible
staff members shall be granted home leave once in every twelve months.
A staff member whose home country is either the country of his or her
official duty station or the country of his or her normal residence
while in United Nations service, shall not be eligible for home leave."

Annex IV to the Staff Regulations
Repatriation grant
Replace the paragraph with the following text:
"In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to staff
members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate and who at the
time of separation are residing, by virtue of their service with the
/...

A/RES/49/241
Page 3

United Nations, outside their country of nationality. The repatriation
grant shall not, however, be paid to a staff member who is summarily
dismissed. Eligible staff members shall be entitled to a repatriation
grant only upon relocation outside the country of the duty station.
Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility and
requisite evidence of relocation shall be determined by the SecretaryGeneral."
