UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/26
31 August 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3922nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 August 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern about the current
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which poses a serious
threat to regional peace and security. The Security Council expresses
alarm at the plight of the civilian population throughout the country.
"The Security Council reaffirms the obligation to respect the
territorial integrity and national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other States in the region and the need for all States to
refrain from any interference in each other’s internal affairs. In this
context, the Council calls for a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including an immediate ceasefire, the
withdrawal of all foreign forces, and the initiation of a peaceful process
of political dialogue with a view to national reconciliation. The Council
expresses support for all the regional diplomatic initiatives aimed at a
peaceful settlement of the conflict. The problems of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be solved on the basis of a process of allinclusive national reconciliation which fully respects the equality and
harmony of all ethnic groups and which leads to the holding of democratic,
free and fair elections as soon as possible.
"The Security Council urges all parties to respect and protect human
rights and respect humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols of 1977, as applicable to them. It
condemns reported summary executions, torture, harassment and detention of
civilians based on their ethnic origin, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, the killing or wounding of combatants who have laid down their
weapons, hate propaganda, sexual violence and other abuses by any side. In
particular, the Council calls for the protection of the civilian
population. It recalls the unacceptability of the destruction or rendering
useless of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population, and in particular of using cuts in the electricity and water
supply as a weapon against the population. The Council reaffirms that all
98-25404 (E)

310898

/...

S/PRST/1998/26
English
Page 2

persons who commit or order the commission of grave breaches of the
above-mentioned instruments are individually responsible in respect of such
breaches.
"The Security Council calls for safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian agencies to all those in need in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It calls for unrestricted access by the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) to all detainees in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It urges all parties to guarantee the safety and security of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
consult, as a matter of urgency, with regional leaders in coordination with
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) about ways
to bring about a peaceful and durable solution to the conflict, and to keep
it informed about developments and his own efforts. It reaffirms the
importance of holding an international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU.
"The Security Council will follow the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo closely. It will remain actively seized of the
matter."

-----
