TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 10 DECEMBER 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l756)

..............................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . I

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent Representatives of
Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1145);
(b) Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 323 (1972) concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SJPV.1756

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND FIFTY-SIXTH

on Monday,

President: Mr. HUANG Hua (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1756)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1145);
(b) Report by the Secretary-General on the impleSecurity
Council resolution
mentation
of
323 (1972) concerning the question of Namibia
(S/10921 and Corr.1).
The meeting WQS called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: (translation from Chinese): My first
duty as President of the Security Council for the month of
December is to express to the outgoing President, Ambassador Jankowitsch of Austria, the warm appreciation of all
members of the Council for his dedicated services as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November.
Adoption of the agenda

10 December

MEETING
1973, at 3 p.m.

Somalia requesting that they be allowed to participate,
without vote, in the debate on the item before us, under
the terms of Article 31 of the Charter and in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council. Accordingly, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, and in accordance with past
practice, to invite them to participate without vote, in our
discussion.
3. In view of the limited number of places availableat the
Council table, I shall invite the representatives concerned to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber, on the understanding that they will be called to
the Council table when it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Amina (Niger)
and Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I have
also received a letter, dated 3 December 1973, from the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, in
which he requested, in accordance with the decision taken
by that Council, that a delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia be invited to participate in the
discussion of the Council concerning the question of
Namibia. That delegation will consist of the President of
the Council for Namibia, the representative of Zambia, as
well as the representatives of Burundi, Indonesia and
Mexico.
5. Accordingly, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to the delegation of the United Nations Council
for Namibia. As I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to the proposal.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
la) Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1145);
(b) Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 323 (1972)
concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.1’)
2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): 1 have
received letters from the representatives of the Niger and
1 See Official
Year, Supplement

Records of the Security
Council,
for April, May and June 1973.

Twenty-eighth

At the invitation of the President, Mr. P. J. ?I LUSakQ
(President of the United Nations Council for Namibia),
Mr. P. Mikanagu (Burundi) and Mr. M. Sidik (Indonesia)
took places at the Council table.
6. The PRESIDENT (translation from G’zinese): The
Security Council will now proceed to its consideration of
the situation in Namibia in accordance with the request
contained in a letter dated 4 December 1973, addressed to
me by the representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan
(S/11145].
7. The Security Council last discussed this question at its
1678th to 1682nd meetings held between 28 November
and 3 December 1972. I should like to recall, further, that

views of several of these parties, namely the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) and Chief Clemens
Kapuuo, the Chairman of the National Unity Convention in
Namibia, with whom I met recently in New York. The
position of the Organization of African Unity on Namibia
is contained in the resolution adopted at the twenty-first
session of the Council of Ministers and endorsed by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government in May this
year, which was formally transmitted to me.

on 30 April 1973, the Secretary-General submitted a report
to the Security Council on the implementation of resolution 323 (1972)[S/IO921
and Corr.l/.
8. I now call on the Secretary-General.
9. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It will be recalled that
in Security Council resolution 323 (1972), I was asked by
the Council to seek further clarification of the position of
the South African Government on a number of important
issues concerning the policy and intentions of that Government with regard to Namibia. The report which is now
before the Council in document S/10921 and Corr.1, sets
out the results of the further contacts with representatives
of the Government of South Africa, which took place in
New York and Geneva over a period of four months. The
contacts were, as previously, carried out in close consultation with the Group of Three of the Security COUIV.A,
composed of the representatives of Peru, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia, to whom I am greatly indebted for their
valuable advice and assistance.

14. In addition to receiving the views of these parties, I
was able to discuss this matter with many Heads of State
and Government during my visits to Zambia and the United
Republic of Tanzania and during my attendance at the
OAU summit conference in Addis Ababa in May and at the
Conference of Non-Aligned States in Algiers in September,
15. In general the view was that, in the light of the
position of the Government of South Africa as given in its
statement of 30 April 1973; no useful purpose would be
served by continuing the policy envisaged in resolution
309 (1972) of the Security Council. The view was also
expressed that the approach indicated in resolution
309 (1972) should be resumed only if the Government of
South Africa were to make a substantial move towards
reconciling its position with that of the United Nations.

10. These further contacts sought clarification from the
South African Government on its position on several
fundamental questions raised during the last debate in the
Council on this matter and, in particular, a complete and
unequivocal statement of its policy regarding selfdetermination and independence for Namibia in line with
the principles clearly set out in resolution 323 (1972).
Accordingly, in my discussions with the representatives of
the South African Government, I emphasized the firm
stand of the United Nations on the international status of
Namibia, the preservation of its national unity and territorial integrity, and the exercise by the Namibian people of
their right to self-determination and independence as a
single, united nation. I also stressed that, in order to create
conditions for the people of Namibia to exercise that right,
it would be necessary to abolish discriminatory legislation
and to remove restrictions on freedom of movement and
political activity, including freedom of speech, freedom of
association and the freedom to hold political meetings.

16. I feel obliged to bring this additional information to
the President’s notice and to the notice of members of this
Council, as it will no doubt have a bearing on the decisions
which YOU will have to reach during your present series of
meetings.
17. In conclusion, I should Iike to express my deep
conviction that the Council will remain aware of the
profound and continuing obligation which the United
Nations has assumed towards the people of Namibia.
18. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR
(Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): May I first of all pledge to the President of
the Security Council for this month, Ambassador Huang, the
most cordial co-operation of the delegation of Peru, and at
the same time I should like to express warm congratulations
to the outgoing President, Ambassador Peter Jankowitsch,
for the intelligent and effective manner in which he
conducted our work in November.

Il. Following my discussions with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, I received from the latter on
30 April the statement of his Government’s position which
is reproduced in paragraph 13 of the report. In this
connexion, I also wish to draw the attention of the Council
to paragraph 14, which contains information concerning
the position of the Government of South Africa on some of
the other questions dealt with during our discussions.

19. We are meeting this afternoon to consider the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 323 (1972) concerning the question Of
Namibia. This report represents the latest stage of the
experiment begun by the Security Council when it adopted
resolution 309 (1972), which was presented so skilfully and
brilliantly at the historic series of meetings in Addis Ababa
by the representative of Argentina, Ambassador Ortiz de
Rozas.

12. AS I pointed out in paragraph 18, although the
statement made clearer South Africa’s position on some of
the basic issues, it falls short of the complete and unequivocal clarification of South Africa’s policy in regard to
self-determination and independence for Namibia which the
Council sought when it adopted resolution 323 (1972).

20. I should also like to express my great appreciation for
the manner in which the Secretary-General, impeccably
observing the mandate entrusted to him by the Council,
pursued negotiations with the Government of South Africa
during which he yielded not an inch of the rights of the
people of Namibia, which have so often been proclaimed by
the United Nations.

13. Because the Security Council had requested me to
submit my report not later than 30 April, there remained no
time, after receiving the statement from the Foreign
Minister of South Africa, to contact the other parties
concerned and include their views in the report. However,
subsequently I have had the opportunity of obtaining the
2

21. Unfortunately, there has been no clear and unequivocal pronouncement by the Government of South Africa
on its policy in regard to the exercise of the right to
self-determination and independence of the people of
Namibia, and on their national unity and territorial
integrity. Quite the opposite, the Government of South
Africa has confirmed the division of the Territory into
bantustans by means of legislative measures which were
adopted at the beginning of this year,

NationsCouncil for Namibiaduring thosedebates,aswell
as at this meeting,is a recognitionof the responsibilities
acceptedby the United Nationsin regardto that Territory.
Those responsibilitiesproceed from the decisionof the
GeneralAssemblywhich terminatedthe Mandateof South
Africa over Namibiain 1966 and its establishment
of the
United NationsCouncil for Namibiain 1967.Yet, for over
six years,South Africa hasdefied the United Nationsand,
regardlessof the decision of the Security Council-.
reinforced by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice-has not only continuedto occupy the
territory illegally,but hasfurther intensifiedthe application
in Namibia of its evil apartheid policies and practices,
which were one of the primordial reasonswhy it was
declaredunfit to administerthe Territory.

22. Today, when we have just celebrated in the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we
cannot but regret that this barrier to self-determination still
exists in a territory the legal status of which is crystal clear,
for no one can honestly deny the authority of this
Organization over it.

28. For more than six years,in contemptuousdisregardof
the authority of the United Nations and world public
opinion, South Africa hascontinuedto oppressthe people
of Namibia,dividing them and confining them to remote
and inhospitableareasand resortingto the most ruthless
useof armedforce and policestate measures
in its efforts
to stifle the demand or the Namibianpeople for their
legitimateand inalienablerights and to suppress
thosewho
are strugglingfor their freedomandindependence.

23. Having all these facts before us, the delegation of Peru,
which participated in the group of the Security Council
established pursuant to resolution 309 (1972), after talks
with members of the Council, has submitted a draft
resolution contained in document S/l 1152. As will be
observed, the preambular part is limited to a reference to
the report of the Secreta,ry-General, Here I would venture
to make an oral amendment which consists of adding an
additional preambular paragraph, which would be the first
preambular paragraph, and it would simply read: “Recalling
its resolutions 309 (1972), 319 (1972) and 323 (1972)“.

29. When the Security Council, in its resolution
309(1972) of 4 February 1972, invited the SecretaryGeneralto initiate contactswith all partiesconcerned,with
a view to establishing
the necessary
conditionswhich would
enable the people of Namibia to exercisetheir right to
self-determinationand independence,it did sobecausethe
pressureon South Africa was so great, as a result of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
June 19712and the massreactionsthat followed it in the
Territory, that it wasthought that South Africa would be
ready to accepta peacefultransferof the administrationto
the UnitedNations,andin particular, to the UnitedNations
Councilfor Namibia.

24. Operative paragraph 1 expresses our appreciation for
the report of the Secretary-General, to whose excellent
work I had an opportunity to refer earlier. In operative
paragraph 2 the Council decides to discontinue the efforts
already made on the basis of resolution 309 (1972) which
is also explained in the first part of my statement.
Operative paragraph 3, which is closely linked to paragraph 2, ensures that the Council will continue to take UP
any important matter which might ariseand which, in the
opinion of the Secretary-General,warrantssubmission
to us
for consideration.
25. We trust that the adoption of this draft resolutionwill
cause no difficulties, since it flows from the need to
preservethe authority which our Organization musthave.
26. The PRESIDENT (translation from C;lzineSe):1 call
now on the Presidentof the United Nations Council for
Namibia,Mr. Lusaka.
27. Mr. LUSAKA (Presidentof the United NationsCouncil for Namibia): Mr. President,allow me, first of all, to
expressmy gratitude to you and to all the membersof the
Security Council for enabling the United NationsCouncil
for Namibia to be present at your deliberations. AS
Presidentof the United Nations Council for Namibia,it is
indeedan honour and a duty for meto addressthe Security
Council and to provide it with someassistance
at a time
when it is consideringthe report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 323 (1972) on
Namibia.My colleagueson the Councilfor Namibiaalready
had an opportunity of addressingthe Security Councilin
1972 in Addis Ababa and here in New York on this
question. The presenceof a representativeof the United
3

30. Lie many others, the United NationsCouncil for
Namibiawasscepticalabout the usefulness
of any dialogue
with South Africa. The Councilfor Namibiacautionedthat
South Africa shouldnot be allowedto usethe establishment of contactsto procrastinateand prevaricatein order
to consolidateits illegal occupation of Namibia. At the
sametime, the Councilinsistedthat the nationalunity and
territorial integrity of Namibiashouldbe preservedandthe
Bantustansabolished,and that the policy of apurtlzeid
should be stopped.It also required the abolition of all
restrictionsupon freedomof movementandpolitical activity *
31. The report of Ambassador
Eschercameasa surpriseto
all, including the membersof the Security Council. The
Council for Namibiawasdismayedto find that the Vorster
regimehad attempted,through duplicity andsubterfuge,to
trap the Security Couucil into granting somekind OF
legitimacy to its continuingillegal occupationof Namibia
and into giving a semblance
of approvalto its Bantustan
2 Legal &mequences
for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notWithstat~dif%
Secu&y
Council resolutioll
276 (1970), Advisory
OPitlioil, I. C-J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.

policies in Namibia. Not only had it failed to agree to the
right of free movement within the Territory-a right which
we consider to be the prerogative of every citizen in a
democratic society-but it had even refused to give a clear
and unequivocal interpretation of its policies with regard to
self-determination and, independence for Namibia, which
was the very essence and purpose of the contacts, claiming
that it was not appropriate to go into a detailed discussion
on the question at that stage.
32. When the Security Council, despite the totally negative stand taken by South Africa, decided to continue the
mandate of the Secretary-General, our worst fears were
confirmed. It was clear that Vorster had succeeded in
diverting attention from the crucial question of the
withdrawal and transfer of power over Namibia, by giving a
semblance, of legitimacy to South Africa’s presence in the
Territory and that he was utilizing the contacts to
consolidate further its hold over the Territory. Even while
the contacts with the Secretary-General were still going on,
the Vorster regime was hastening the implementation of its
apartheid policy of Bantustans aimed at destroying
Namibia’s national unity and territorial integrity.
33. In the light of the foregoing, the Council for Namibia
was not in the least surprised that the further round of
contacts created under resolution 323 (1972) resulted in no
significant modification of South Africa’s position on any
of the basic issues.The report of the Secretary-Generalon
the third phaseof the contacts wasissuedon 30 April 1973
(S/10921 and Cmr.I].
34. The Council for Namibia hasmet and consideredthat
report. Special attention was given to the question raised
very pointedly in paragraph19, which I quote:
“The question ariseswhether, in the light of the results
achieved so far, the contacts and efforts initiated pursuant to resolutions 309 (1972), 319 (1972) and
323 (1972) should be continued. Should the Security
Council decide to continue theseefforts, it shouldbear in
mind my earlier statement to the effect that time and
protracted discussionwould be required if any progressis
to be achieved.”
35. The Council will have noted that in the report [ibid.,
annex II, para. 5 (b)], the Secretary-Generalhas reported
that the Council for Namibia, before submjssionof the
Secretary-General’sreport, called for termination of the
contacts.
36. This report did not help the Council for Namibia to
emergefrom the feeling that these contacts are uselessfor
the purposeof liberating Namibiafrom Vorster’s yoke. The
Council will note that the paragraphwhich I have just cited
not only mentions that “protracted discussionwould be
required if any progressis to be achieved”, but it speaksof
“any progress”, which implies the assumptionsthat no
progresshas been made so far, We must, therefore, ask
ourselveswhat spanof time “protracted discussions”would
cover if after more than a year of contacts no progresshas
been made. As all the reports show, and as is stated in
paragraph5 of the latest report, thesecontacts are forever
bedevilledby the fact that

circumstancesbeyond our control madeit impossiblefor us to examine exhaustively all the basicissues
duringthe periodavailableto us”.
‘I

.

.

.

37. The likelihood that there will ever be sufficient time
“to examineexhaustively all the basic issues”during any
phaseof contacts seemsas elusive as the clouds in the
heavens.For the conduct of Vorster’s regimeindicatesthat
they intend to avoid by every possiblemeansadherenceto
the only issuewith which the United Nations is concerned-that is, the questionof withdrawal and transfer of
powerto the United Nationsover Namibia.
38. Vorster not only diverts discussioninto tangential
issues,but addsinjury to insult by indulging in the most
blatant equivocation which could ensnareonly the negligent. But by thesevery acts he indicateshis consciousness
of the extent to which he and his clique of racists in
Pretoria have tried deliberately to brutalize the minds of
the African peoplewho have had the terrible misfortuneof
falling under their inhuman domination. They hope, no
doubt, that pressures
will be appliedto makeuschaseafter
the carrotsthey danglebefore us.
39. I could cite at great length evidencein support of the
proposition that Vorster is bent upon trying to deceiveus
into acceptinghis presencein Namibia.But I cannot inflict
upon you the agony of having to listen to a recitation of
Vorster’sattemptsat deception.You andall the membersof
this high body are all too painfully familiar with them.
Therefore I will mention only the most recent, merely
becauseof its importancefor careful thought rather than as
corroboration.
40. In paragraph 14 of the most recent report, the
Secretary-Generalcites information given to him by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Vorster’s racist regime as
follows:
“On the basisof presentdevelopments,the Government
of South Africa anticipatesthat it might not take longer
than 10 years for the population of South WestAfrica to
reach the stagewhereit will be ready to exerciseits right
to self-determination.”
41. That statement,strictly interpreted, meansthat by 10
years from today, in the eyesof the racists,the people of
Namibiawill reachonly that stagewhen they will be able to
exercisetheir right to self-determination-that is, to choose
whether or not they want independenceor somethingelse,
but not attain independenceitself. That offers us the hope
that the peopleof Namibia will chooseindependence.Bul
it is necessaryto guard againstthe seductivenessof thal
prospect.For the realitiesare that Vorster andhis racists, i’
we consentto it, will remainin occupation of the Territoq
to work their own mischief by conditioning the minds o
the people, particularly those who can be bought wit1
racist gold, and by establishinginstitutions which wil
ensure that such choice as they will be permitted tl
exercisewill be favourable to the colonialist imperialists i
Pretoria. What is worseis that acceptanceof that lo-yes
period will imply acceptanceof the presenceof Vorster i
Namibia and his right to imposehis brand of politic;
developmentupon its people.

42. In that connexion, it is necessary to note that
Vorster’s regime introduced into the South African Parlia.
ment, on 8 February 1973, the Development of Self.
Government for Native Nations in South West Africa Bill
and established the Advisory Council, which had been
rejected in November 1972, and packed it with puppets of
Pretoria. In the meantime, Vorster has embarked upon a
vicious propaganda campaign of misrepresentation which
seems to have been designed to have a twofold effect. He
claims publicly that his acts in Namibia have the blessings
of the United Nations.

They have begunto try to erode national unity in the
so-calledhomelands;
they havelauncheda viciouscampaign
againstNamibianfamily life through the institutionalization of the so-calledinflux control, aliaspasslaws;and, as
before, they have beenforcibly removinggroupsor tribes
from their established
areasto makeroom for whites. The
old town of Katutura wasdemolished
in 1971for the same
purpose.
49. Superimposed
upon theseinhumanandillegalpolicies
was the establishmentof a so-calledAdvisory Council,
comprisingthe regime’shand-pickedrepresentativesaccountableonly to the prime racist of the illegal regime.
Torture, detention without trial, indiscriminatemurder,
terrorismand floggingare the order of the day in Namibia.

43. Clearly, that is designed to lull the people of Namibia
into a state of acquiescence to the imperialist strangle-hold
which Vorster is trying to gain over Namibia, For if they
believe Vorster’s lies they will believe that the establishment of colonial domination over their territory, having the
blessing of the United Nations, is in the best interest of its
people.

50. I shall now read a letter transmittedto me by the
Secretary-General,
who receivedit from Namibianwomen.
I shallreadit asI receivedit in its roughtranslation.
“To the Membersof the UnitedNations,

44. At the same time, it seems also to be intended to have
a not dissimilar effect upon those outside Namibia who are
critical of the violence which Vorster is doing to the people
and the Territory of Namibia. The regions of the world in
which that can have any credibility need not be mentioned
by me.

“In the nameof the womenof NamibiaI would like to
bringthe followingto your attention:
“(a) We hereby wish the guidanceof God for the
GeneralAssemblyof the United Nations;may God give
you the wisdomwhichyou will needin dealingwith these
difficult matters; may the Holy Spirit inspire you to
differentiate betweenwhat is the truth andwhat arelies.

45. All the reports of contacts between the Secretary
General and those acting on his behalf with Vorster, if we
need to rely on them, show that, except for the paid
puppets, all the people of Namibia want Vorster and his
racism to be removed from Namibia. We cannot allow
ourselves to do anything which would jeopardize the
retention of that spirit of dignity and independence of the
people of Namibia. Rather, we should act to encourage and
mature it. For it is the courage and determination of the
people of Namibia which will win and maintain for them
independence from racist domination.

“(b) Hear our cry in needbecauseyou are now our
Moses.You are appointedby God to mediatefor the
nationsunder oppression.We are beingtortured herein
Namibiain secretbut because
welive in isolationwe have
not the possibility to makeour needknown and if we
succeedto do so we are tortured by the South African
Government.

“We, the womenof Namibia,have hard timesand we
are tired of carrying our burdenfurther, which means
seeingby what methodsthoseto whomwe gavebirth are
being tortured. Many of our children are now in jail.
Many of them are burnedwith electricity and many of
themhavebeenkilled.

46. However, we need to counter the possible effects of
Vorster’s lies. I can assure you that the Council for Namibiais
pursuing this energetically. We can allow neither the
people of Namibia nor indeed the people of any part of the
world to be duped into the acceptance of Vorster’s
mendacities.

“Now, from August 15, 1973, nearly all freedom
fighters are put in jails which burn them like hot
grill-pans.Thesejails are built with corrugatediron only
and arestandingin the burningsun.Thoseinsideturned
palebecauseof the heat andwe fear what canhappento
them.

47. The racist regime of South Africa has continued to
treat with equal contempt the entire United Nations. They
have disregarded, and continue to disregard, the resolutions
of the United Nations, including the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice which terminated their
Mandate over Namibia, and have been trying deliberately to
mislead the Security Council. They have begun to implement the so-called Odendaal plan which, infer alia, is a
blueprint to further fasten the illegalhold of South Africa
over Namibia.

“(c) The womenof Namibiaare beatenand tortured
very much, e.g.Aneli Dama,and others.The womenare
orderedto lie on their stomachs
and then they are beaten
shamelessly
(it may meanthat they werenaked).Someof
themarestill in jail andsuffera lot.

48. Under its illegal occupation of Namibia, and while
pretendingto participate in the conduct of a dialoguewith
the Secretary-General,in compliancewith Security Council
resolution 310 (1972), the apartheid regime of South
Africa has continued to assaultthe territorial integrity of
Namibiathrough persistentapplicationto that Territory of
the odious policy of so-calledhomelandsor Bantustans.
S

“(d) The freedomfightersarebeingbeatenup only by
the Chiefs(Headmen).Whenthe South African Govemment could not bring any chargesagainstthesementhey
weresentto the Chiefswho had beatenthem with palm
sticks, 15.20 strokes,e.g. AndreasNuukwawo, . . . and
othersreceivedasmany strokes.

“(t’)

llarsh

teadlcrs

tl)

LIWS
kC%p

~I+C being
thCIl1

MaIlY of thelIt ~OSC
reasons why, . , .
“cl’he sdl001
dd
TlliS

put into practice against the
from active political involvement.
their work without
knowing
the

fact, we COnSent to a continuation of the dialogue, the
world will believe Vorster’s misrepresentations to be true,
howevw vociferously or persistently we may deny it.
Vorster’s bona fides may be questionable now, but our
conduct could give him considerable credibility.

councils have been dismissed because they

TW the IT~~SOIIS
~-~~~VClIllll~~lt
Ody

why
these
wants
to

teachers
use the

were

expelled.

54. 1t is true that the Council for Namibia called for the
termination of the current contacts before the report of the
Secretary-General had been seen or its contents were
known, but we have just elaborated the reasons which we
believe justify that stand. There are those who are being
misguided or are cunningly and maliciously representing
our just demands as precipitate, because we did not await
the so-called “concessions” which they claim Vorster has
made to the Secretary-General.

‘blind’. Anyone
Who WYS that CXh purstul is the image of God and should
have ltul~~~lll rights is put into jail, We arc not allowed in
hWtb0
to use the word “Namibia’“. Those who do that
arc terribly beaten up.
“(J”) The Government uscs almost
the same
primitive
of punishment IKIW as in the traditional times,
They, for exampk,
take the freedom fighters from their
~O~IBW-.!O~LIIUI~ Natlgutwala
for instance was banned
rrom his home. They USA the uneducated to torture their
own people.

1llCthOdS

55. The South
African rBgime destroyed the prospect of
any credibility being attached to the assurances given by it
to the Secretary-General with regard to freedom of political
activity, including the holding of meetjngs, by arresting in
Ovamboland eariy in May of this year nine national leaders
of Namibia.

“Hear our cry in need, brothers. We and our children are
tortured by the South African Government and they
are ‘very busy’ torturing the people, We have raised our
voice to God and now we turn to the organization of the
ptc~ of the world so that the help of God can come to
us tllrough

56. An analysis of what is being represented as a “concession” by the Vorster regime shows that the “concession” is
only apparent and not real and is in fact a cunning
manoeuvre on its part. If the United Nations were to accept
it, the racists of Pretoria would be given, in effect, the
illegal right once more to tyrannize over the people and
Territory of Namibia for at least another 10 years. Very
likely acceptance of South Africa’s position would be
tantamount to agreeing that racist tyranny may remain in
Namibia forever. Paragraph 14 of the report says:

you.

“If it should
go on like this, we shall be totally
destroyed. We shall always be tortured.
“WC trust that our cry h need will bring you hastily to
us-our cry.
“Thanking

you on behalf of the women of Namibia.”
“ ‘On the basis of present developments, the Government of South Africa anticipates that it might not take
longer than 10 years for the population of South West
Africa to reach the stage where it will be ready to exercise
its right to self-determination.’ ”

51. It will bc noted that the illegal occupiers have chosen
to igaorc human rights and to disregard the will of the
people of Namibia and of the United Nations because of
the cxistencc of the policy of appeasement, saturated with
tile indifCerence of South Africa’s major trading partners
and sympathizcrs who, unfortunately,
are among the most
powerful of the industrial, commercial and military States
in the Llniled Nations.

57. It is necessary to note that by that so-called concession, after 10 years the people of Namibia would reach only
that stage where they would be able to exercise their right
to self-determination, not that of independence itself. That
ultimate goal, so fervently desired by the people now,
would be placed much further beyond their reach than
appears at first glance if Vorster’s so-called concession were
agreed to now, for the United Nations would be giving the
racist tyrants the opportunity during those 10 years to
work their evil machinations in the Territory and to stamp
out the determination of the people, which exists now, to
achieve independence and the right to manage their own
affairs.

52. The Council for Namibia feels extremely dissatisfied
with the conduct of the contacts because the dialogue has,
as I have pointed out, been diverted from the central
issue the withdrawal
of South Africa’s illegal occupation
from Namibia. WC had hoped, in spite of our scepticism
about the utility of dialogue with Pretoria, that it might
have been possible, with a genuine and vigorous effort, to
make SIH~IC progress; but our hopes have been frustrated
and our scepticism confirmed. In the face of the manifest
intent of Vorster never to permit the dialogue to focus
U~O~I the essential issue which exists between the United
N;ltj()1js and Vorstcr on the question of Namibia, there
seems 110 point in permitting the continuation
of apparentIy interminable
arguments with Vorster
on merely
accompanied by insincerities
and
tangential questions,
deliberate attempts at deception.

58. Moreover, by acceptance of the so-called “concessions”, the United Nations would be giving, once more, to
the apostles of apartheid in Pretoria the legal right to
continue to brutalize the people of Namibia as they have
been doing over the past 50 years.
59. If after 50 years of administration by Pretoria, another
10 years are necessary to reach the stage when the right to
self-determination can be exercised, the conclusion which
must be drawn is that Pretoria was not Competent to

53. What is even more important is the fact that Vorster
Ilas been claiming United Nations approval for his illegal
presence and conduct in Namibia. If, being aware of that
6

implement that responsibility. The situation in the Territory today shows that this is not a logical deduction but a
demonstrable fact.
60. The United Nations Council for Namibia, on the basis
of the facts just recounted, is opposed to continuation of
the contacts between the United Nations and the Vorster
regime of South Africa because it believes they can only
prejudice the United Nations position and result in de facto
recognition of a situation which is illegal and contrary to
the interests of the Namibian people. The contacts must be
terminated since, as has been proved, they have served only
to alleviate the pressure created by the Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice.
61. Let me point out that the Council for Namibia is not
alone in that conclusion. Among others who have formed a
similar judgement is the International Conferh:nce of
Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonia!:sm and
Apartheid in Southern Africa, which in its report to the
General Assembly states that:
“No contacts, dialogues or negotiations should be
conducted with South Africa except to arrange for the
immediate transfer of power in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI)“.3
62. We have been mindful also of the fact that SWAP0 of
Namibia, through its President, Mr. Nujoma, also called for
discontinuation of the dialogue at a press conference which
he held during the first week of May of this year at United
Nations Headquarters, here in New York.
63. The Organization of African Unity, at its summit
conference in Addis Ababa, in May of this year, also
adopted a similar decision. Governments of African countries with which the Council for Namibia had consultations
in their capitals have since then reaffirmed their individual
decisions to demand termination of the contacts. That
opinion was shared by the non-aligned summit held in
Algiers last September and by a number of United Nations
bodies and organizations including the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the Fourth Committee.
64. This wide similarity of views has not unnaturally
caused the Council for Namibia to feel even more confident
in the correctness of its decision. Therefore it is being urged
here with that sense of assurance which arises from the
knowledge that our views have been examined and reexamined by others who have come to the same conclusion.
65. It is oftern argued that once the contacts are terminated the United Nations will not have an alternative
action to ensure that the people in Namibia will enjoy their
right to self-determination and independence. It is true that
South Africa might have lost its last chance to ensure the
peaceful transfer of power in the Territory to the United
Nations Council for Namibia. However, it is not the first
3 SeeDocument A/9061, pertaining to agendaitems 23, 70, 71
and 72 of the twenty&hth sessionof the GeneralAssembly,issued
separatefy(offset).

time that the United Nations has tried to convince South
Africa to accept the authority of the United Nations over
Namibia. There were, for example, the Good Offices
Committee, the Carpio Mission and many other official and
unofficial contacts. The result was always the same: the
contacts failed becauseSouth Africa never discussedin
good faith and alwaystried to usethe United Nationsfor
its own ends. In the meantime, the Pretoria regime
continuedits illegaloccupationof Namibiaandthe plunder
of its wealth.
66. The Council for Namibia,at a specialsession
held in
Lusaka, during its visit to Africa in June of this year,
assessed
the existing situation concerningthe struggleto
liberateNamibia.At the endof its deliberationsthe Council
issueda Declarationon the Questionof Namibia.4In that
Declarationthe Council reaffirmed its decision,madein
March this year, that the contacts must be terminated
becausethey are detrimentalto the interestsandwelfareof
the peopleof Namibia.
67. Stemmingfrom that reaffirmation of its standon the
contacts between the United Nations and the Vorster
regimeof racists,the Councilfor Namibiadrew a number
of conclusions.Wenow wish to urgethe Security Council
to terminatethe contactsand in sodoingto adopt someof
the conclusionsof the Councilfor Namibiaasmeasures
to
deal with the situation which will be created by the
terminationof the contacts.
68. As the Council for Namibia and many othershave
cometo recognize,it is necessaryfor the Security Council
to acknowledge
the following:
“The United NationsCouncilfor Namibiahascometo
the conclusionthat the time hascomefor the international community to recognizethat SouthAfrica’s illegal
occupationof Namibiacannot continuewithout serious
dangerto internationalpeaceandsecurity.It is therefore
incumbent on all the nations of the world actively to
support the struggleof the peopleof Namibiafor liberty
and independence,not only politically but also materially.“4
69. That obligation to assistactively the legitimatestrug
gle of the people of Namibia for their rights to selfdetermination and independencelies heaviest on this
Security Council. For, as is statedin paragraph8 of the
LusakaDeclarationof the Councilfor Namibia:
“The United Nations,havingassumed
responsibilityfor
the Territory, hasan obligationto intensify its action to
compel South Africa to withdraw from Namibiaand
allow the United Nations Council for Namibiato take
over administrationof the country. The Council for
Namibia will urge the Security Council, the United
Nations organ chargedwith primary responsibilityfor
international peaceand security, to fulfil its obligation
under the Charter of the United Nations by taking
effective action to compel South Africa to withdraw
immediatelyfrom Namibia.““
4 See Official Records of the General
Session, Supplement
No. 24, JJwd. 157.

Assembly,

Twenty-eighth

considered opinion of the overwhelming majority of the
Members of the United Nations, the Council, in keeping
with its functions and responsibilities, should no longer
shrink from taking appropriate measures, if necessary,
under Chapter VII of the Charter to compel South Africa
to withdraw its administration and presence from
Namibia without delay.” [1628th meeting, para. 91.1

70. Among measures which the Security Council can
consider are those identified by the Council for Namibia in
paragraph 5 of its Lusaka Declaration-that is, the Security
Council should adopt a resolution which will impose an
obligation upon all countries who are giving political,
military, economic and financial support, either directly or
indirectly, to the regime of the occupying Power to
discontinue such aid and support immediately. They should
also withdraw their consular offices from Namibia. Furthermore, the investment of foreign capital and the activities of
Western transnational corporations in Namibia exploiting
and exhausting the natural resources of the country to the
detriment of the rightful owners of these resources must be
terminated. Several petroleum companies which had withdrawn at about the time of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice have taken up prospecting
concessions. A number of companies have started new
prospecting ventures.

73. Let there be no doubt about the seriousness of the
present situation nor about the seriousness of the undertakings of the Council for Namibia which were made in the
Declaration:
“Every effort will be exerted to marshal the international community into contributing to that undertaking. Vigilance will be maintained to ensure that the
international community will not be made to waver or be
diverted from that course by the South African racists,
colonialists and their imperialist allies.“”

71. Governments seem not to be aware that by allowing
powerful financiers, whether persons or corporations, from
among their nationals to invest in Namibia, they are
subjecting themselves to powerful pressures to maintain and
support Vorster’s colonialist ambitions in Namibia for the
sake of men whose greed has enveloped their judgements.
In so doing, they are creating an engine for their own
destruction. For Namibia’s wealth, added to that already
under the control of Pretoria’s racist imperialists, will
enhance and strengthen their imperialist opportunities and
ambitions, and, indeed, will encourage them into further
illegal and aggressive conduct. In that connexion, I wish
here to remind the Security Council of the effect of the
same policies and practices upon the imperialist ambitious
Nazi Germany and to remember that Vorster was a disciple
of Hitler.

74. I wish to conclude my statement with the serious and
earnest request to the Security Council that all the organs
of the United Nations work together to free Namibia and
all of southern Africa from Pretoria’s imperialist clutches,
and to free the world from a serious threat to international
peace and security by way of a racial war.
75. The Council for Namibia, during the course of its visit
to Africa, was afforded the opportunity to visit capitals and
border areas in the south of Africa. Everywhere we went we
could actually feel the tension originating from the presence of the troops of the racists that, for example, form an
arc around Zambia. Their presence, combined with the
ever-present threat of sabotage of vital facilities, creates a
situation which can explode very easily into a major racial
conflagration, It is clear that if a military conflict starts in
southern Africa today, it will be impossible to contain it. It
will embroil all of Africa and ultimately draw in the rest of
the world.

72. However, it is the view of the Council for Namibia
that, if necessary, the Security Council should not hesitate
to adopt measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations to compel Vorster and his band of
imperialist-colonialist
plunderers to withdraw
from
Namibia. The United Kingdom decided to bring the case of
an illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia to the Security
Council as a threat to peace under Chapter VII. The
Namibian question is equally dangerous. South African
troops and police are extremely active in Namibia. The
United Nations is unable to solve this problem without
applying Chapter VII. In order, therefore, to strengthen the
force of international law, the Security Council-which has
the primary responsibility for peace and security-must
take it upon itself to consider measures not exclusive of
Chapter VII which will help in removing South Africa’s
occupation regime from Namibia. At the special meetings
of the Security Council held in Addis Ababa in February
1972, the then President of the Council for Namibia,
Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan, stated the responsibility of
the Security Council as follows:

76. There is only one way in which the situation can be
defused. The racists must be compelled to respect the
United Nations and the principles of law and justice which
it represents and which it has been demanding to be
accorded to the people of Africa.
77. The time has come for the Security Council to
acknowledge that, in its hesitation to take effective
measures, it has contributed to the development of a
serious threat to international peace and security by, for
example, allowing the aggressive racist imperialists in
Pretoria to expand their domination in southern Africa and
to make satellites of Ian Smith and his rebels, and of the
Portuguese colonialist rulers in Angola and Mozambique.
Vorster’s band of racists now looms as a large and menacing
presence in the south of Africa, ever threatening to invade
and occupy.

“The cardinal issue before the Security Council concerning Namibia is the removal of South Africa from the
Territory so as to create proper conditions in which the
United Nations can discharge the responsibilities it has
assumed in respect of Namibia. It is to this cardinal issue
that the Security Council must address itself. In the

78. A decisive stage in the question of Namibia has been
reached. The time for decision is now.
79. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, my delegation congratulates you on your assumption of the high
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
8

December. Under your leadership, I am sure that the
Council will discharge its responsibilities with effectiveness
and dignity. I also congratulate the Ambassador of Austria
for the way in which he conducted the Council’s delibera
tions during the month of November.

Territory of Namibia gives credibility to such feelings. The
Council, as the body charged with the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security,
must come to the rescue of the United Nations. It must go
a stage further than mere talking; it must act now and
remove the colonial shackles of South Africa from Namibia.

80. The question of Namibia is a painful one. The United
Nations has been seized of it in its legal and political organs
since its inception. Significant case law has developed on
this Territory. In all this, the unchallenged view in law and
in politics has been that the United Nations has a degree of
responsibility for the Territory previously administered as a
Mandate by the racist regime of South Africa. In 1966 the
General Assembly, with the support of the Security
Council, terminated the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia and assumed responsibility for that Territory. The
opinion of the International Court of Justice, issued in June
1971 pursuant to a Security Council request, vindicated the
termination of that Mandate and defined the limits of
contact that States should have in respect of activities
carried on in Namibia.

85. In calling upon the Security Council to act, my
delegation is mindful of the fact that the Council is made
up of individual delegations, some of which are very close
allies of South Africa. The Council’s inability to act,
therefore, is to be blamed not only on the regime of South
Africa but on those who make it possible for South Africa
to defy the Council and the United Nations. These friends
of South Africa actively trade with it and maintain a
presence in South Africa and in Namibia. They are
beneficiaries of the evil system of apartheid in South Africa
andin southernAfrica. They deriveeconomicbenefitsand
cherishstrategicinterestsbeyondtheir responsibilityto the
Charter of the United Nations and respect for human
dignity andthe self-determination
of peoples.

81. In spite of all these efforts of the United Nations, the
South African regime is still illegally exercising its authority
in Namibia in open defiance of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, the body charged by the United Nations with
the responsibility for overseeing the interests of the
Namibians. The South African regime has refused to discuss
the crucial question of transferring power to the Council
and the people of Namibia and withdrawing therefrom. We
must condemn this intransigence and illegal presence, for it
is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to
international law.

86. AS presently constituted, the Council enjoys impeccable and valuablesupportfrom its membersfrom Africa,
Asia, Latin America andEasternEurope.But significantly,
the WesternEuropeanmembersof the Council-or at least
some of them-have consistentlygiven only partial and
faltering supportto the Councilon matterssuchasthe one
we are discussing.This group is well known for its pious
respect for the rights of men and individuals and for
international law, but this region, which has considerable
influence on both South Africa and Portugal, should
examineits conscienceand its long-terminterestsand cast
its weight in accordancewith justice and the wishesof
Namibia,Africa and the other regionsof the world. Verbal
support
is not goodenough.The Westerncountriesmustgo
the extra mile.

82. This act of omission on the part of the South African
regime constitutes grave aggression, not only against the
Namibian people and Territory, but against the international community as well. It contradicts all efforts at
peace and reconciliation; it invites discord, hatred and the
use of the only other means available, namely, the
application of force to evict the South Africans from the
United Nations Territory of Namibia.

87. WhenAfrica and other regionssupportedthe Security
Councilin its resolutions319(1972) and323(1972), they
did so with considerable
misapprehension.
In spite of their
doubtsof the legality of suchtalks with anillegaloccupier
long after its mandatewasterminated,they suspected
that
South Africa would not respondwith equalmagnanimityto
their overturesin seekingan early, peacefulsolutionto the
Namibianquestion.However,they gavethe benefit of the
doubt to South Africa and the membersof the Western
group. WeAfricans hopedthat this group-and I meanthe
Westerngroup-whichhasclosetiesandwieldsconsiderable
influence on South Africa, would apply friendly pressure
on South Africa in such a way that it would begin the
processof transferringpower to the United Nationsand
thus honourably end its occupation of Namibia. The
missionof the Secretary-Generalwas, however, fraught
with insuperabledifficulties, ashisreport clearly spellsout.
The regime of South Africa did not give a categorical
clarification in regardto:

83. The alternative just mentioned is one that this Council
and the African peoples inside and outside Namibia can
take with comfort. Considering that already the southern
African situation is an area fraught with tension and threats
to international peace and security, we cannot afford to
add insult to injury. South Africa, anxious to have an
empire in southern Africa, extends its tentacles to the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia, and in collusion with
the Fascist Portuguese, maintains its active presence in
Mozambique and Angola. Racial tension in the entire area
is, to our regret, a way of life. Independent countries close
by are subjected to intrusion and harassment. In the wake
of such grave threats, of which the United Nations is fully
aware and of which it is seized, the Security Council should
exercise its full responsibility and end the South African
presence in Namibia.

“(a) South Africa’s policy regardingself-determination
and independence
for Namibia;(b) the compositionand
functions of the proposedadvisory council; lc) the
removal of restrictionson movementma measuresto
ensurefreedomof political activity, includingfreedomof
speechand the holding of meetings;and (d) the discon-

84. The United Nations has been ridiculed and downgraded in the eyes of public opinion as impotent in
enforcing its decisions. South Africa’s defiance and continued aggression in its occupation of the United Nations
9

merit, to exercise the utmost influence on South Africa
with a view to bringing an immediate end to South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia.

tinuance of measures in furtherance of South Africa’s
‘homelands’ policy”. [S,/I 0921 and Corr. 1, paru. 6.1
88.
It appeared, therefore, that those who were in a
position to advise South Africa lost the opportunity as well
as the good will of the African people and of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. No doubt they also lost
the good will of many members of the Security Council.
Since the South African rdgime did not appear to consider
seriously an honourable end to its illegal rule in Namibia,
the African and other peace-loving peoples have come to
the conclusion that a continuation of the dialogue between
the United Nations and the South African authorities must
be ended.

94. Third, the Council should request those countries
which continue to trade with South Africa and to exploit
the resources in Namibia, as a result of licences granted by
the South African authorities, or otherwise invest resources
in Namibia pursuant to South African laws, to desist from
such activities immediately.
95. FOLKUI, the Council should request all those countries
which maintain a diplomatic or consular presence in
Namibia to terminate them immediately. In this regard
those countries which maintain such relations with Pretoria
should SO prescribe their jurisdiction so as to exclude
Namibia.

89. My delegation notes that the South African rigime in
its reply to the Secretary-General had in part the following
to say:

96 Fifth, the Council should, at the present time,
terminate United Nations dialogue with South Africa since
there is no basis at present for realizing the desired results.

“On the basis of present developments, the [r&me] of
South Africa anticipates that it might not take longer
than IO years for the population of South West Africa to
reach the stage where it will be ready to exercise its right
to self-determination”.[lbid.,
pm. 14.1

97. Finally, I should like to request you formally,
Mr. President, to invite the representative of the South West
Africa People’s Organization, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, to participate in
the Council’s debate.

90. My delegation cannot accept that the illegal occupier
should dictate or determine the timing of the realization of
the inalienable right of the Namibians to self-determination.
The illegal occupier should not arrogate to itself further
usurpation of the prerogatives of the United Nations over
Namibia. The Council cannot accept the compounding of
illegality with illegality. Without in any way detracting
from the position that my delegation has just stated, the
Council observes that this proposition has not been
followed seriously by the regime of South Africa. For
example, the Pretoria regime has not said categorically that
it intends to evacuate Namibia within that time nor issued a
time-table that it considered applying to the question of
withdrawal.
The Council and the United Nations are
therefore left precisely without any clear information on
the position of the South African rbgime. Nothing short of
an immediate, unconditional and complete pullout from
Namibia by South Africa-which
is long overdue-would
satisfy my delegation, or for that matter this Council. The
rBgime of South Africa and its friends should pay heed to
this warning.

98. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
&WI French): Mr. President, before speaking on the subject
of the problem before us, I should like to extend to you the
heartfelt congratulations of my delegation and pay a tribute
to your predecessor, my colleague ‘and friend Ambassador
Jankowitsch of Austria, for having conducted, with so
much competence and dynamism, both the consultations
and the meetings of the Security Council during the past
month.
99. More than six years have elapsed since our Organization, by resolution 2145 (XXI) of the twenty-first session
of the General Assembly, put an end to the Mandate
entrusted to South Africa to administer Namibia and
decided to take over direct responsibility for the Territory
and its population. Throughout this period, the racist
Government of South Africa continued to violate the
obligations devolving upon it by refusing to comply with
the pertinent decisions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. On the contrary, the racist minority is
resorting increasingly to coercion and oppression of the
Namibian people for the purpose of perpetrating its illegal
occupation of this Territory, thereby hampering the exercise of the inalienable right of this people to selfdetermination and independence. Moreover, it is extending
its criminal policy of apartheid by establishing alleged
independent homelands, or Bantustans, in order systematically to destroy the national unity and the territorial
integrity of Namibia.

91. Besides, it is with considerable regret that my delegation notes from press reports that the South African regime
has continued to pursue its policy of Bantustans in
Namibia. It has also apparently approved the flogging of the
indigenous people by some of the chiefs imposed upon
them. These are aspects of the Namibian question that the
Security Council cannot accept.
92. In conclusion, my delegation takes the view that, first,
the Government of South Africa should be condemned for
its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its perpetuation of the policy of Bantustans in the area, and its
continued exploitation of the resources of that Territory;

100. The Security Council is thus placed in the dilemma
of either assuming its responsibilities or observing passively
the challenge flung at it by the Government of Pretoria.
Already in the course of its historic special series of
meetings held on African soil at Addis Ababa, from 28
January to 4 February 1972, the Security Council by its

93. Second, the Council should request the permanent
members of the Western group of the Council which have
continued to co-operate with the South African Govern10

resolution 309 (1972), entrusted the mandate to the
Secretary-General calling upon him to initiate contacts with
the parties concerned “with a view to establishing the
necessary conditions for enabling the people of Namibia,
freely and with strict regard to the principle of human
equality, to exercise their right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations”. The Security Council, moreover, urged the South
African Government to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the implementation of that resolution.

independence, calls upon the international community to
increase its political, moral, financial, material and other
forms of support to the people of Namibia, under the
leadership of SWAPO, in order to enable them to carry out
an effective armed struggle so as to expedite the attainment
of independence of Namibia, condemns the South African
racist authorities for their enforcement of the racist policy
of Bantustans which is designed to destroy the unity and
territorial integrity of the Namibian people, supports the
efforts of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
implement the mandate entrusted to it by the United
Nations General Assembly, calls upon the Security Council
to take appropriate measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations to force South Africa into
terminating its illegal occupation of Namibia, calls upon the
United Nations Security Council to terminate the contacts
of the United Nations Secretary-General with the South
African racist authorities as such exercise has proved
ultimately to be detrimental to the interests of the people
of Namibia and prejudicial to an early attainment of
independence by this territory.

101. In spite of the laudable efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General in pursuance of resolution 309 (1972)
and knowing the obstinacy of the racist minority, a large
number of delegations, including my own, have always had
serious doubts concerning the usefulness and efficacy of
contacts between the United Nations and the Pretoria
Government. The disappointing conclusion of the report of
the Secretary-General, as the result of a mission carried out
by his Special Representative to the South African authorities in Namibia, confirmed our apprehension.
102. The most recent report of the Secretary-General,
which my delegation has examined with the greatest of
interest, shows clearly that South Africa still has no
intention of complying with decisions of the United
Nations inviting it to withdraw immediately from Namibia,
nor to abolish its policy of apartheid, of the so-called
homelands, a policy which has not only been condemned
by international opinion, but, better still, has met with the
vehement opposition of the overwhelming majority of the
Namibian population.

107. For its part, the Fourth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers in
September 1973, by firmly adhering to the OAU resolution, reaffirmed as well the legitimacy of the struggle of the
Namibian people and committed itself to providing concrete reinforcement with material, moral and diplomatic aid
to the fighters of Namibia regrouped within SWAPO, and
supported the interruption of the dialogue between the
Secretary-General and the illegal South African regime in
Namibia, in accordance with the wishes already expressed
by its people and pursuant to the recommendation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.

103. At the very time when contacts were being conducted between the Secretary-General and the South
African authorities, Pretoria was intensifying the application of the hideous system of Bantustans. Evidence of this
is the proclamation of two homelands-the Ovamboland
and Kavangoland-as “autonomous zones”. Moreover, in
March 1973, South Africa established an alleged “Advisory
Council”, consisting essentially of members of the administration of the homelands and not including the authentic
representatives of the people of Namibia. By illegally
applying such measures, Pretoria has ignored the opinion of
the majority of the Namibians in their claims to their lawful
aspirations.

108. Moreover, this Conference expressed concern over
the continuous exploitation of the natural resources of the
Namibian territory by the Pretoria regime and categorically
condemned the presence of military bases, of troops and of
the police of that Government upon Namibian soil.
109. That same opinion had already been expressed by the
International Conference of Experts for the Support of
Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa
held in February 1973 in Oslo.
110. My delegation profoundly regrets that the minority
regime of South Africa persists in its failure to co-operate
with the Secretary-General. It reaffirms the special responsibility and the obligation of the United Nations vis-a-vis the
Namibian people and supports the proposition that the
Security Council has the duty to do everything in its power
to restore to the Narnibian people its inalienable right to
self-determination, independence and territorial integrity.

104. We note with regret that tension in the Territory has
become more serious recently as a result of the pitiless
pursuit of repression against the nationalists of SWAPO,
chiefly in Ovamboland.
105. The Namibian people has shown its will to take into
its own hands the question of the liberation of its country
and to have its right to self-determination and independence prevail by all the means at its disposal. In the face of
this firm commitment, the Tenth Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of OAU expressed its determination
to provide all possible support to the liberation movement
of Namibia.

1 I I. My delegation believes that members of the Council,
specifically its permanent members, who some years ago
put an end to the Mandate of South Africa in Namibia and
two years ago instructed the Secretary-General to restore
legality in that country, are now in duty bound to find
appropriate means to bring the Government of South
Africa to see reason. All the States Members of the United
Nations should aid Africa in freeing Namibia.

106. In the resolution adopted for this purpose, OAU
reaffirms its full and unconditional support to the
Namibian people in their legitimate struggle for Namibia’s
11

112. My delegation, while taking note of the efforts of the
Secretary-General, believes sincereIy that it is time to put
an end to the mandate as it is stipulated in resolution
309 (1972) and confirmed in paragraph 4 of resolution
319 (1972) and paragraph 5 of resolution 323 (1972)
Moreover, it appeals to all States, particularly those which
maintain economic and military ties with South Africa, that
the economic embargo, which has produced some effect in
Southern Rhodesia, should be extended to South Africa so
as to compel it to apply the pertinent resolutions of the
United Nations,

for the maintenance of the territorial integrity of Namibia
and the immediate granting of freedom and independence
to its people.
118. Life and the further development of events have
clearly and convincingly confirmed the correctness of the
position taken by the Soviet delegation.
119. Now scarcely anyone can doubt that the racists of
South Africa have used the contacts with the SecretaryGeneral to consolidate their positions in Namibia, which
they occupy illegally, and to continue their policy of
n~~n~tlzeid through the dismemberment of. that country.
Moreover, at the time when the Secretary-General was
establishing contacts with the racist r&ime in South Africa,
that rCgime was intensifying its persecution, terrorism and
repressive measures against the population of Namibia. In
violation of United Nations decisions on the territorial
integrity of Namibia and the national unity of its people,
the racists advanced an anti-national plan allegedly giving
“autonomy” to individual regions of Namibia and began to
establish the so-called homelands or Bantustans. In other
words, they applied the well-known imperialist method of
“divide and rule” in order to continue and strengthen their
racist domination in Namibia. The people of Namibia
discovered in time what the treacherous plan of the racists
was. The people boycotted the establishment of the
homelands.

113. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened at the request of three African
States, members of the Council, for consideration of the
question of Namibia and, in this connexion, discussion of
the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 323 (1972).
114. The United Nations has exerted considerable efforts
and adopted various approaches to solve the problem of the
liberation of Namibia from its illegal occupation and the
enslavement of its people by racist South Africa. At its
meetings away from Headquarters in Addis Ababa, the
Council, as a result of urgent proposals made by various
members of the Council and supported by a number of
African countries,
took the decision, in resolution
309 (1972), to establish direct contacts between the United
Nations and the parties concerned, including South Africa,
through the Secretary-General. To assist him in carrying out
that mission, the Council established a group of three
members of the Council.

120. The people of Namibia do not want to endure the
colonial oppression of the racists. In Namibia there is a
mass awakening of the national consciousness and a
growing trend towards open struggle for independence. The
working class of Namibia is progressing towards effective
action and has become aware of itself not only as a class in
itself, but also as a class for itself, As a means of protest and
struggle under the conditions of the Fascist police terror
that prevails in Namibia, the workers have resorted to
strikes. The extension of racist laws. to Namibia is arousing
opposition from increasingly wider sectors of the population of Namibia.

115. At the same time, the Council once again solemnly
affirmed the right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination, national independence and maintenance of
its territorial integrity, upon which any decision relating to
Namibia must be based.
116. The Counci; rejected any other interpretation, mcasure or pcrlicy which ran counter to this. The SecretaryGeneral was instructed to continue his efforts, with the
assistance of the three members of the Council, SO as to
enable the people of Namibia, freely and with strict regard
to the principle of the equality of the whole population of
the country, to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

121. Speaking at the World Pcacc Congress in Moscow, the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev,
stressed that “the whole course of post-war development
has shown convincingly that colonialism and aggression, the
policy of colonial oppression and the policy of force are, in
essence, two sides of the same coin”. The situation in
Namibia is a clear illustration of that statement. In
inflicting colonialist and racist oppression of the people of
Namibia, the Pretoria rCgimc is at the same time using the
territory and resources of Namibia for the aggressive
purposes of threatening and making military attacks on
independent African States. For example, along the border
with Zambia, in the Caprivi Strip in the north-eastern part
of Natnibia, a military base has been established with
take-off and landing runways and a system of ground-toground missiles. The hostile purposes for which thcsc bases
are being used against countries in Africa have been made
known to the Security Council in the statements of the
delegation of Zatnbia made during consideration of the
question of aggression by South Africa against Zambia.

117. From the very outset, when the idea of contacts for
the purpose of a “dialogue” between the Secretary-General
and the South African racists on the question of Namibia
first began to emerge, the Sovjet delegation expressed
serious doubts, which have been fully justified, regarding
the practicality and advisability of such a measure. We did
not believe it would be possible to reach agreement with
the racists on the liberation of the people of Namibia. We
cautioned the principal supporters
of the idea of a
“dialogue”-the
rcprescntative of Argentina, Ambassador
Ortiz dc Rozas, and various other representatives-that
such
a “dialogue” could only provide the South African racists
with a prelcxt for further procrastination in iniplemcntine
earlier United Nations decisions on Namibia that provided
12

$22.
A whole series of decisions on Namibia has been
@d,pted by the Uni ted Nations in connexion with the racist
elicy
being pursued by the Government of South Africa.
e would like to dwell briefly only on the most important
0p these. First of all, the United Nations has recognitLedand
‘@affirmed in its decisions, that the peopIe of Namibia have
%
inalienable right to freedom and independence in
“ccordance
with the Declaration on the Granting of
$ndependence to ColonialCountriesandPeoples.Secondly,
%, UnitedNationshasofficially terminatedthe Mandateof
%uth
Africa to administerNamibia. Consequently,the
f=Qrther presencein that country of the authorities,armed
z‘orces, police and other attributes of the racistdomination
of
South Africa is unlawful. Thirdly, and lastly, the
“rational unity of the peopleof Namibiaand the territorial
htegrity
of that country have beenrecognizedand reaffirmed by the UnitedNationsand thusareinviolable.
x 23. Accordingly, any support, whether political, economic, military or other, givento the racistregimeof South
Africa, cannot be regardedotherwise than as a direct
Molation of the resolutionsof the GeneralAssemblyand
the Security Council and asthus aiding and abettingthis
international crimeof the racistsandcomplicity with it.

exploitation of man by man has beeneliminated for ever
and racism and national hatred are criminal offenses
punishableby law.
126. There is JIO doubt
whiitsoevcr that, without assistanceand supportfrom outside,the racist rdgimein Pretoria
would nut have dared challengethe United Nations, the
peoplesof Africa andworld public opinion. Its racistpolicy
is contrary to the purposesand the decisionsof the United
Nations;it is a violation of generallyacceptedinternational
rules of law and therefore falls into the category of
internationallypunishablecrimes,with all that that entails.
127. The General Assembly h% frequently condemned
racism CIJ~ upartheid as crimes against humanity. The
SpecialPolitical Committee,at the twenty-eighth session
of
the Generrtl Assembly,has just recently reaffirmed this
condemnationin a draft resolution.5
128. A particularly sinister role in the provision of
assistance
and supportto racismin South Africa isthe one
played by internationalmonopolisticcapital asit existsin
the so-calledWesternworld.

129. The penetration of this capital into the South
African economy is constantly growing. It is drawn there
124. It is the duty of the United Nations to put an by greedfor profit and by the cheapslave labour of the
immediate end to these violations. The fact that South Africans, the possibility of unlimited and unrestricted
Africa enjoyswide supportfrom its political andeconomic exploitation of the African working class,the absenceof
md its military partners is no secret to anyone. That,
any labour legislationor trade unions, and the complete
indeed, is the main reasonwhy the racist authoritiesof
and absolutedefencelessness
of the worker in the face of
Sauth Africa ignore United Nations decisions.The South the omnipotenceof capital under the conditions of racist
African authorities, and their colonialist racist policy in
domination. That is what is enticing and attracting the
regard to the African population of South Africa itself and international imperialist monopoliesand causingthem to
& regard to Namibia, are directly supportedby some rush to South Africa, without stoppingto think that they
Western Powers,and in particular by their international are thus becomingdirect accomplicesin the international
monopolies. The racistsare beingprovided with assistance crimeof the racists.From this exampleof our times,we see
md support by their closest allies and partnersin the
that even tudav the wordsof Marx in hisfamouswork, UQS
colonial plundering of Africa, the Portuguesecolonialists Kapital. are still convincing. Referring to the English
and the SouthernRhodesianracists.Another ally andclose economistDanning,he wrote:
partner of South Africa is Israel. Thesetwo countriesare
“Capital abhorsthe absenceof profit or too small a
united and brought together, firstly, by their policy of
profit,
just asnature abhorsa vacuum. But once there is
aggression-Israel against the Arabs, and South Africa
sufficient profit, capital growsbold, Ensurea 10 per cent
against the Africans-and, secondly,by the fact that both
profit, and capital is ready to be applied to anything.
Governments arelike-mindedracists.Israel,with its Zionist
With 70 per cent it becomeslively; with a 50 per cent
credo, is propagatingthe antediluviannonsensical
idea of
profit it tramplesunderfoot all human laws,and with a
the “chosenpeople of God”, and the basisof the policy
300 per cent profit there is no crimewhich it would not
and ideologyof the South African racistsis the old slogan
embarkupon, evenwhen threatenedwith the gallows.”
of the colonialistsand imperialistsabout the so-called
superiority of the white man and the burden supposedly
130. It is the fabulously high profits in South Africa
placed upon him by God to care for the black man.In the
which
arc pressuringinternational capitalinto participating
former case,with the Zionists, andin the latter case,with
in the crime of the racists. According to information
the racists,God is appealedto asan ally and protector to
justify aggression
and racismandto concealthe true nature provided by the Secretariat, over the IO-year period from
1960 to 1970the amount of capital investmentby foreign
af the misanthropictheory and policy of racialsuperiority
in the economy of South Africa and Namibia
and the oppressionof somenationsby others.Thesefalse monop~JkS
rose
from
S4.3
thousandmillion to SK? thousandmiilion.
theories have long been condemnedand rejectedby the
The world community is aware of these facts. which
modernworld andby the United Nations.
dernonstratcthe cruel and inhumanexploitation by foreign
monopoliesof the peopleandworking classof Namibia.
125. The Western European and North American selfstyled defendersof humanrights shouldturn their atten131. It has already been mentioned in statcmcnts by
tion elsewhere-to South Africa and Israel-in connexion previousspeakersthat certain StatesMembersof the United
with the protectionof humanrights,insteadof seekingout,
for tendentiously hostile and slanderouspurposes,the
allegednon-observance
of humanrightsin placeswherethe
13

Nations :IIY colllinutng lo co-op~ral~ willi lhe Sot1111
African racists hi viohtion ol‘ ~hil~~~ Nn~ionsI’CSdll~i~JIlS.
This is reflected in moral and political support and in
CCor~onlic rflatioiis,

and ;1Is0 ill iililil;q/

co-opsratiun

with

South Africa. The military r&lions bctwcon South Africa
and the United Kingdom are particularly close. For
example, joint British-South African naval manoeuvresare
carried out. I have before me a report of the Special
Committee on Aparclzcid on the military build-upin South
Africa and the implementationof the armsembargoagainst
South Africa [S/I1005 of 4 October 19731.
132. It isstated in this report that during the period under
review. 1972-1973, there hasbeencontinued co-operation
between South Africa and the United Kingdom under the
Simonstown Agreements,especiallyas regardsjoint naval
excrciscs and that “Sancx 2”, an exercisewith the participation of the combined forcesof the South African Navy
and the Royal Navy, took placealong the southern Capt
coastlinebetween 14and 20 August 1972.
133. It was also reported that severalfurther cornbincd
exorciseswould take place in the ncxl few months.Joint
British and South African naval exercisesdid in fact take
place again in .I1.11~
1973. This information from official
United Nations documentswassubmitted to the General
Assemblyat its twenty-eighth session.
134. It is also generally known that, in violation of the
Security Council embargo,South Africa is still receiving
armamentsfrom a number of Westerncountries. It is the
task of the United Nations to persuadethose countries
which are co-operatingwith the Republicof South Africa
to halt suchco-operationimmediately.
135. It has now become quite clear and obvious to
everyone that the “dialogue” and “contacts” bctwecn the
United Nations and the racistsof South Africa haveproved
to be a total failure. This conclusionis confirmed by lhc
Secretary-Generalin his report to the Security Council. In
paragraph1X of the report it isstated: “, , . the positionof
the Government of South Africa is still far from coinciding
with that establishedin the resolutions of the United
Nations concerning Namibia”. It is clear from the report
also that the evasive and hypocritical statementsof the
South African authorities during the “dialogue” with the
Secretary-Generaldid not provide a completeand unequivocal clarification of South Africa’s policy in regard to
self-determinationandindependence
for Namibia.
126. The Secretary-Generalnoted in the introduction to
his annual report to the GeneralAssenibly at its twentyeighth sessionon the work of the Organisation” that the
contacts and efforts he had undertaken to achieve the
objcctivcs and implement the decisionsof the United
Nations with respect to Namibia had not produced the
desiredresults.

largest. ilic most inl’iucnlial and tlie mvsl concelrnd
CICIH~I~~ in this niatter of Atrican unity, that is, tlie

!)rg:inizatio~i 01’ African Unity. That organijatioii, which
rcprcscntsall lllc StalcS Uf Al’riCil,
llas
Come
oul
directly
and
categorically against continuance of the “dialogue”
bctwecn the llnitcd Nations rind tllc Soutll African racists.
At the tenth ennivcrsary Assembly of lleads of State and
Govcrnmcnt of OAU, a specialresolution was adoptedon
this question. In it, the Assembly of OAU calls upon the
Security Council to terminate the contacts of tbc United
Nations Secretary-Ccneralwith the South African racist
authorities as such exercise has proved ultimately to be
dclrimental to the interests of the people ol’ Namibiaand
prejudicial to an early attainment of indcpendcnccby this
territory. The United Nations Council for Namibiatook the
sameposition in this matter in its famous LusakaDeclaration of 14 June 1973, to which the distinguishedrepresentative of Zambia, AmbassadorLusaka, referred. The
Special Committee on decolonization has also taken a
similarpositionon this issue.1 referred to Mr. Lusakaasthe
represcntativcof Zambia,but IX is alsothe Presidentof the
Councilfor Namibia.
138. At the current sessionof the GeneralAssembly, the
Fourth Committeehasalsoadopteda drai’tresolutioncalling
for the termination of contacts between the SecretaryGcncral and the Government of South Africa. It is to be
hoped that this resolution will be confirmed in the plenary
meetingof the GeneralAsscmbly.7
139. This is therefore the position of the United Nations
and of the overwhelmingma.jority of its Member States.It
is, above all, the position of the people of Namibia
themselves,whose representativesin SWAP0 have frequently stated that the peopleof Namibia reject diplomatic
contacts,“dialogue” or negotiationswith the racists.
140. In this connexion there can be only one answerto
the questionposedby the Secretary-Generalin his report to
the Security Council on whether there is any sensein
continuing contacts with the Government of South
Africa-that answer is that the contacts and “dialogue”
with the racist rdgimcare incompatible. Such an approach
can only serve as a cover for the racistsand give rise to
entirely unfounded illusions on the part of world public
opinion and the StatesMembersof the United Nations.The
Secretary-General’scontacts with the racistsare of no use
whatsoever to the people of Namibia but are, in fact,
detrimental to their interests. The United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, cannot permit such an
unacceptably illusory situation to continue; it is not in
accord with the purposesand principlesof the Charter of
the United Nationsor with its decisions,andit contradicts
the elementaryprinciplesandnormsof justice.
141. It is the task and the duty of the Security Council to
take the most effective measures
possibleto compelSouth
Africa to submit to United Nations decisions,to ensurethe
realization by the people of Namibia of their inalienable
right to independenceand national self-determination,and
to ensurethat the territory of Namibiaceases
to be usedby

137. The Security Council, in consideringthe questionof
the “dialogue” between the United Nations and South
Africa, cannot disregardthe position and views of the

7 Subscqmltly
31 11 I (XXVIIl).

14

adopted by the General Assembly as muhtiun

the South African racist regime as a bridgehead for
hostilities and aggression against independent African countries.

al~nt. TIw young kvcluping counlrics alsu 11ccd
support. TIIC Sovici llnion providescstcnsivc
assistanceand suppc~ to 111sdcvcloping indcpcndcnt
countriesand nationalliberationn1ovemcnts
in Asia,Africa
and Latin America. The noble objectivesof support :m.l
expansionof assistance
to developingcountriesare served
also by the proposal-submittedby the Soviet Union and
adopted by the General Assembly as resolution
3093(XXVII&concerning the reductionof military budgetsof Statespermanentmcmbcrsof the Security Council
by 10 per cent and utilisation of part of the funds thus
savedto provideassistance
to developingcountries.
~C~CC

economic

142. In the statement issued by the World Peace Congress,
which was held in October of this year in Moscow, special
emphasis was laid, in the section dealing with national
liberation movements and the struggle against colonialism
and racism, upon the need to achieve the total isolation of
the colonialist, Fascist and racist rhgimes of Portugal, South
Africa and Rhodesia. That decision by the Congress is in
accord with the prevailing conditions in southern Africa.
The Security Council must take measures to compel the
racist regime of South Africa to implement the United
Nations decisions concerning Namibia.

146. The Soviet Union fully supports‘linitcd Nations
decisionson the provision of assistance
to the national
liberation struggleof the peoples,primarily the peoplesof
southern Africa and Namibia. The Soviet Union is a
member of the United Nations Council for Namibia. It
playsan active part in workingout constructivemeasures
to
ensureto the peopleof Namibiatheir inalienableright to
freedomandnationalindependence.

143. The Soviet Union has-as it will continue to dosteadfastly stood for the immediate liberation of the people
of Namibia from racist tyranny and for their selfdetermination and independence. The Soviet Union recognizes and supports the legality of the struggle by the people
of Namibia, with all means at their disposal, against the
South African occupiers and racists.

147. Firmly condemningthe policy of colonialism,racism
and apartheid, the Soviet Union hasno diplomatic,CCOnomic or other ties with the racist r&me of the Republic
of South Africa and favoursthe adoptionby the Security
Council of the firmest measures
to enablethe peopleof
Namibia to exercisetheir lawful and inalienableright to
freedomandnationalindependence.

144. The Soviet Union pursues an undeviating policy in
support of the liberation of all peoples from colonial
domination and the complete elimination of colonialism
and racism. This firm Leninist policy is reflected in the
Programme-approved at the twenty-fourth Congress of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union-for the struggle by
our Party and people on behalf of peace, international
co-operation and friendship among peoples.

148. The delegationof the Soviet Union supportsthe
draft resolutionsubmittedby Peru(S/lllSZ/ concerning
the discontinuanceof further contacts by the SecretaryGeneralwith the racistsof South Africa and will vote in
favour of that draft resolution.

145. In conformity with this anti-colonialist policy and
the policy of providing aid to the national liberation
struggle of the peoples, the Soviet Union also realizes that it
is not enough for young States to attain political indepen-

The meeting rose at 5.5.5 p.m.

15
