S/2017/567

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 30 June 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached communication, dated 29 June 2017,
which I received from the Director General of the Organisation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see annex). The letter transmits the note by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat on the report of the OPCW fact-finding mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic regarding an alleged incident in Khan Shaykhun in April
2017.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-11206 (E)

070717

*1711206*

S/2017/567

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you the note by the Technical Secretariat
entitled “Report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria regarding an alleged
incident in Khan Shaykhun, Syrian Arab Republic, April 2017” (see enclosure).
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

NOTE BY THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT
REPORT OF THE OPCW FACT-FINDING MISSION IN SYRIA
REGARDING AN ALLEGED INCIDENT
IN KHAN SHAYKHUN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
APRIL 2017
1.

On 4 April 2017 an incident was widely reported in the international press and social
media alleging an attack involving the use of a chemical weapon in the Khan Shaykhun
area of southern Idlib in the Syrian Arab Republic.

2.

On 13 April at the Fifty-Fourth Meeting of the Executive Council, the Director-General
informed the Council of the prompt action that had been undertaken by the OPCW Fact
Finding Mission (FFM) in analysing all available information on the basis of which this
was determined to be a credible allegation.

3.

On 12 May 2017, the Secretariat issued a note S/1497/2017 providing an update to the
States Parties on the activities of the FFM.

4.

The FFM continued its work involving interviews, evidence management and sample
acquisition.

5.

The following is the report of the FFM regarding the alleged incident in Khan
Shaykhun.

6.

Based on its work, the FFM is able to conclude that a large number of people, some of
whom died, were exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance. The release that caused this
exposure was most likely initiated at the site where there is now a crater in the road. It is
the conclusion of the FFM that such a release can only be determined as the use of sarin,
as a chemical weapon.

7.

As regards the question of an on-site visit by the FFM to the scene of the incident, it is
an area located outside the effective control of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic. It is to be noted that the use of sarin or a sarin-like substance is not
questioned. This is also evident from the position of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic which provided to the FFM its own information and materials as evidence.
Since the mandate of the FFM is confined to establishing only the fact of the use of
chemical weapons, the security risks associated with a deployment to Khan Shaykhun
far outweighed any additional corroboration of the facts that have already been
established. The Director-General has therefore decided that the FFM will not undertake
an on-site visit to Khan Shaykhun.

17-11206

3/80

S/2017/567

REPORT OF THE OPCW FACT-FINDING MISSION IN SYRIA
REGARDING AN ALLEGED INCIDENT
IN KHAN SHAYKHUN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
APRIL 2017
1.

SUMMARY

1.1

The Fact-Finding Mission (hereinafter “FFM”) conducted a preliminary assessment of
all available information immediately after reports of the incident in Khan Shaykhun,
which, at the time of the incident, was not under the control of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, surfaced in the media on 4 April 2017. The nature and extent of
the information available provided a credible basis for investigation, which resulted in
the FFM being mandated to gather facts regarding this incident of alleged use of toxic
chemicals as a weapon.

1.2

The FFM was led by and predominantly comprised of inspectors from the Technical
Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”), and was supported by various other divisions
and branches within the Secretariat. Interpreters were embedded in the team and were
critical to the effective functioning of the mission.

1.3

With support as indicated above, the FFM made preparations to deploy. An advanced
team departed within 24 hours of being alerted to the incident, with the main team
departing 24 hours later to a neighbouring country, where casualties had been
transported.

1.4

The conclusions were derived from analysis of biomedical specimens, interviews, and
supplementary material submitted during the interview process. Additional data came
from analysis of environmental samples.
Evidence was cross-referenced and
subsequently corroborated.

1.5

Whilst unable to visit the location shortly after the incident, the rapid deployment
enabled the team to attend autopsies, collect biomedical specimens from casualties and
fatalities, interview a wide variety of witnesses, and receive environmental samples.

1.6

The team received limited information on the dispersal mechanism and, therefore, was
unable to make firm conclusions on that specific matter. However, the biomedical
specimens, of which the FFM had full custody, provided incontrovertible evidence that
people were exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

1.7

The team concluded that a large number of people, some of whom died, were exposed to
sarin. The release that caused exposure was likely to have been initiated in the crater in
the road, located close to the silos in the northern part of the town. The team concluded
that, based on such a release, the only determination that could be made was that sarin
had been used as a weapon.

4/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

2.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

2.1

The FFM was set up “to establish facts surrounding allegations of the use of toxic
chemicals, reportedly chlorine, for hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic” on the
basis of the Director-General’s authority under the Chemical Weapons Convention
(hereinafter “Convention”) to seek to uphold at all times the object and purpose of the
Convention, as reinforced by the relevant decisions of the OPCW Executive Council and
the United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013).

2.2

The Terms of Reference of the FFM were mutually agreed upon by the OPCW and the
Syrian Arab Republic through the exchange of letters between the OPCW DirectorGeneral and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, dated 1 and 10 May 2014,
respectively (Annex to the Note by the Technical Secretariat S/1255/2015, dated 10
March 2015).

2.3

The continuation of the FFM was subsequently endorsed by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “Council”) in decision EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February 2015, as recalled
by United Nations Security Council resolution 2209 (2015), and subsequently decision
EC-M-50/DEC.1, dated 23 November 2015. Both of these Council decisions and
resolution 2209 (2015) require the FFM to study all available information relating to
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, including that provided by the
Syrian Arab Republic as well as by others.

2.4

The OPCW FFM is also referred to in the United Nations Security Council resolution
2235 (2015) establishing the OPCW-UN Joint Investigative Mechanism (hereinafter
“JIM”) and the United Nations Security Council resolution 2319 (2016) extending the
mandate of the JIM by one more year.

2.5

The scope of the Fact-Finding Mission’s mandate does not include the task of attributing
responsibility for the alleged use 1.

1

Fifth preambular paragraph of EC-M-48/DEC.1; sixth preambular paragraph of EC-M-50/DEC.1; eighth
preambular paragraph of the United Nations Security Council resolution 2235 (2015).

17-11206

5/80

S/2017/567

3.

METHODOLOGY
Methodological considerations

3.1

The three principles serving as the foundation in developing the team’s methodology
were:
(a)

ensuring a validated methodology for the acquisition and analysis of evidence to
the fullest extent possible under mission conditions;

(b)

ensuring that the personnel conducting the investigation have the appropriate skill
set and experience; and

(c)

ensuring the implementation of appropriate chain of custody procedures for
evidence collection.

3.2

Access to physical evidence, electronic evidence, witnesses, and documentation, in
addition to the time lag between the allegation and access, differs from allegation to
allegation. The FFM applied the same overarching methodology to all allegations,
whilst recognising that the differing circumstances of each allegation assign lesser or
greater relevance to the various components of the detailed methodology.

3.3

Accordingly, the FFM reviewed and compared the methodology in S/1318/2015
(including Rev.1 and Rev.1/Add.1), S/1319/2015, S/1320/2015, S/1444/2016, and
S/1491/2017 to ensure consistent application of investigative methodology with respect
to previous allegations.

3.4

Similarly, subsequent conclusions and detailed methodology related to this allegation
were compared to previous allegations (referenced in paragraph 3.3 above) to ensure
that report outputs are consistent.
METHODOLOGY FOR THE ACQUISITION AND ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE

3.5

Throughout its work, the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria complied with the
current OPCW guidelines and procedures for the conduct of an investigation of alleged
use (hereinafter “IAU”) of chemical weapons (Annex 1).

3.6

The FFM also adhered to the most stringent protocols available, using both objective
criteria and standard questionnaires for such an investigation, as included in procedures
listed in Annex 1. As these questionnaires were specifically designed for IAUs, slight
adaptations were occasionally required. The authority permitting such flexibility to
make adaptations is expressly provided for in the OPCW procedures. Additionally, any
adaptations were minor and were carried out in consultation with the Office of the Legal
Adviser and the Office of the Director-General.

3.7

The prioritisation of evidence was based on relevance in accordance with the guidance
provided in the OPCW procedures, and re-evaluated according to the degree of
separation in the chain of custody between the source and receipt by the team. Types of

6/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

evidence were then defined as primary, secondary, or tertiary, in descending order of
value.
3.8

Principal methods for collecting and evaluating the credibility of information included,
inter alia, the following: research into incidents and existing reports; assessment and
corroboration of background information; conduct of interviews with relevant medical
care providers, with alleged casualties, and other individuals linked to the reported
incident; review of documentation and records provided by interviewees; assessment of
the symptoms of victims as reported by interviewees; and collection of biomedical
specimens and environmental samples for subsequent analysis.

3.9

As mentioned above, in accordance with the OPCW procedures, as applicable, the FFM
categorised evidence as primary, secondary and tertiary. The ascribed values took into
consideration corroboration between interviewee testimonies, open-source research,
documents and other records, and the characteristics of the samples provided. No
metadata forensic analysis was carried out on the electronic records provided by the
witnesses.

3.10

During the short preparatory phase, the team engaged in open-source research
concerning the allegations (Annex 2). The majority of sources included news media,
blogs, and the websites of various non-governmental organisations (NGOs). The team
managed contact with the casualties and other interviewees through various NGOs and
States Parties.
Access to relevant geographic locations

3.11

During an investigation, complete, direct, and immediate access to the alleged initiation
site provides the greatest opportunity to collect high value evidence. Considering
various constraints, such as available time and security concerns, the FFM based its
decisions on whether or not to conduct on-site visits, including interviews, on four main
factors:
(a)

scientific and probative value of an on-site visit;

(b)

a risk assessment of conducting visits in the midst of ongoing armed conflict;

(c)

determination of whether casualties and/or witnesses had been able to cross the
national borders for treatment and were willing to meet the FFM team; and

(d)

determination of whether permission to visit the site, including the issuance of
visas, could have been granted in time to allow immediate access.

3.12

Ideally, potential interviewees would be identified by one of two means: the first
through identifying witnesses at the alleged impact site by the investigation team, and
the second through the identification of potential interviewees as possible leads by other
sources deemed to be reliable by virtue of proximity.

3.13

Owing to such factors as security concerns in the region of the alleged incident, the time
frame of events—whereby no permission was in place when the team initially deployed,

17-11206

7/80

S/2017/567

which would have provided the best circumstances for evidence retrieval—and some
casualties and other witnesses had been transferred to a neighbouring State Party, it was
determined that the risk of a visit to the incident area would be prohibitive for the team.
Therefore, the team could not visit the site shortly after the allegation to observe, assess,
or record the location of the alleged incident, could not canvass directly for other
witnesses, and could not collect environmental samples and/or remnants of the alleged
munitions.
3.14

Furthermore, the scientific and probative value of visiting the site diminishes over time,
particularly if it is not possible to manage access to the site. Hence, the evidentiary
value of samples taken close to the time of the allegation, supported by photographic
and video evidence and in association with witness testimony, needs to be balanced
against the evidentiary value of the FFM visiting the site some time later to collect its
own samples.

3.15

However, the presence of casualties for treatment in a neighbouring country provided
potential for interviews, the collection of biomedical samples, and access to medical
records.
Attendance at Autopsies

3.16

Whilst the advanced team was en route to a neighbouring country, the FFM was
informed that autopsies were to be carried out on three alleged victims. Attendance at
autopsies provided potential for collection of biomedical specimens, access to autopsy
records, and identification of the cause(s) of death.
Selection of interviewees

3.17

Through liaison with representatives of several NGOs, including Same Justice/Chemical
Violations Documentation Centre Syria (CVDCS), the Syrian Civil Defence (also
known as White Helmets, and hereinafter “SCD”), the Syrian American Medical Society
(SAMS), and the Syrian Institute for Justice (SIJ), the FFM identified a number of
witnesses to be interviewed. These witnesses were expected to provide testimony and
potentially relevant evidence.

3.18

The FFM sought a variety of witnesses of different age ranges to cover various aspects,
including: the site of the alleged incident; the location, rescue, condition, transport, and
treatment of casualties; and the acquisition of samples.

3.19

Liaison continued with the NGOs and official representatives of a neighbouring State
Party. The ultimate purpose of the liaison was to coordinate logistics and movements,
identify casualties and witnesses—including their location—and arrange for relevant
authorisations. These discussions were initiated shortly after the team became aware of
the allegation and continued throughout the process.

3.20

Furthermore, two people were presented as interviewees by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

8/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

3.21

Potential interviewees were in several locations, either in Syria, or in hospitals in a
neighbouring country, or elsewhere in a neighbouring country. Different logistical
requirements and authorisations were required, depending on their location and
depending on whether taking biomedical specimens was also feasible.
Interview process: overview

3.22

The FFM made every effort to respect cultural and religious values and norms, national
customs, and the personal pressures and traumas associated with exposure to toxic
chemical(s), in addition to the health condition of casualties.

3.23

In conducting the interviews, full consideration was given to the privacy and protection
of participants. All information was kept confidential, and the identities of casualties
and witnesses were protected at all times. An identity number was assigned to each
interviewee and only this number was used to process data. The master list with the
names of the witnesses was kept secure by the FFM.

3.24

Interview methods were based on the free recall technique, tailored with follow -up
questions relevant to this investigation and adapted from standard operating procedures
(QDOC/INS/WI/IAU05).

3.25

With the exception of one interview that was held in English without interpretation, all
interviews were held in English with Arabic interpretation.

3.26

To the extent possible, given the circumstances of the individual interview and
interviewee, each interviewee was given an overview of the interview process. A
consent form for each interview was prepared using the personal details of the
interviewees and their identification papers. This was followed by the signing of the
consent form. Many interviewees expressed concern that their personal details, coupled
with the information they were providing, would be disseminated outside of the OPCW
without their knowledge, and concerns about the potential impact that would have on
their security. All interviewees were assured that they would remain anonymous.
Interview process: hospitals

3.27

Facilities that provide medical treatment have, for reporting purposes, been generically
referred to as medical facilities. These include established major hospitals, smaller
specialist hospitals, field hospitals, and basic medical centres that offer little more than
first aid.

3.28

Due to concerns raised by some of the witnesses, medical facilities—aside from those
mentioned specifically herein—are not individually identified in this report. For ease of
reporting, they have been given individual codes.

3.29

Those codes were used by the team during the mission. However, not all hospitals are
included in the reporting phase, therefore the codes are not necessarily sequential in
section 5 of this report.

17-11206

9/80

S/2017/567

3.30

To the extent feasible, witnesses were given an explanation of the team’s mandate,
background and process, including, among other things, confidentiality aspects and
consent.

3.31

The team did not perform any interviews in public areas and was unable to perform
interviews with those who were unconscious or barely conscious. As such, only one
interview was possible, at the time, with hospital-based casualties. That particular
interview continued for as long as permitted by the patient’s condition at the time of the
interview.

3.32

Given that only one interview was possible at the time, the team selected two of those
patients and interviewed them after they were discharged and after the results of the
biomedical specimens were known. The delayed interviews enabled a more thorough
interview than had been possible in the hospital and ensured that interviews were
performed with those who had tested positive for exposure.

3.33

The team conducted an interview with a treating physician at a hospital who received
patients involved in this allegation in Syria. This was carried out in private at the
hospital.

3.34

The team obtained consent for both interviews (with one doctor and one patient) that
were carried out at hospitals.
Interview process: elsewhere

3.35

For other witnesses who could be interviewed at locations other than hospitals,
including witnesses interviewed after their discharge from hospital, a suitable location
(city and precise location within the city) for the safe, accessible, and comfortable
conduct of interviews was chosen.

3.36

Most interviewees were transported in small groups, either with the support of NGOs or
a State Party, to the city where the interviews were to be conducted. Interviewees were
individually transported to the precise interview location, where they were met by the
interview team.

3.37

At the beginning of individual interviews, each interviewee was given an overview of
the team’s mandate, background and process, confidentiality aspects and consent. Once
the process was mutually agreed between the interview team and each interviewee, the
recording devices were switched on. Both audio-visual and audio-only recording were
used. Consent forms were signed after switching on the recording devices.

3.38

The initial portion of the recorded interview followed a standard procedure of an
introduction of everyone present in the room, an explanation of the aims of the
interview, and confirmation of consent. Subsequently, the interviewees delivered their
statements on the incident(s). With a view to obtaining a full account of what was
witnessed and experienced by the interviewees, follow-up questions were posed by the
interview team, including a review of regional maps for identification of key locations,
when possible. All review processes that used a computer were recorded on video

10/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

and/or audio. Furthermore, any additional evidence provided by the interview ees was
reviewed, including, but not limited to documents, photographs, and videos. The
testimonies and evidence were secured.
3.39

When circumstances dictated the need to do so, the FFM formed two interview teams
that conducted concurrent interviews in two separate rooms. Each interview team set
out to elicit maximum information from a range of perspectives. In order to do so,
interview teams were comprised of cross-functional skill sets.

3.40

After every interview, the FFM held a debriefing session where the findings were shared
within the team. All data and documents collected were secured at the end of each day.
Epidemiological methodology

3.41

Epidemiological determination of cause and effect was established according to the
following criteria:
(a)

there must be a biologically plausible link between exposure and outcome;

(b)

there must be a temporal relationship between exposure and outcome; and

(c)

there must not be any likely alternative explanation for the symptoms.

3.42

An epidemiological investigation includes: a review of all the documentation related to
an alleged incident; an epidemiological description of the incident; interviews with
presenting witnesses, health-care workers, and first responders; first-hand interviews
with survivors; and on-site assessments of symptoms and signs, including assessments
of the clinical severity of their syndromes. Further information regarding the treatment
and outcomes of persons exposed should be retrieved from medical files relating to the
time of incident and from interviews with the treating clinicians. The epidemiological
investigation should yield information about the scale of each event and provide
contextual and geographical information that should subsequently be cross-checked and
corroborated by the environmental sampling teams.

3.43

However, as mentioned previously, the FFM was not able to physically visit the
locations of the alleged incident, and, therefore, did not have the opportunity to:

17-11206

(a)

assess the geography of the location of the alleged incident;

(b)

visit the hospitals and clinics where the casualties were initially treated;

(c)

gain direct access to records, including patient registers, medical files, treatment
records, radiographs, laboratory reports, from those previous treatment facilities;
and

(d)

conduct on-site collection of testimonies and clinical examination.

11/80

S/2017/567

3.44

The FFM could nevertheless rely on clinical examinations at the hospitals in which the
casualties were located at the time of the team’s deployment, and had direct access to
records that were brought to interview by witnesses.

3.45

The epidemiological investigation was therefore focused on collecting testimonies from
casualties and from those providing medical care at that time, together with collecting
and examining any relevant documentary evidence that they might offer.
Sampling and analytical procedures for environmental samples

3.46

Typically, samples from an incident would be collected by the investigating team
immediately after the incident, using approved procedures and equipment, including full
documentation of the chain of custody of the samples. As noted earlier, the team was
constrained due to the inability to access the site of the alleged incident and the amount
of time that had passed between the alleged incident and receipt of samples by the team
(depending on the source, between 1 week and 2 months after the incident). As a result,
the team was unable to:
(a)

assess the geography and conditions of the location of the alleged incident;

(b)

directly select sampling points and items;

(c)

conduct on-site collection of samples; and

(d)

implement a complete chain of custody, by the team, for samples from source.

3.47

In the absence of direct sampling at the location by the team, the FFM requested th at
any samples and sampling procedures provided by other parties be supported as much as
possible by photographs, video footage, and witness testimony.

3.48

The samples were transported to the OPCW Laboratory, where most were split by
laboratory personnel and sent to two designated laboratories for analysis. A few of the
samples were difficult to split and were, therefore, sent only to one of the two
designated laboratories.

3.49

Given the unknown nature of other possible innumerable toxic chemicals (such as
volatility, vapour density, prevalence of naturally occurring markers, or degradation
products and rates), any selection of samples from those offered to the team and the
subsequent analyses of such samples required careful consideration. With such a broad
range of unknowns, the team considered and accepted a broad array of sample types,
with the intention of subjecting them to an equally broad array of analyses.

3.50

The FFM used OPCW designated laboratories for the analysis of the samples received.
Designated laboratories (DLs) carry out the analysis of authentic off-site samples in
accordance with the relevant decisions taken by the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (hereinafter “the Convention”).

3.51

The exception to this was in relation to samples provided by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Prior to handover to the FFM, those samples were analysed by

12/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in Barzah. The FFM was also
provided with an analytical report compiled by the SSRC in Barzah. Subsequently,
those samples were also analysed by the OPCW Laboratory prior to being sent to
OPCW DLs.
Biomedical specimens
3.52

Specimens from autopsies carried out in a neighbouring country were taken by forensic
laboratory staff with their equipment in the presence of the FFM team and remained in
the FFM’s custody until transfer to the OPCW Laboratory personnel. The specimens
were handled in accordance with recommendations from the OPCW Laboratory for
storage of such specimens. Those storage conditions were also applied during transport.
No further manipulation or procedures were carried out on the specimens by the team
and they were transferred to the OPCW Laboratory.

3.53

Specimens taken from patients in a neighbouring country were taken using equipment
and vials provided by the FFM team. Blood samples were taken from ten patients and
urine samples taken from five of those ten.

3.54

Specimens were also received from doctors who treated patients inside Syria and
collected biomedical samples. Those samples included blood, urine, hair, and
secretions.

3.55

Specimens were received from Idlib Health Directorate (as part of the medical system in
place in Idlib, not controlled by the government). Those specimens included blood,
urine, and hair.

3.56

Blood was separated in-country into plasma and cells, and then divided into separate
aliquots from each individual, depending on the quantity of blood provided. All
biomedical specimens were transported to the OPCW Laboratory. The urine and blood
samples were repackaged and transported to two laboratories designated for the analysis
of authentic biomedical samples (S/1402/2016).
Analysis of initiation event

3.57

As with other evidence, visits to the site of an alleged incident and collection of
evidence at the site would have provided the most valuable input, particularly if the
collection could have been done very close to the time of the alleged incident.

3.58

Further means of validation would ideally be provided by comparing observations from
interviewees against the expected behaviour of a known device or theoretical design.
Given the uncertainty around the volume of the chemical and how it might behave under
unknown energetic and mechanical dispersion conditions, it would not be possible to
compare the theoretical dispersion of chemicals and fragments to that described by
interviewees and shown in photographs and videos.

3.59

Exploitation of the site by other parties also adversely impacted the FFM’s ability to
receive a broader range of evidence from the site and build a picture of the alleged
method of dispersion.

17-11206

13/80

S/2017/567

PERSONNEL SELECTION, SKILL SETS, AND TRAINING
3.60

Team members were selected based on their specific skill sets across a broad range of
mission requirements. The skill sets included knowledge and expertise in the following
fields:
(a)

analytical chemistry;

(b)

biomedical analysis;

(c)

medical/health, including epidemiology and first response;

(d)

organic chemistry, including chemistry of scheduled chemicals;

(e)

interview and negotiation;

(f)

toxic chemicals;

(g)

munitions and delivery systems; and

(h)

non-routine mission experience, including previous experience with fact-finding
missions and other missions to the Syrian Arab Republic.

3.61

Equipment needs were identified and equipment was sourced while movements and
logistics were arranged. Expert advice and consultation was also coordinated with
resources from the Secretariat, particularly with regard to health and safety, security
matters, and the legal aspects of the process.

3.62

The above preparations ensured that sample receipt, interviews, and all other evidence
collection were performed by fully trained and qualified inspectors.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY, EVIDENCE COLLECTION AND HANDLING

3.63

The FFM collected evidence in the form of witness interviews and statements (taken as
audio and/or video recordings) and documents, photos, and/or videos handed over by
witnesses. The team additionally received environmental and biomedical specimens
collected by witnesses, first responders, medical staff, and/or other individuals linked to
the reported incident.

3.64

The FFM witnessed the collection of all biomedical specimens taken in the
neighbouring country and took immediate custody. Generally, unless otherwise
specified, samples included biological and/or biomedical specimens.

3.65

The following procedures aimed at ensuring the chain of custody from the moment of
receipt were applied during the mission:
(a)

14/80

All witness statements and interviews were video and/or audio recorded and the
recordings were documented as evidence.

17-11206

S/2017/567

(b)

All electronic files or paper documents handed over by interviewees were
registered in the evidence logbook.

(c)

In order not to alter the metadata of the files, electronic data storage devices were
viewed either directly or via a universal serial bus (USB) bridge, and secure digital
ultra-small flash memory cards were locked prior to viewing.

(d)

Files on original electronic storage devices were copied to provide best evidence,
and working copies were made so as not to compromise original information
during data handling.

(e)

The receipt, packaging, and sealing of the samples provided were supported by
photographs and appropriate paper documentation.

(f)

The received samples were in the possession of at least one team member and
under OPCW seal from the time of receipt until arrival at the FFM on-site office.

(g)

At the FFM on-site office, samples were fully documented, packaged and sealed so
that the packaging was appropriate for safe transport.

(h)

The integrity of the samples was ensured through their physical possession by an
FFM member and/or through tamper-proof seals.

(i)

All seals and accompanying documentation were confirmed as correct and intact
prior to the issuance of handover and takeover receipts.

3.66

Most of the samples delivered to the FFM were supported by witness testimony and
accompanied by documents, including photographs and video.
Although the
documentation and testimony, in most cases, provided a good degree of confidence in
the chain of custody prior to receipt by the FFM, the entire chain of custody could not
be categorically verified. Such samples included biomedical samples that were not
collected in the presence of team members, environmental samples, and dead creatures
(referred to biological-environmental samples).

3.67

The FFM followed procedures to ensure a strict chain of custody from the time of
receipt through delivery to the OPCW Laboratory in Rijswijk, the Netherlands, by the
procedures described above. Additionally, similar stringent measures were applied
when transferring the samples to selected DLs, where activities were conducted using
standardised procedures (including quality assurance and quality control checks) for
receiving, storing, preparing, and analysing samples.
The results were then
communicated to the FFM team for review. Each transfer of material was accompanied
by documentation of the transfer.

17-11206

15/80

S/2017/567

4.

DEPLOYMENT DETAILS AND CHRONOLOGY

4.1

The table in Annex 3 indicates the significant timelines for the deployment of the FFM,
interview of witnesses, and collection of samples.
Initiation

4.2

Immediately after reports of the incident in Khan Shaykhun surfaced in the media on 4
April 2017, the FFM commenced collection and review of all relevant information.
Those reports, including posts on social media, presented a situation of a potentially
large number of casualties resulting from possible exposure to a toxic substance.

4.3

A preliminary assessment was undertaken and, in view of the gravity of the reports, the
Director-General of the Secretariat of the OPCW instructed that all FFM resources be
mobilised to analyse the incident. Given that the nature and extent of the information
available qualified the incident as a credible account of a possible use of a toxic
chemical, an initial FFM team was able to deploy in less than 24 hours.

4.4

Active monitoring of the media by the Information Cell and by the FFM continued.
That allowed the FFM to map the site of the reported incident and to identify potential
interviewees and possible evidence. Through reports and information from States
Parties, the Secretariat was made aware of a number of casualties having been taken, or
having made their way, to a neighbouring country.
Deployment activities

4.5

As the FFM was already engaged in analysing a number of recently reported incidents
on the alleged use of chemicals as weapons, it had access to lines of communication
with parties who had knowledge of and connections to the area in question. Those
contacts were used to identify quickly the initial casualties from this incident.

4.6

Furthermore, the team deployed with the equipment necessary to cover all aspects of the
mission, including an environmental sample collection kit, a biomedical specimen
collection and transport kit, communications equipment, interview equipment, and
personal protective equipment (PPE), including PPE for handling toxic material.

4.7

Rapid mobilisation was crucial in the first instance in allowing FFM team members to
attend the autopsies of three victims on Wednesday, 5 April 2017, and to witness the
extraction of biomedical specimens from the bodies. The team requested autopsy
records to verify the cause of death. The Secretariat received the autopsy reports in the
original language on 12 May 2017.

4.8

On Saturday 8 April 2017, the FFM team visited three hospitals, whilst there was still a
high potential to interview patients and collect relevant biomedical specimens and
associated testimony.

4.9

Despite this rapid deployment, many patients had been discharged from medical
facilities before the FFM was able to meet them. However, the team was still able to
witness the collection of biomedical specimens from ten casualties (blood samples from

16/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

10, and urine samples from five), and was able to meet with casualties from the alleged
incident. At the time of the visit to the hospitals, the team interviewed one of those
casualties and one treating physician. The blood from seven of the 10 patients tested
positive for exposure. The team selected two further patients from those seven, located
them, and interviewed them on 31 May and 1 June 2017.
4.10

Biological-environmental specimens (two dead birds and hair from a dead goat) were
received by the FFM team on 12 and 13 April 2017. The FFM had been advised that
those animals had been close to the incident site. Anatomical parts and internal organs
were removed from the birds and taken by the team.

4.11

Environmental samples, such as clothing, soil from the crater of the suspected impact
point, and soil from locations close to the suspected impact point were received by the
team on 13 April 2017.

4.12

In addition to the biomedical specimens, collected in the presence of the FFM, further
biomedical specimens were collected at medical facilities in Syria by medical personnel
operating in the opposition-controlled area. Those specimens were passed to the FFM
team on 12 and 14 April 2017.

4.13

At the time of handover, the team was informed that all samples were taken by NGOs.
That information was corroborated by the testimony from other witnesses interviewed
by the FFM. A representative of an NGO was also interviewed and provided
photographs and videos from the site of the alleged incident.

4.14

Amongst the casualties were four first responders reported as showing signs of
exposure. The FFM interviewed one of them and witnessed the collection of a blood
sample by a nurse.

4.15

The team deployed twice to Damascus to collect information from the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic, perform interviews, collect physical evidence, and explore
possibilities for a potential visit to Khan Shaykhun.

4.16

The FFM visited the SSRC in Barzah on 18 June 2017 and received additional
environmental samples and metal fragments.

4.17

As at Thursday, 22 June 2017, the FFM had interviewed 34 witnesses (29 male, five
female), received 415 photos, six audio files and 178 videos during interviews, in
addition to 30 environmental samples, 48 biomedical samples, 699 pages of records
(including autopsies, medical records, death certificates and other patient information),
10 parts from three biological-environmental specimens, 12 electronic documents
(including MS Word, MS Excel, PDF, and txt formats) and two CDs containing videos.

17-11206

17/80

S/2017/567

5.

INCIDENT SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

5.1

Khan Shaykhun is a town in the sub-district of the Maarrat al-Nu'man District, within
the Idlib Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is located approximately 35 km
north of Hama City and 60 km south of Idlib City.

5.2

Prior to the conflict (based on figures from the 2004 census), the population of the town
and the surrounding district was approximately 50,000 people.

5.3

In April 2017, at the time of the allegation, the town was not under government control.

5.4

Between 8 April and 22 June 2017, inclusive, the FFM interviewed 34 people in person,
including patients, doctors, nurses, first responders, and other witnesses.
Topography and weather

5.5

The following figures show the area of Khan Shaykhun and the area related to the
allegation.
FIGURE 1:

18/80

RELATIVE LOCATION OF KHAN SHAYKHUN IN NORTH
WESTERN SYRIA

17-11206

S/2017/567

FIGURE 2: KHAN SHAYKHUN

5.6

No meteorological data was available for Khan Shaykhun, therefore weather conditions
were estimated by reviewing historical data from www.worldweatheronline.com and
www.wunderground.com in Hama City, Idlib City and Latakia. The following figure
shows the wind directions over time in these three locations on the morning of 4 April
2017.
FIGURE 3: VARIATION OF WIND DIRECTION AND WINDSPEED ON
4 APRIL 2017

17-11206

19/80

S/2017/567

5.7

Based on that data, the wind speed was low but with no certainty of wind direction. The
team estimated the likelihood that the wind was coming from somewhere between the
South and the East, but could not be certain.

5.8

The following figure depicts the topography in and around Khan Shaykhun. It was
designed with Global Mapper (Geographic Information System software) and provides a
three dimensional indication of the terrain features in the area. The blue boxed area
marks the Khan Shaykhun bakery, for reference.
FIGURE 4: THREE-DIMENSIONAL DEPICTION OF THE TOPOGRAPHY IN
AND AROUND KHAN SHAYKHUN

5.9

The narratives in the following section include witness testimony in relation to the
weather and topography.
Narrative

5.10

The narrative in this section relates to Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. It is derived
solely from interviews and, where possible, is corroborated with different interviewees.
As such, the narrative has been formed neither from information in open sources, nor
from information that may have been supplied by States Party. A different narrative was
given by witnesses identified by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. Due to
the inability to interview more of such witnesses, it was not possible to corroborate this
narrative. The narrative is, however, included for completeness.

5.11

At the time of the allegation, the town comprised people, including families, who
originated from the town, and internally displaced people from other parts of Syria.

5.12

At approximately 06:30, alerts were issued via hand-held radios reporting that military
jets had departed an airfield and were heading in the general direction of Khan
Shaykhun, amongst other areas. At that time, many residents were at home, either in

20/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

bed or preparing to go to work. The weather was sunny, with a clear sky and no
discernible wind.
5.13

A broad description of the topography showed a small downward incline to the south
and west from the initiation point.

5.14

Shortly afterwards, there was a swooping sound, as made by a jet when it attacks, but
without a subsequent loud explosive sound.

5.15

One witness went on to his balcony after hearing the noise of the jet and observed a boy
(approximately 12 years old) in the road, coming from the direction of the bakery and
grain silos. The witness recognised the boy as someone who regularly sells fuel from
the roadside near the bakery. He saw the boy fall down and left his house to help the
boy. Whilst providing assistance to the boy, the witness was warned of an attack by a
jet, via a radio, and took cover.

5.16

That attack resulted in several explosions in a residential area to the west of grain silos
in the northern part of Khan Shaykhun.

5.17

Upon hearing the explosion(s), other residents left their homes to help neighbours who
may have been injured in the attack.

5.18

Upon arrival at the site, first responders belonging to the SCD found, in addition to a
small number of casualties exhibiting trauma type injuries, many civilians who appeared
to have no external injuries. The symptoms of those exhibiting no external injuries, as
described at that stage by non-medical personnel, included “people who were walking
and then fell down”, suffocation, and muscle spasms.

5.19

Members of the SCD and other civilians attempted to rescue casualties and transport
them to the medical centre in Khan Shaykhun, (coded as MF-F) either by ambulance or
by private vehicle.

5.20

An ambulance departed the site driven by a first responder. Five casualties were also in
the ambulance, one of whom was another first responder. The driver had reported
feeling drowsy shortly after departing the site. The ambulance, with casualties still
inside, was found approximately two hours later, close to the site. The ambulance driver
and the other first responder, who was in the ambulance, regained consciousness later in
Medical Facility D (MF-D) having been rescued themselves.

5.21

A number of casualties were initially transferred to MF-F. The local headquarters of the
SCD were also located in the vicinity of the medical centre. Once it became apparent to
the staff of the hospital and to the SCD that they were dealing with a potential chemical
incident, patients were washed with water by the fire crew of the SCD upon arrival.

5.22

Given the limited health care capability at MF-F, patients were transferred to several
different medical facilities in the region, either passing through MF-F or going directly
to other facilities. Admittance to medical facilities and possible subsequent transfer
were made on the basis of whether the receiving or potential receiving medical facilities
had the capacity and capability to deal with such casualties.

17-11206

21/80

S/2017/567

5.23

Initially, no patients were transferred to Al Ma’arra National Hospital, which was the
main hospital in the region, as it was taken out of service a few days earlier. It is
unclear whether or not this facility opened later in the day on a limited basis to support
the treatment of casualties.

5.24

Several patients, particularly those needing a higher level of care according to the
assessment of Syrian doctors, were further transferred to a neighbouring country for
treatment in medical facilities there.

5.25

Interviewees reported cases of exposure due to cross contamination, such that 10
members of the SCD presented mild to moderate symptoms and about five medical staff
from medical facilities presented similar symptoms.

5.26

Several interviewees reported their relocation away from Khan Shaykhun following the
allegation.
Interviews conducted in Damascus

5.27

The narrative collected from two interviews conducted in Damascus over the period of
21 – 22 June 2017 differs. One interviewee stated that “members of” … an armed
opposition group… “had evicted tenants from a house in Khan Shaykhun, replacing
them with new tenants and the house was used for the storage of weapons, munitions
and barrels some two months prior to the incident on 4 April 2017”. That house
appeared to have been damaged at some time during the incident on 4 April 2017.

5.28

The other interviewee recalled that at around 07:00 on 4 April 2017, he was woken by
the sound of an explosion and observed a cloud above a building which he described as
a “chemical warehouse”. Approaching the location of the cloud he felt dizzy, and
feeling unwell, he went back to his house to rest while his condition improved. Two to
three hours later, on hearing ambulance sirens, he left his house to witness casualties
being decontaminated and treated by first responders wearing respiratory protection. He
recalled that the roads were blocked and only ambulances “from a neighbouring
country” and water tankers were allowed inside the affected area. The casualties, some
of whom appeared unresponsive with shallow breathing, were transported to Al Rahma
field hospital in Khan Shaykhun.

5.29

Both interviewees informed the interview team that there was an established early
warning system that used hand-held radios to pass warning messages in case of aircraft
overflights so that townspeople could take cover. However, on the morning of the
incident they reported that no such warnings were received until around 11:00 to 11:30
and no aircraft were observed until that time
Impact points and location of casualties

5.30

The following figure shows an aerial view of Khan Shaykhun, the impact point of the
alleged chemical munition (point 1) and three other impact points reported at around the
same time (point 2, point 3, and point 4). All of those (figures 5 to 7) were derived from
the interviews.

22/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.31

17-11206

The team noted that a fifth impact point was reported to the south of the built up area,
but was outside of the city and not included below.

23/80

S/2017/567

FIGURE 5: NORTHERN KHAN SHAYKHUN INDICATION IMPACT POINT 1,
DERIVED FROM INTERVIEWS AND RECEIVED EVIDENCE

FIGURE 6: AERIAL VIEW OF KHAN SHAYKHUN SHOWING IMPACT
POINTS DERIVED FROM INTERVIEWS AND RECEIVED
EVIDENCE

24/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.32

The following figure shows an aerial view of Khan Shaykhun, the initial impact point
(see above), and the area (yellow shading) where casualties originated.
FIGURE 7: AERIAL VIEW OF KHAN SHAYKHUN SHOWING THE INITIAL
IMPACT POINT AND ORIGIN OF CASUALTIES, AS DERIVED
FROM INTERVIEWS AND RECEIVED EVIDENCE

Information, evidence and testimony related to autopsies
5.33

The FFM was informed that three people who had been transferred to a neighbouring
country from Khan Shaykhun had died, and that the FFM could attend their autopsies.

5.34

A two-member team attended autopsies of the three victims. They observed the
autopsies and witnessed the collection, by pathology staff, of biomedical specimens
(comprising brain, hair, liver, lung, and haemolysed blood) from the three fatalities.
The team noted that the bodies were intact and, aside from one victim having been
intubated, showed no signs of traumatic injury and had no broken bones.

5.35

On 8 April 2017, those specimens were transported to the OPCW Laboratory. Upon
receipt at the OPCW Laboratory, specimens were split in accordance with OPCW
procedures and subsequently transferred to two laboratories designated for the analysis
of authentic biomedical samples.

5.36

The Secretariat received the autopsy reports from a neighbouring country in the original
language, on 12 May 2017. The FFM received the translated versions of the autopsy
reports on 9 June 2017. The contents of autopsy records are summarised in the
following paragraphs.

17-11206

25/80

S/2017/567

5.37

The aforementioned three individuals had been transferred from Syria to either hospital
MF-A or MF-C in a neighbouring country. All three were pronounced dead on 5 April
2017, and an initial examination was carried out for all three fatalities.

5.38

Based on the initial findings, in all three cases it was recommended that “a classic
autopsy has to be performed in order to determine the exact cause of death and for this
classic autopsy the body has to be sent to” a forensic department in another city in a
neighbouring country.

5.39

The reports, inter alia, gave details of both internal and external examinations in
addition to the results of toxicological analysis.

5.40

The final conclusion of all three autopsy reports confirmed that, on the basis of the
forensic examinations, autopsy findings, and laboratory results, the cause of death was
due to exposure to toxic gas.
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility A

5.41

The team visited Medical Facility A (MF-A) on Saturday, 8 April 2017. MF-A is
located in a neighbouring country and received casualties related to the attacks in Khan
Shaykhun that occurred on 4 April 2017. On arrival at MF-A, the team was informed
that all patients who had been admitted with symptoms of chemical poisoning had been
discharged the previous day.

5.42

The team interviewed a doctor who had been involved in the treatment of the patients.
The following is an account from the doctor.

5.43

The doctor reported that the hospital admitted 38 injured that came from Syria. After
initial care, 18 were transferred to other hospitals. From the remaining 20 patients, all
but one (who continued vomiting for two more days) reported feeling better the
following day. All patients survived, were subsequently discharged, and returned to
Syria.
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility B

5.44

The team visited Medical Facility B (MF-B) on Saturday, 8 April 2017. MF-B is
located in a neighbouring country and received casualties related to the attacks in Khan
Shaykhun that occurred on 4 April 2017. On arrival at MF-B, the team was informed
that all but one of the remaining patients who had been admitted with symptoms of
chemical poisoning were in intensive care or were otherwise unable to be interviewed.

5.45

The FFM witnessed the collection of biomedical specimens by hospital staff from six
patients. Blood samples were collected from all six patients, and urine samples from
three.

5.46

Blood was separated in-country into plasma and cells, and then divided into three
aliquots from each person. The samples were received at the OPCW Laboratory on 12
April 2017. The urine samples, where sufficient quantity was available, were split into
three aliquots by the OPCW Laboratory, and the urine samples and blood samples were

26/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

repackaged and transported to two laboratories designated for the analysis of authentic
biomedical samples.
5.47

The team was able to conduct one short interview with a casualty. The testimony is
included in the earlier narrative. The interviewee further reported that after having been
involved in the rescue of casualties in Khan Shaykhun, he remembers going to a shelter,
before waking in his current location at MF-B.
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility C

5.48

The team visited Medical Facility C (MF-C) on Saturday, 8 May 2017. MF-C is located
in a neighbouring country and received casualties related to the attacks in Khan
Shaykhun that occurred on 4 April 2017. On arrival at MF-C, the team was informed
that all remaining patients who had been admitted with symptoms of chemical poisoning
were in intensive care or were otherwise unable to be interviewed.

5.49

The FFM witnessed the collection of biomedical specimens by hospital staff from four
patients. Blood samples were collected from all four patients, and urine samples from
two.

5.50

Blood was separated in-country into plasma and cells, and then divided into three
aliquots from each individual. The samples were received at the OPCW Laboratory on
12 April 2017. The urine samples, where sufficient quantity was available, were split
into three aliquots by the OPCW Laboratory, and the urine samples and blood samples
were repackaged and transported to two laboratories designated for the analysis of
authentic biomedical samples
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility D

5.51

The team interviewed two doctors who worked at Medical Facility D (MF-D), which is
a hospital located in Syria. The following is a summary of their testimony.

5.52

As reported to the team, 75 casualties and around 20 deceased individuals were
transported to MF-D. The signs and symptoms, including the severity of symptoms of
the 75 casualties on presentation, are depicted in the following figures.

5.53

The FFM notes that the determination of the severity of symptoms depends on the
determination made by the particular doctor and/or hospital, and is not necessarily
comparable to the determination made by others.

17-11206

27/80

S/2017/567

FIGURE 8: SEVERITY
OF
PRESENTATION

SYMPTOMS

FOR

CASUALTIES,

ON

FIGURE 9: SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF CASUALTIES

28/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.54

The medical treatment given to the casualties is shown in the following figure.
FIGURE 10: MEDICAL TREATMENT GIVEN TO CASUALTIES

5.55

The following figure shows the discharge time of patients after arrival at MF-D
FIGURE 11: DISCHARGE TIME FROM TIME OF ARRIVAL AT MF-D

5.56

Specimens of blood, urine, secretions, and hair were provided from casualties treated by
this hospital.
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility E

5.57

17-11206

The team interviewed one doctor who worked at Medical Facility E (MF-E).
following is a summary of his testimony.

The

29/80

S/2017/567

5.58

As reported to the team, 20 casualties were received by MF-E. The signs and
symptoms, including the severity of symptoms of the 20 casualties on presentation, are
depicted in the following figures.
FIGURE 12: SEVERITY
OF
PRESENTATION

SYMPTOMS

FOR

CASUALTIES,

ON

FIGURE 13: MEDICAL SYMPTOMS OF CASUALTIES

30/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.59

The treatment given to the casualties is shown in the following figure.
FIGURE 14: MEDICAL TREATMENT GIVEN TO CASUALTIES

5.60

No biomedical specimens were provided from this medical facility.
Information, evidence and testimony related to Medical Facility H

5.61

The team interviewed one doctor who was on duty at Medical Facility H (MF-H) when
casualties started to arrive. The following is a summary of his testimony. The doctor
did not have details or records of casualties related to the whole medical facility, aside
from the number of deceased, and described the casualties who he personally attended
to.

5.62

He initially received six casualties: three women, two children, and one man. The three
women were dead on arrival. One child and the adult man recovered. The outcome of
the other child is unknown.

5.63

Although he did not recall the precise number of exposed patients, he reported that
about 40 – 60 cases were admitted to the hospital; of that number, 18 died in the first
hour, and six died during the second hour.

5.64

All patients received intravenous cannulation, hydrocortisone, atropine, and oxygen.
Approximately three needed diazepam and 16 received orotracheal intubation.

17-11206

31/80

S/2017/567

Analysis of the incident of 4 April 2017
5.65

A total of 34 interviews were completed between 8 April and 22 June 2017. The details
of these interviewees are provided in the table below.

TABLE 1: INTERVIEWEE DETAILS
Interviewee

Male

Female

Primary
casualty

Secondary
casualty

Treating physicians

5

5

0

0

1

Nurse

6

5

1

First responders

8

8

0

2

4

Witness

14

10

4

5

3

Sampler

1

1

0

0

0

Total

34

29

5

7

10

2

Analysis of medical signs and symptoms
5.66

In general terms, symptoms vary according to time of exposure, purity and type of
chemical agent, and route of exposure.

5.67

With respect to the alleged incident in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017, the main route
of exposure was likely inhalation (see Annex 5), the duration of exposure in relation to
the involvement is varied, and the onset of symptoms varied among different people.

5.68

People who were in close proximity to the dispersion point presented earlier, severe, and
sudden symptoms, including rapid death. Others presented delayed, generally milder,
symptoms.

5.69

Common symptoms recorded by casualties, rescuers or medical staff, either as witnesses
or in medical records were: confusion, muscular weakness, chest tightness, dizziness,
headache, vomit, shortness of breath, blurred vision, pinpoint pupils, convulsions or
muscular spasms, profuse sweating, eye burning, and suffocation. Some casualties
reported frequent urination and a state of agitation.

5.70

The onset of symptoms in relation to the incident varied from immediate to delayed by a
few hours, depending on the distance from the dispersion point and the duration of
exposure. Some of the casualties included medical staff and ambulance drivers, who
were not present at the site.

32/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Onset in relation to the allegation
5.71

The symptoms presented, their duration, and response to medications are consistent with
acetylcholinesterase inhibition. This is corroborated by a laboratory analysis of the
blood, urine, and specimens collected from the victims and casualties, which confirmed
the presence of sarin or a sarin-like substance.
Analysis of medical records

5.72

The team collected a number of patient records, death certificates, and other medical
documents from medical facilities throughout northern Syria, collected from medical
NGOs, the Idlib Health Directorate (IHD), and the Khan Shaykhun Medical Centre.

5.73

Variations in the procedures used by different medical staff and hospitals for the
collection and categorisation of patient information and medical records resulted in
variations in the reporting of patient information, such as, for example, the priority
assigned to the severity of patient presentation.

5.74

Different medics at different hospitals also provided treatment according to personal
experience and availability of medicines.

5.75

The team reviewed all available records relating to those who had died and noted that
several people were duplicated in other records. The team removed all the duplicates,
leaving approximately 10 where it was unclear whether they were duplicates or just
similarly named people.

5.76

Conversely, the team did not cross check the records where they related to casualties.
Therefore, there is a significant likelihood of duplication of names from different
sources.
Cumulative summary of medical records collected by the IHD and other medical
facilities in Syria

5.77

17-11206

The following figures summarise data from records supplied by the IHD. The numbers
of those exposed also include fatalities. As indicated above, the likelihood that some
patients registered in Khan Shaykhun were also referred to one or more different
hospitals due to the permanence of symptoms and may have therefore been recorded
twice, cannot be excluded.

33/80

S/2017/567

FIGURE 15: NUMBER OF THOSE EXPOSED, ACCORDING TO AGE RANGE

FIGURE 16: NUMBER OF FATALITIES, ACCORDING TO AGE RANGE

34/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

FIGURE 17: NUMBER OF FATALITIES, ACCORDING TO GENDER

FIGURE 18: SYMPTOMS REPORTED IN RELATION TO CASUALTIES

17-11206

35/80

S/2017/567

FIGURE 19: MEDICAL TREATMENT GIVEN TO CASUALTIES

Summary of medical records collected by Khan Shaykhun Medical Centre
5.78

Given its location as the closest medical facility to the alleged incident, in addition to
the fact that it dealt with the first cases of exposure and that many of the fatalities were
temporarily located in a building nearby this medical centre, the statistics recorded for
this location are reported separately.

5.79

The following figures summarise the data registered by Khan Shaykhun Medical Centre.
The numbers of those exposed also include fatalities. There is some overlap of people
between those identified in the records from Khan Shaykhun Medical Centre and those
from other medical facilities in Idlib Governorate.

36/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

FIGURE 20: NUMBER OF THOSE EXPOSED, ACCORDING TO AGE RANGE

FIGURE 21: NUMBER OF FATALITIES, ACCORDING TO AGE RANGE

17-11206

37/80

S/2017/567

FIGURE 22: NUMBER OF FATALITIES, ACCORDING TO GENDER

FIGURE 23: MEDICAL TREATMENT GIVEN TO CASUALTIES

5.80

A total number of 107 fatalities were reported. The FFM noted that there were some
potential duplicate names and therefore estimated the number of fatalities as
approximately 100 people.

38/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Report of biomedical specimens
5.81

Biomedical specimens were analysed at two DLs. Results from the analyses from each
laboratory were in agreement.

5.82

Table 2 summarises the results from the analyses of specimens taken at autopsies and
demonstrate that biomedical specimens from all three fatalities indicate exposure to
sarin or a sarin-like substance.

17-11206

39/80

Blood

No

Person
Reference

1.

683

683/Blood

2.

684

684/Blood

3.

685

685/Blood

Sample
Reference

Analysis
Results
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance

Brain
Sample
Reference
683/Brain

684/Brain

685/Brain

Analysis
Results
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance

Hair
Sample
Reference
683/Hair

684/Hair

685/Hair

Liver
Analysis
Results

Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Negative for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance

Sample
Reference
683/Liver

684/Liver

685/Liver

Analysis
Results
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance

Lung
Sample
Reference
683/Lung

684/Lung

685/Lung

Analysis
Results
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance
Positive for
sarin or sarinlike substance

S/2017/567

40/80

TABLE 2: AUTOPSY RESULTS

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.83

Table 3 summarises results from samples collected, where the collection of samples was
witnessed by FFM team members. Samples from the first 10 people were taken in
hospitals located in a neighbouring country on 8 April 2017. The sample from the
eleventh person (reference number 1385) was taken on 1 May 2017, based on
information supplied during the interview of reference number 1385 and records
supplied by the IHD. Further details regarding person reference 1385 are provided later
in this report.

5.84

Indication of N/A (not applicable) in the ‘Sample Reference’ column indicates that
either no sample was possible, or the team chose not to take the sample.

TABLE 3: BIOMEDICAL RESULTS FROM SAMPLES, WHERE THE SAMPLING
WAS WITNESSED BY THE FFM TEAM

No

Person
Reference

1.

Blood

Urine

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

1321**

1321/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

N/A

N/A

2.

1355

1355/P

Nothing detected

1355/U

Nothing detected

3.

1305

1305/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

N/A

N/A

4.

1304*

1304/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

N/A

N/A

5.

1353

1353/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

N/A

N/A

6.

1356**

1356/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

1356/U

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

7.

1302

1302/P

Nothing detected

N/A

N/A

8.

1354

1354/P

Nothing detected

1354/U

Nothing detected

9.

1320

1320/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

1320/U

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

10.

1358

1358/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

1358/U

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

11.

1385***

1385/P

Positive for sarin or sarin-like
substance

N/A

N/A

* Interviewed in hospital
** Interviewed at a later date
*** Interviewed by team, prior to taking blood sample

17-11206

41/80

S/2017/567

5.85

Of the blood samples taken from eleven individuals, eight tested positive for exposure
to sarin or a sarin-like substance. Similarly, of urine samples taken from five
individuals, three tested positive for exposure to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

5.86

At the time samples were taken, the team noted that one of the ten casualties from the
samples taken in hospitals appeared to have trauma-related injuries and further noted
that his blood and urine tested negative for sarin or sarin-like substances. Seven of the
remaining nine blood samples and three of the remaining four urine samples tested
positive for sarin or a sarin-like substance or related metabolites.
Results from biomedical specimens taken in Syria

5.87

Table 4 summarises results from specimens taken, where the taking of specimens was
not witnessed by FFM team members. Samples numbered 1 to 7 in Table 4 were taken
by medical staff under the auspice of the IHD; samples numbered 8 to 14 in Table 4
were taken under the auspice of SAMS. These were handed over to the FFM together
with supporting documentation.

42/80

17-11206

17-11206

TABLE 4: BIOMEDICAL RESULTS FROM SAMPLES, WHERE SAMPLING WAS NOT WITNESSED BY THE
FFM TEAM
Person
No
Reference

Blood
Sample
Reference

Analysis
Results

1351A1

Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance

1

1351A

2

1351B

3

1351C

4

1351D

5

1351E

6

1351F

7

1351G

8

131803

131803

9

131806

131806

10

131809

131809

1351A2
1351B1
1351B2
1351C1
1351C2
1351D1
1351D2
1351E1
1351E2
1351F1
1351F2
1351G1
1351G2

Urine

Hair

Secretion

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

1351A3

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

1351A4

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate*

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

1351C3

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

1351D3

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

1351F3

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

1351G3

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

1351G4

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

131801

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131802

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

131804

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131805

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

N/A

N/A

131807

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131808

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate
S/2017/567

43/80

Person
Reference

11

131815

131814

12

131821

131820

13

131826

131825

14

131830

131830

Sample
Reference

Analysis
Results
Negative for
sarin or sarin-like
substance
Negative for
sarin or sarin-like
substance
Negative for
sarin or sarin-like
substance
Positive for sarin
or sarin-like
substance

*Trace level: less than 1 ng/g
** Trace level: less than 1 ng/ml

Urine

Hair

Secretion

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

Sample
Reference

Analysis Results

131813

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131811

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131812

Nothing detected

131816

Nothing detected

131818

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131817

Nothing detected

131827

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131823

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131824

Nothing detected

N/A

N/A

131829

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate

131828

Isopropyl
methylphosphonate**

S/2017/567

44/80

Blood

No

17-11206

S/2017/567

5.88

Blood from 11 of the 14 samples tested positive for sarin or a sarin-like substance.
Those positive results were in part corroborated by other biomedical samples from the
same person.

5.89

The team noted that the blood of person reference numbers 131814, 131820, and
131825 tested negative for sarin or sarin-like substances, yet other biomedical
specimens from the same people tested positive for isopropyl methylphosphonate.

5.90

The team further noted that the name associated with person reference number 1351B
(Table 4) had the same name as witness number 1385 (Table 3). On the basis of these
same names, the team asked witness 1385 if he would be willing to give the team a
blood sample in order to confirm whether he was the same person and whether his
blood, taken under full custody of the FFM team, confirmed exposure to sarin or a sarin like substance. Those specimens, for the purpose of reporting, had been assigned
identity code D1.

5.91

Similarly, the team noted that the name associated with person reference number 131806
(Table 4) had the same name as person reference number 1320 (Table 3). Having
already received analysis results for both these samples that were positive for sarin or a
sarin-like substance, the FFM identified value in confirming whether those two samples
did indeed relate to the same person. Those samples, for the purpose of reporting, had
been assigned identity code D2.
Tracking casualties

5.92

The FFM requested DNA analysis of the blood samples from person reference numbers
1351B (D1), 1385 (D1), 131806 (D2), and 1320 (D2). Table 5 shows the results of
those analyses.

TABLE 5: BIOMEDICAL RESULTS FROM SAMPLES, WHERE SAMPLING WAS
NOT WITNESSED BY THE FFM TEAM
No

Sample
Reference

Samples
taken under
custody of:

1.

1385B

FFM

2.

1351B

IHD

3.

131806

SAMS

4.

1320B

FFM

Identity
code

Blood
Analysis Results

The random
match probability

D1

Samples 1385B (from person 1385)
and 1351B originate from the same
individual*

< 1x10 9

D2

Samples 131806 and 1320B (from
person 1320) originate from the
same individual*

< 1x10 9

*An exception to this conclusion where all samples are from males is identical twin brothers. Identical twins
have matching short tandem repeat (STR) DNA profiles. Therefore, STR DNA analysis cannot discriminate
between individuals who are identical twins.

5.93

17-11206

Based on comparison of DNA analysis of a blood sample taken under the custody of the
IHD and a blood sample taken under the custody of the FFM, both of whom were
identified with the same name, the FFM confirms that both samples are from the same
person.
45/80

S/2017/567

5.94

Based on comparison of DNA analysis of a blood sample taken under the custody of
SAMS and a blood sample taken under the custody of the FFM, both of whom were
identified with the same name, the FFM confirms that both samples are from the same
person.

5.95

As indicated in the tables above showing biomedical results, those four samples also
tested positive for sarin or a sarin-like substance. Those results enabled the team to
assess the link between the site of the allegation, exposure, and witness testimony.
Furthermore, the results can be used to assess the credibility of samples taken under the
custody of others.

5.96

Amongst the video footage reviewed by the team, there were scenes in which one of the
deceased from the autopsy was also shown in the footage. The video footage was
handed over and reviewed during an interview, and the context of the footage was
described by the interviewee. The interviewee made no reference to the person from the
autopsy.

5.97

Autopsy records from the autopsies attended by the FFM indicate that these three people
were transferred from Syria to hospitals in a neighbouring country prior to their deaths
and subsequent autopsies. In addition, a review of the records from the IHD indicated
from the names that two of the fatalities from the three autopsies were initially
transferred from Syria to a neighbouring country for treatment.

5.98

Table 6 summarises all the blood samples taken from casualties, and indicates who had
custody of the samples, the results of sample analysis, and whether individuals were
interviewed. The DNA analysis is also included in the table.

46/80

17-11206

17-11206

TABLE 6: TRACKING SUMMARY OF BIOMEDICAL SAMPLES
Samples collected and analysis results, as determined by DLs
Sample
Reference
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

1355
1302
1354
1321
1304
1305
1353
1356
1358
1320
131806
131803
131809
131830
131815
131821
131826
1351A
1351C
1351D
1351E
1351F
1351G
1351B
1385

Additional
Analysis

Hospital (Witnessed
by FFM)

DNA matched

DNA matched

SAMS

IHD

Interview location
(Witnessed by
FFM)

Negative
Negative
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive

Interviewed

Yes
Yes

Yes

Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Inconclusive
Inconclusive
Inconclusive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive
Positive

Yes

Positive = Positive for sarin or sarin-like substance
Negative = negative for sarin or sarin-like substance
S/2017/567

47/80

S/2017/567

Environmental samples and other samples from the site
5.99

Environmental samples, two dead birds, and hair from a dead goat were received by the
FFM team on 12 and 13 April 2017. Anatomical parts and internal organs from the
birds were removed and taken by the team upon their receipt.

5.100 At the time of handover, the team was informed that all samples provided on 12 and 13
April 2017 were taken by the chemical sample unit of the SCD. A member of the
chemical sample unit who took the samples was present at the handover and provided
information on every sample. This information was supported by interviewing the same
person a few days later and with photographs handed over at an interview. This
information was corroborated by testimony from other witnesses.
5.101 Table 7 below shows the analysis results of scheduled chemicals and other chemicals of
interest according to the “Scope of Analysis env 3” L/VER/LAB/209626/17, dated 25
April 2017.
TABLE 7: ANALYSIS FROM DESIGNATED LABORATORIES
No

Sample
code

Description

Analysis Results
DL #1

DL #2

Samples from medical facility
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

10SDS
11SDS
12SDS
13SDS
14SDS

Clothes
Clothes
Clothes
Clothes
Clothes

n.d.
Hexamine (trace)
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

Samples from the impact point of the alleged munition and the surrounding area
Vegetation 10m from
IMPA, MPA, DIMP,
6.
15SDS
IMPA, DIMP
location
hexamine, DIPP
Sarin,
IMPA, MPA,
Sarin, IMPA, DIMP, DIMP, hexamine,
7.
17SLS
Soil from crater
DIPF,
hexamine, pyro
HFP, DIPP, TPP
8.

18SLS

Rock from location

Sarin, IMPA, DIMP,
hexamine

9.

19SLS

Soil 100m away

IMPA, DIMP

10.

20SLS

Soil 50m away

IMPA, DIMP

48/80

IMPA, MPA, DIMP,
hexamine, HFP, DIPF
(trace), DIPP
IMPA, MPA, DIMP,
DIPP
Sarin (trace), IMPA,
MPA, DIMP, DIPF
(trace), DIPP, TPP
(trace)

17-11206

S/2017/567

No

Sample
code

Description

Analysis Results
DL #1

DL #2

Specimens from dead animals found near the impact point
11.

16SDS

Goat hair, 20 – 30m
away

IMPA

12.

22SDS

Bird: feathers

IMPA, DIMP

13.

46SDS

Bird: feathers

14.

21SDS

Bird: wings

15.
16.
17.

23SDS
24SDS
25SDS

18.

46SDS

Bird: liver
Bird: heart
Bird: pectoral muscles
Bird: feathers and
wings

DIMP
Sarin, IMPA, DIMP,
hexamine, DIPF

19.

47SDS

Bird: brain

20.
21.

48SDS
49SDS

Bird: stomach
Bird: Heart

IMPA

IMPA (trace)
Sarin (trace), IMPA,
MPA, DIMP, hexamine,
DIPF (trace), DIPP
DIMP, hexamine (trace)
F- regen
F- regen
IMPA, DIMP, hexamine

GB-tyr; IMPA,
F- regen
IMPA, F- regen

F- regen

Key for this and subsequent table
DL
Designated laboratory
n.d.
No detection of relevant chemicals (as defined by the OPCW laboratory)
IMPA
Isopropyl methylphosphonate (first degradation product of sarin)
MPA
Methylphosphonic acid (degradation product of sarin and/or nerve agent
precursor and/or nerve agent by-product )
DIMP
Di-isopropyl methylphosphonate (by-product of sarin production)
Pyro
Di-isopropyl dimethylpyrophosphonate (by-product of sarin production)
DIPF
Di-isopropyl phosphorofluoridate (by-product of sarin precursor/sarin
production)
DIPP
Diisopropyl phosphate
HFP
Hexafluorophosphate
TPP
Tri-isopropyl phosphate (by-product of sarin precursor/sarin production)
F regen
Fluoride regeneration method: positive for sarin or sarin-like substance
GB-tyr
Tyrosine adduct of sarin or sarin-like substance
EIMP
Ethyl isopropyl methylphosphonate
Hexamine
Hexamethylentetramine
5.102 The FFM notes that the interviewees who collected the clothing (items 1 to 5 in Table 7),
collected it on the basis of its availability, rather than any views that it may be
contaminated.
5.103 Representatives of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic informed the FFM that
samples relating to the alleged incident in Khan Shaykhun were provided to them by an
unnamed volunteer from Khan Shaykhun. The FFM collected fractions of these samples
17-11206

49/80

S/2017/567

from the SSRC in Barzah on 18 June 2017. A video recording of the collection of the
samples was provided to the FFM. These environmental samples consist of soil,
fragments of metal, bone, and vegetation from different locations, as well as extraction
samples from these fragments.
5.104 An analysis of these samples was performed by the SSRC in Barzah, the results of those
analyses were provided to the FFM by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The OPCW Laboratory provided a fast screening of the samples before dispatching
them to DLs.
5.105 Table 8 below shows the results of analyses as performed by the SSRC in Barzah and by
the OPCW Laboratory on the samples provided by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
TABLE 8: ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES PROVIDED BY THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
No

Sample
code

Description

Analysis Results*
SSRC

OPCW Laboratory

Samples from the impact point of the alleged munition and the surrounding area
Sarin, DIMP,
Sarin, DIPF, DIMP,
1.
01SLS
Soil sample from crater
hexamine,
hexamine, pyro
Soil sample from crater
Sarin, DIMP,
Sarin, DIPF, DIMP,
2.
02SLS
adjacent to sample
hexamine,
TPP, pyro
01SDS

01SDS

Soil sample 75m north
of the silos
Soil sample taken from
Khaled Ibn Al Walid
Mosque
Soil sample taken near
the house
Soil sample 50m south
of the silos
Two metal objects from
crater

N/A, see 01BLS

8.

01BLS

DCM extract of 01SDS
made by SAR

DIMP, hexamine,

9.

10SLS

n.d.

10.

09SLS

11.

08SLS

12.

03SLS

13.

03SDS

14.

03BLS

Soil sample taken from
the house
Soil sample taken from
another Mosque
Soil sample from a
house
Soil sample taken 80m
away from crater
Three leaves from
different locations
DCM extract of 03SDS
made by SAR

3.

04SLS

4.

05SLS

5.

06SLS

6.

07SLS

7.

50/80

n.d.

n.d.

n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
Sarin, DIPF, DIMP,
TPP, hexamine, pyro
Sarin, DIPF, IMPA,
EIMP, DIMP, TPP,
hexamine, pyro

n.d.
n.d.
DIMP, hexamine,

DIMP

N/A
n.d.
17-11206

S/2017/567

No

Sample
code

Description

15.

02SDS

16.

02BLS

17.

11SLS

18.

12SLS

19.

04SDS

20.

01BLB

Bone of animal taken
from silos
DCM extract of 02SDS
made by SAR
Soil sample taken from
a house
Soil sample from
different locations
Sample from different
locations
DCM blank for
01-03BLS

Analysis Results*
SSRC

OPCW Laboratory

N/A
n.d
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

* For key, see under Table 7.
5.106 The FFM reviewed the analyses performed by the SSRC in Barzah and the OPCW
Laboratory on the same samples, as well as the analyses performed by the DLs on
samples received from the chemical sample unit of the SCD. These were all assessed as
being broadly consistent.
5.107 The FFM was unable to retrieve any parts that might relate to dispersion of a chemical.
However, the FFM was informed that remnants of a munition from the impact crater
(point 1 in Figure 5) have been secured and could be made available in the future.
Review of other sources of information
5.108 The FFM noted that open-source information that referred to a chemical incident
although there were several explanations as to the cause of the alleged chemical
incident, no open-source information (see Annex 2) denies any exposure to toxic
chemicals.
5.109 The Secretariat received several Notes Verbales from the Syrian Arab Republic referring
to Khan Shaykhun. None of these provided information of significant evidential value.
5.110 The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic provided the FFM with summaries of
written statements from three people. These were not included in the earlier narrative.
5.111 The FFM interviewed two of these three people. Their testimony is included in the
earlier narrative.
5.112 The other statement indicated that there were no warnings received on the radio, which
is normally the case in the event of an attack from the air. At approximately 07:00, he
heard three loud explosions and subsequently noted indications of a chemical attack.

17-11206

51/80

S/2017/567

Categorisation of evidence
5.113 The FFM considered the following as primary evidence: first hand testimony from
interviewees, and biomedical specimens that were collected in the presence of the team
and where chain of custody was maintained by the team.
5.114 The FFM considered the following as secondary evidence: documentation, photographs,
video and audio recordings provided by interviewees, and samples, including
environmental samples, biomedical specimens, and dead or affected creatures that were
collected by witnesses and supported by testimony, documents and photographs and/or
video.
5.115 The FFM considered the following as tertiary evidence and/or supporting information:
samples, of all types, where there is insufficient supporting evidence; testimonies
without additional corroboration; open source information; and information supplied by
States Parties.

52/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

6.

CONCLUSIONS

6.1

The methodology has been described earlier in this report. However, due to the ongoing
conflict, it was not possible for the site to be secured and the team was not able to visit
the site. The team therefore relied on: interviewees, who were either identified by other
entities or accessible in hospitals; samples (lacking full chain of custody by the team) as
made available by the interviewees; medical records; and biomedical specimens, both
those for which the team had full chain of custody and those taken by others.

6.2

Based on media report monitoring, the FFM was ready to mobilise within 24 hours of
reports appearing in the media. This capability was critical to being able to attend
autopsies before burial, and meet patients whilst there was still a high potential for
retrieving relevant biomedical specimens. Thus, specimens could be taken and bio
markers in specimens could still be detected before the body metabolised them.

6.3

The FFM was also able to interview witnesses whilst their recollection of events was
relatively fresh. Furthermore, the FFM highlights that it has interviewed a greater
number of witnesses than would typically be expected for this type of mission. This
relatively larger number has enhanced the corroborative value of different testimonies
and provided a means of cross-checking the evidence provided. This corroboration has,
therefore, imparted greater confidence in the earlier narrative and any resultant
conclusions.

6.4

The team was supplied with the reports from the three autopsies. They conclude that the
three fatalities were caused by exposure to sarin or a sarin-like substance. In addition to
the official reports, specimens were also taken from the corpses in the presence of the
team and were analysed by designated laboratories. The results demonstrated that these
specimens had been exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

6.5

When viewed in isolation, each individual piece of evidence relating to one autopsy
might not completely exclude the possibility of other explanations; however, the
combination of evidence and corroboration across all the autopsy related evidence
enabled the team to conclude that at least three people who had been transferred from
Syria to a neighbouring country shortly after the alleged incident in Khan Shaykhun
died as a result of exposure to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

6.6

Although the FFM was only able to interview one patient in hospital at the time the
biomedical specimens were collected, it was able to identify two additional patients and
interview them at a later date. Through their own testimonies, which were corroborated
by other witnesses, the team was able to place them at the site at the time of the alleged
incident.

6.7

Biomedical specimens from these three witnesses, in addition to a further four casualties
who were also in hospital at the time, tested positive for sarin or a sarin-like substance.
The team can confirm, therefore, with the utmost confidence that these seven people
were exposed to sarin or a sarin like substance.

17-11206

53/80

S/2017/567

6.8

The team received biomedical specimens from seven casualties which were taken under
the auspices of the Idlib Health Directorate (IHD). From these seven people, the team
identified one person as having the same name as an interviewee. The team took a
further blood sample from this person. Analysis of the DNA confirmed that the sample
provided by the IHD and the sample taken in the presence of the team were taken from
the same person. The sample taken in the presence of the team also tested positive for
sarin or a sarin-like substance. Therefore the team can confirm, also with utmost
confidence, that this person was exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

6.9

Having reviewed the results in conjunction with the results of the other six specimens,
medical records, and witness testimony, the team attached significant credibility to the
results obtained from the other six people. As such, the FFM confirms that these six
people were exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

6.10

The team received biomedical specimens from seven casualties that were collected
under the auspice of Syrian American Medical Society. As indicated in the body of the
report, the results for three people were inconclusive. The FFM therefore decided to
exclude these results as being positive indicators to exposure. Furthermore, due to the
extent of other evidence, the team decided that the inconclusive nature of these results
did not warrant further investigation with respect to reporting on whether or not
chemicals were used as weapons.

6.11

From these four people of the seven mentioned in the previous paragraph, whose
biomedical specimens had tested positive for sarin or a sarin-like substance, the team
identified one person as having the same name as a casualty from whom the team had
previously taken blood that had also tested positive. The DNA of these two samples
matched, thus when the analyses of the blood samples from the other three positive
samples are viewed in the context of the matching DNA, medical records, and witne ss
testimony, the team attached credibility to the results obtained from the other three
people. As such, the FFM confirms with a high level of confidence that these three
additional people were exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance.

6.12

The FFM neither intended nor attempted to interview and take biomedical specimens
from every casualty. Instead, the team obtained medical records from different sources
and interviewed casualties, first responders, doctors, nurses, and other witnesses. This
corroborated evidence demonstrates that a large number of people were exposed to an
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor.

6.13

In reviewing the records relating to those who died and those who were survivors, the
FFM was unable to determine exact numbers of fatalities and survivors. The FFM
attributed the lack of overarching detailed records to the ongoing conflict, the
unavailability of hospitals, strained resources, the large number of internally displaced
people, the broad range of supporting organisations (such as NGOs), and the
prioritisation of promoting recovery amongst survivors. Based on records and
testimony, the FFM identified approximately 100 fatalities and at least 200 other
casualties who had survived acute exposure.

54/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

6.14

Once it became apparent that medical facilities were dealing with a chemical incident,
particularly one related to an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, casualties were
decontaminated, as far as was practical, prior to admission to medical facilities.
However, due to the delay in recognising this need in conjunction with the varied ways
in which casualties were transported to hospitals and the general confusion on the day of
the alleged incident, it would be expected that medical staff would become casualties
themselves, due to secondary contamination. This secondary contamination was
confirmed by some of the interviewees who were not present at the site but displayed
symptoms of exposure.

6.15

In summary, the sudden high number of fatalities, the high number of people presenting
the same symptoms at the same moment, and the location and the absence of traumatic
injuries among the casualties all support the hypothesis of an incident involving a toxic
chemical dispersed in the environment.

6.16

As indicated earlier, the FFM did not retrieve its own samples from a controlled and
secured site. However, the analytical results from the samples received from all sources
are consistent, particularly once the variables around sampling are taken into account.

6.17

The analyses of the samples indicate not only the presence of sarin, but also other
chemicals including potential impurities and breakdown products related to sarin,
depending on the production route and the raw materials used.

6.18

By reviewing, in conjunction, the evidence relating to autopsy records, biomedical
specimens, hospital records, witness testimony, photographs and video supplied during
interviews, and environmental samples, the FFM concludes that a significant number of
people were exposed to sarin, of which a proportion died from that exposure.

6.19

Although, some witnesses advised that the release was due to a munition dropped from
an aircraft, the FFM was unable to retrieve any items from the site which would indicate
the means of dispersal of a chemical. After analysing photographs and video supplied by
witnesses, the FFM could not establish with a great degree of confidence the means of
deployment and dispersal of the chemical.

6.20

Witness testimony related to the site and ensuing events coupled to the analysis of
environmental samples from the crater lends credibility to the hypothesis that the sarin
release was initiated in the area of the impact point (as indicated in Figure 5).

6.21

The descending nature of the terrain from the initiation point and the distribution of the
casualties support the promulgation of a chemical denser than air, which followed the
slightly descending nature of the hill towards lower areas towards the West and South
West of the likely initiation location, and along a street descending from the hill in a
southerly direction.

6.22

When taken together, the number of casualties, the number of fatalities, the topography,
the identified chemical, the likely point of initiation and the likely weather conditions
all point to the deliberate release of a toxic chemical in sufficient quantity to cause
death, incapacitation, and harm to humans and animals.

17-11206

55/80

S/2017/567

6.23

The FFM emphasises that it has interviewed a greater number of witnesses than would
typically be expected for this type of mission. This relatively larger number has
enhanced the corroborative value of different testimonies and provided a means to
cross-check the evidence provided. This has therefore imparted greater confidence in
the narrative and any resultant conclusions.

6.24

This investigation demonstrated:

6.25

(a)

an unusual prior event;

(b)

a number of afflicted persons with a similar disease or syndrome presenting at
around the same time;

(c)

a number of cases of unexplained disease;

(d)

an illness occurring in an unusual setting within a community;

(e)

analyses of signs and symptoms; and

(f)

positive laboratory results.

Whilst the conditions for a safe visit to Khan Shaykhun were not met, the FFM
concludes that a large number of people, some of whom died, were exposed to sarin,
and that the release that caused the exposure was likely initiated from a release in the
vicinity of a crater in the road, located close to the silos in the northern part of the town.
It is the conclusion of the team that such a release can only be determined as the use of
the Schedule 1A(1) chemical sarin, as a chemical weapon.

Annexes (English only):
Annex 1:

Reference Documentation

Annex 2:

Open Sources

Annex 3:

Timelines

Annex 4:

Evidence Obtained by the FFM

Annex 5:

Characteristics of Nerve Agents and Sarin

56/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Annex 1
REFERENCE DOCUMENTATION

2

Document Reference

Full title of Document

1.

QDOC/INS/SOP/IAU01
(Issue 1, Revision 1)

Standard Operating Procedure for Evidence
Collection, Documentation, Chain-of-Custody and
Preservation during an Investigation of Alleged Use of
Chemical Weapons

2.

QDOC/INS/WI/IAU05
(Issue 1, Revision 2)

Work Instruction for Conducting Interviews during an
Investigation of Alleged Use

3.

QDOC/INS/SOP/IAU02
(Issue 1, Revision 0)

Standard Operating Procedure
Investigation of Alleged Use (IAU) Operations

4.

QDOC/INS/SOP/GG011
(Issue 1, Revision 0)

Standard Operating Procedure for Managing
Inspection Laptops and other Confidentiality Support
Materials

5.

QDOC/LAB/SOP/OSA2
(Issue 1, Revision 2)

Standard Operating Procedure for Off-Site Analysis of
Authentic Samples

6.

QDOC/LAB/WI/CS01
(Issue 1, Revision 2)

Work Instruction for Handling of Authentic Samples
from Inspection Sites and Packing Off-Site Samples at
the OPCW Laboratory

7.

QDOC/LAB/WI/OSA3
(Issue 2, Revision 1)

Work Instruction for Chain of Custody and
Documentation for OPCW Samples On-Site

8.

QDOC/LAB/WI/OSA4
(Issue 1, Revision 3) 2

Work Instruction for Packing of Off-Site Samples

9.

S/1402/2016

Status of the Laboratories Designated for the Analysis
of Authentic Biomedical Samples

10.

C-20/DEC.5

Designation of Laboratories for the Analysis of
Authentic Biomedical Samples and Guidelines for the
Conduct of Biomedical Proficiency Tests

Latest version: 13 February 2017

17-11206

57/80

S/2017/567

Annex 2
OPEN SOURCES
Open source internet links related to the Khan Shaykhun incident
 http://aa.com.tr/en/middle-east/turkey-sends-ambulances-to-syrias-idlib/788696
 http://thefreethoughtproject.com/chemical-weapons-attack-syria-white-helmets/
 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/breaking-news/livenews/54474561.cms
 http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-39488539
 http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-39500319
 http://www.cbsnews.com/news/syria-chemical-weapon-attack-autopsies-turkey-says-trump-

blames-assad-russia/
 http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/gas-attack-kills-18-syrias-idlib-observatory-1708105490
 http://www.syriahr.com/en/?p=64063
 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/04/04/syria-gas-attack-nine-children-among-least-35people-reported/?WT.mc_id=tmg_share_tw
 http://www.yenisafak.com/en/dunya/turkey-sends-ambulances-to-syrias-idlib-2638443
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2017_Khan_Shaykhun_chemical_attack
 https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=1889428304604063&id=1717062255174003
 https://m.kiblat.net/2017/04/05/ini-identitas-pilot-pembantai-warga-khan-shaikhoun-di-idlib/
 https://twitter.com/AbdulrhmanMasri/status/849147537495908352
 https://twitter.com/Acemal71/status/849250471827124224
 https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/849146624253329408
 https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/849147396101738496
 https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/849153755543195649
 https://twitter.com/Conflicts/status/849158537649565696
 https://twitter.com/DailySabah/status/849244431802871808
 https://twitter.com/DrShajulIslam
 https://twitter.com/DrShajulIslam/status/849184962419064832
 https://twitter.com/EuroMedHR/status/849192810284756993
 https://twitter.com/JakeGodin/status/849259284412203008
 https://twitter.com/kshaheen/status/850065642791284737
 https://twitter.com/markito0171/status/850052568097189889
 https://twitter.com/NorthernStork/status/849142790772621312
 https://twitter.com/shawncarrie/status/849253115564093440
 https://twitter.com/ShehabAgency/status/849187871940653056
 https://twitter.com/sterion75/status/849258695980613632
 https://twitter.com/Elizrael/status/849204305072709632
 https://www.enabbaladi.net/archives/140756
 https://www.enca.com/world/hollande-accuses-assad-of-chemical-weapons-massacre

58/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Open source internet links related to the Khan Shaykhun incident
 https://www.facebook.com/edlibEmc12/videos/1889428304604063/?autoplay_reason=all_page_

organic_allowed&video_container_type=4&video_creator_product_type=0&app_id=350685531
728&live_video_guests=0
 https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=1670550746579431&id=1489609321340
242
 https://www.qasioun.net/ar/news/show/59687/%D8%B9%D8%B4%D8%B1%D8%A7%D8%AA
_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%82%D8%AA%D9%84%D9%89_%D9%88%D8%A7%D9%84%D9
%85%D8%B5%D8%A7%D8%A8%D9%8A%D9%86_%D8%A5%D8%AB%D8%B1_%D8%B
A%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%A7%D8%AA_%D8%A8%D8%BA%D8%A7%D8%B2_%D8%B3
%D8%A7%D9%85_%D8%A7%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%87%D8%AF%D9%81%D8%AA_%D
8%AE%D8%A7%D9%86_%D8%B4%D9%8A%D8%AE%D9%88%D9%86_%D8%A8%D8%
B1%D9%8A%D9%81_%D8%A5%D8%AF%D9%84%D8%A8_%D8%B5%D9%88%D8%B1
 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/apr/04/syria-chemical-attack-idlib-province
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LbI1ATu-8UY
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZ3uJNMva5k
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QexHNA1bZD8
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rSooD8Owshc
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sinGDpQ27_I

17-11206

59/80

S/2017/567

Annex 3
TIMELINES
TABLE 1: MISSION RELATED TIMELINES
Date

Time
(CET)

Activities

0900

Fact Finding Mission (FFM) alerted to an alleged use of
chemicals as weapons in the Khan Shaykhun area of Idlib
Governorate. Open sources suggest the attack happened at
0530 CET.

1200

FFM inform Office of the Director General (ODG) that a team
is ready to deploy.

0800

An advance two-person team departs HQ. Whilst in transit,
the team was diverted to enable their attendance at three
autopsies.

2300

Advance team attends autopsies on three of the deceased and
continued to the Field Operating Base (FOB) the following
morning.
Biomedical samples collected from all three deceased people.

0730

A follow-up team of four people depart HQ and rendezvous
with the advance team at the FOB.

0730

Six-person team deploy in two vehicles, to three hospitals
located elsewhere in the neighbouring country.

0900 1830

First interviews performed. Biomedical samples taken from
10 patients.

1100

Sample team transport biomedical samples from autopsies
back to OPCW Laboratory.

0730

Receipt of biomedical and biological-environmental samples.

1100

Sample team transport biomedical samples from hospital
patients back to OPCW Laboratory.

Thursday
13 April

1100

Departure of sample transportation team.
Receipt of environmental and biological-environmental
samples.

Friday 14 April –
Friday
12 May

NA

Interviews. Note: several interviews were also carried out in
relation to other allegations.
Analysis and review of interviews.

Friday 14 April

NA

Receipt of biomedical samples.

Friday 14 April –
Thursday
20 April

NA

Preparation and packaging of samples for transport.

Tuesday
4 April

Wednesday
5 April

Thursday
6 April

Saturday
8 April

Wednesday
12 April

60/80

17-11206

S/2017/567

Date

Time
(CET)

Friday 21 April

1530

Activities
Return of samples plus return of one sub-team to HQ

Monday 10 April
–
Tuesday 25 April

Samples shipped to DL’s

Friday 12 May

Autopsy reports received by the Secretariat.

Wednesday
5 April – Friday
19 May

Reception of preliminary and final analytical results as per
table below

Wednesday
31 May –
Thursday 1 June

NA

Three additional interviews.

Friday 9 June

1030

Receipt of translated autopsy records.

Thursday 8 –
Saturday 10 June

Visit to Damascus and receipt of information from SAR

Saturday 1 –
Thursday
22 June

FFM in Damascus.

Sunday 18 June

Meeting with SAR authorities, review of videos, receipt of
documents, receipt of 20 samples from SSRC and report of
the laboratory analysis

Monday 19 June

Departure of sample transportation team.

Tuesday 20 June

Receipt of samples at OPCW laboratory.

Wednesday
21 June

OPCW Laboratory results received by FFM.

Wednesday
21 June –
Thursday
22 June

Two further interviews

17-11206

61/80

S/2017/567

TABLE 2: SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS RELATED TIMELINES
Source of
sample
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

Blood & tissue
from 3
autopsies
Blood from 10
patients, urine
from 5 patients
Bioenvironmental
samples
Environmental
samples
Biomedical
samples,
supplied from
Syrian medical
facilities in
Idlib
Additional
biomedical
sample
Samples
supplied by
SAR SSRC

Received
by FFM

Received
at
Shipped
OPCW
to DLs
Lab

Preliminary
results received
by OPCW Lab
DL 1
DL 2

Final Results
Received by
OPCW Lab
DL 1
DL 2

5 April

8 April

10 April

12 April 12 April

11 May

1 May

8 April

12 April

14 April

16 April 18 April 25 April

28 April

12 April
13 April

21 April

25 April

3 May

3 May

19 May

11 May

13 April

21 April

25 April

3 May

3 May

9 May

17 May

N/A

N/A

31 May

31 May

30 May

31 May

2 June

2 June

12 April
14 April

21 April

1 May

10 May

N/A

N/A

N/A

17 May

29 May

18 June

20 June

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

18 May

.

Note: samples received from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic have not yet
been analysed by DLs

62/80

17-11206

17-11206

Annex 4
EVIDENCE OBTAINED BY THE FFM
The Table 1 below summarises the list of physical evidence collected from various sources by the FFM. It is split into
electronic evidence stored in electronic media storage devices such as USB sticks and micro SD cards, hard copy evidence and
samples. Electronic files include audio-visual captions and still images. Hardcopy files consist of various documents including
autopsies, medical records, death certificates and other patients’ information. The table also shows the list of samples coll ected
from various sources including, biological samples comprising blood, urine, hair and secretion from patients, selected
anatomical parts of a bird, hair from a goat, environmental samples including rock and soil, and several clothing materials.
The subsequent Table 2 lists all the electronic files which are saved on the various storage devices.
TABLE 1: PHYSICAL EVIDENCE COLLECTED BY THE TEAM
Entry
Number

Evidence description

Evidence reference
number

Evidence source

Electronic and hard copy files and documents

63/80

Kingston 8GB USB Stick - Folders and files
Report of the event – 5 pages
Kingston 8GB USB Stick - Folders and files
Transcend 4 GB µSD Card - Folders and files
Transcend 4 GB µSD Card - Folders and files
Kingston 16GB SD Card - Folders and files
Mandate/authorisation – 2 pages
Patients’ transfer documents – 5 pages
Death certificates – 49 pages
Medical records – 238 pages
Transcend 16GB SD Card - Folders and files
Kingston 16GB SD Card - Folders and files
Medical records – 52 pages

20170414131837
20170414135903
20170410136103
20170508137403
20170510137503
20170510137703
20170510137703
20170510137703
20170510137703
20170510137703
20170430138403
20170510150403
20170510150403

Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1359
Handed over by 1361
Handed over by 1374
Handed over by 1375
Handed over by 1377
Handed over by 1377
Handed over by 1377
Handed over by 1377
Handed over by 1377
Handed over by 1384
Handed over by 1504
Handed over by 1504

S/2017/567

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Evidence description
Kingston 32GB µSD Card - Folders and files
Syrox 16GB USB Stick - Folders and files
Medical and sampling records – 14 pages
SanDisk 8GB USB Stick - Folders and files
Autopsy records (91 pages, including cover letter) and
photographs (198)
Google maps print outs – 5 pages
Drawing of affected area and google map printout – 2 page
Report titled “Preliminary information regarding an incident in
Khan Shaykhun on 04 April 2017”
Report titled “Medical remarks on the cases of injury in the
Khan Shaykhun incident of 04 April 2017”
CD containing videos titled “Study of the injuries of the Khan
Shaykhun incident of 04 April 2017”
Report of the laboratory analysis conducted in SSRC Barzah
GC-MC chromatograms, spectrums of compounds of the
samples
Lists of samples collected in Khan Shaykhun
Headlines of the testimonies from 3 witnesses
1 CD-ROM, containing videos of the sampling process in Khan
Shaykhun
1 CD-ROM, containing videos of “improvised” interviews

Evidence reference
number
20170510151903
20170510151903
201704121351A0
201704121351A0

Handed over by 1519
Handed over by 1519
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate

20170512103901

A State Party

201706211000903
201706221002203

FFM/029/17/6799/014

Handed over by 10009
Handed over by 10022
SAR National Authority
(NA)
SAR NA

FFM/029/17/6799/015

SAR NA

FFM/029/17/6898/029
FFM/029/17/6898/030

SAR NA
SAR NA

FFM/029/17/6898/031
FFM/029/17/6898/037
FFM/029/17/6898/038

SAR NA
SAR NA
SAR NA

FFM/029/17/6898/039

SAR NA

FFM/029/17/6799/013

Evidence source

S/2017/567

64/80

Entry
Number
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

17-11206

17-11206

Entry
Number

Evidence description

Evidence reference
number

Evidence source

20170412135121
20170412135122
20170412135123
20170412135124
201704121351A1
201704121351A2
201704121351A3
201704121351A4
201704121351B1
201704121351B2
201704121351C1
201704121351C2
201704121351C3
201704121351D1
201704121351D2
201704121351D3
201704121351E1
201704121351E2
201704121351F1
201704121351F2
201704121351F3
201704121351G1
201704121351G2
201704121351G3
201704121351G4

Syrian Civil Defence
Syrian Civil Defence
Syrian Civil Defence
Syrian Civil Defence
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate
Idlib Health Directorate

Samples
Bird: feathers and wings
Bird: brain
Bird: stomach
Bird: heart
Blood
Blood
Urine
Hair
Blood
Blood
Blood
Blood
Urine
Blood
Blood
Urine
Blood
Blood
Blood
Blood
Urine
Blood
Blood
Urine
Hair

S/2017/567

65/80

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Evidence description

17-11206

Vegetation 10m from location
Goat hair, 20-30m away. Deceased
Soil from crater
Rock from location
Soil 100m away
Soil 50m away
Bird: wings
Bird: feathers
Bird: liver
Bird: heart
Bird: pectoral muscles
Hair
Secretion
Blood
Hair
Secretion
Blood
Secretion
Hair
Blood
Hair
Secretion
Urine
Blood
Blood
Urine

Evidence reference
number
20170413135101
20170413135102
20170413135103
20170413135104
20170413135105
20170413135106
20170413135107
20170413135108
20170413135109
20170413135110
20170413135111
20170414131803
20170414131805
20170414131806
20170414131807
20170414131808
20170414131809
20170414131809
20170414131810
20170414131812
20170414131814
20170414131815
20170414131816
20170414131817
20170414131818
20170414131819

Evidence source
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Syria Civil Defence
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318

S/2017/567

66/80

Entry
Number
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

17-11206

Evidence description
Secretion
Hair
Blood
Blood
Hair
Secretion
Blood
Blood
Urine
Secretion
Hair
Blood
Clothes
Clothes
Clothes
Clothes
Clothes
01BLS (DMC extract of 01SDS made by SAR)
02BLS (DMC extract of 02SDS made by SAR
03BLS (DMC extract of 03SDS made by SAR
01BLB (DCM blank)
01SLS (Soil sample from crater)
02SLS (Soil sample from crater adjacent to sample 01SDS)
01SDS (Two metal object from crater)
03SLS (Soil sample taken 80 m away from crater)
02SDS (Bone of animal taken from silos)

Evidence reference
number
20170414131820
20170414131821
20170414131823
20170414131824
20170414131826
20170414131827
20170414131828
20170414131829
20170414131830
20170414131831
20170414131832
20170414131833
20170414131834
20170414131835
20170414131836
20170414131837
20170414131838
FFM/029/6898/023/001
FFM/029/6898/023/002
FFM/029/6898/023/003
FFM/029/6898/023/004
FFM/029/6898/023/005
FFM/029/6898/023/006
FFM/029/6898/023/007
FFM/029/6898/023/008
FFM/029/6898/023/009

Evidence source
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
Handed over by 1318
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR

67/80

S/2017/567

Entry
Number
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.

Evidence description
11SLS (Soil sample taken from a house)
08SLS (Soil from house)
09SLS (Soil sample taken from different Mosque)
07SLS (Soil sample 50 m south of the silos)
12SLS (Soil sample from different locations)
04SLS (Soil sample 75 m north from the crater)
05SLS (Soil sample taken near Khaled Ibn Al Walid Mosque)
06SLS (Soil sample taken near a house)
04SDS (Soil sample - stones- from different locations)
10SLS (Soil sample taken from a house)
03SDS (three leaves from different location)

Evidence reference
number
FFM/029/6898/023/018
FFM/029/6898/023/014
FFM/029/6898/023/015
FFM/029/6898/023/013
FFM/029/6898/023/019
FFM/029/6898/023/010
FFM/029/6898/023/011
FFM/029/6898/023/012
FFM/029/6898/023/020
FFM/029/6898/023/016
FFM/029/6898/023/017

Evidence source
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR
SAR

S/2017/567

68/80

Entry
Number
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.

17-11206

17-11206

TABLE 2: ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE COLLECTED BY THE TEAM
Interview
Number
1318

Folder Location
D:\1318\1318 Evidence

File Names
1
DSC_0119
2
DSC_0120
17671143_120332000155904974_508139108_n‫ثث‬
DSC_0121
17690904_120332000111908313_1132266858_n‫ثثث‬
DSC_0122
17690994_120332000111571701_1339978970_n888
DSC_0123
17741020_1904824299762620_875447645_n‫ثثث‬
DSC_0124
17757478_741319562710464_5362090686220065959_n66 DSC_0125
17757828_1904824489762601_557267391_n333
DSC_0129
17760385_120332000128014582_1565646408_n77
DSC_0130
17760730_120332000117519043_236479749_n77
‫سس‬
17793026_120332000143197102_136519629_n‫نن‬
MOV_0115
17793062_120332000110040457_1772714592_n‫نن‬
MOV_0126
17793159_1904824333095950_219894349_n‫سسسس‬
MOV_0127
17793474_1904824309762619_144043703_n‫ئئئ‬
MOV_0128
17796712_984705734999075_7019201702733650026_n555 MOV_0173
555
17806828_120332000107557486_696496462_n‫حح‬
MOV_0175
VID-2017040717806843_1904824456429271_45160440_n‫للل‬
WA0036
VID-2017040817806919_1904824439762606_33540955_n111
WA0012
VID-2017040817806951_120332000096115019_293728909_n‫ححح‬
WA0013
‫من‬
‫اسماء المصابين والشهداء‬
17814023_120332000146446444_1813014030_ncc
‫الكيماوي‬
DSC_0113
‫تقرير كمياوي‬
DSC_0114
‫صور لمجزرة الكيماوي‬
DSC_0116
‫طفلة أية دالل‬
‫مقاطع فيديو لمجزرة‬
DSC_0117
‫الكيماوي‬
DSC_0118
S/2017/567

69/80

‫استالم وحفظ العينات ‪6‬نيسان ‪2017‬‬
‫دم ‪ A1A2‬اسماعيل رسالن‬

‫‪ E1E2‬جثة مجهولة الهوية‬

‫‬ ‪ E1E2‬جثة مجهولة الهوية‬

‫دم وشعر ‪ G1G2G4‬زياد تالوي‬

‫دم ‪ D1D2‬شموس عواش‬

‫‪٢٠١٧٠٤٠٥_١٦٣٤٣١‬‬

‫بول ‪ A3‬عبد المجيد سفر‬

‫‪٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٥٤٢١٥‬‬

‫شعر ‪ A4‬عبد المجيد سفر‬

‫دم ‪ A1A2‬عبد المجيد سفر‬
‫دم ‪ C1C2‬ماريا مرعي‬

‫دم‪ F1F2F4‬هيفاء سويدان‬

‫‪٢٠١٧٠٤٠٦_١٢١٥٠٥‬‬

‫شهادة احد المسعفين‬

‫‪Detailed Report on Sampling.pdf‬‬
‫تقرير تفصيلي عن سحب العينات للكيماوي‬
‫)‪TOSHIBA (8GB‬‬
‫) أضابير المرضى (‪1‬‬

‫‪1359‬‬
‫‪1361‬‬

‫‪17-11206‬‬

‫‪S/2017/567‬‬

‫استالم وحفظ العينات ‪5‬نيسان ‪2017‬‬

‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫عينات\استالم العينات‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ B‬عينات\اسماعيل رسالن‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ E‬عينات\جثة مجهولة الهوية‬
‫‪Folder: D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ G‬عينات\زياد تالوي‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ D‬عينات\شموس عواش‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ A‬عينات\عبد المجيد سفر‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ C‬عينات\ماريا مرعي‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫فيديو \‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪ F‬عينات\هيفاء سويدان‬
‫‪D:\1351\1351‬‬
‫‪Evidence\From‬‬
‫‪Witness\Local Disk‬‬
‫‪D:\1359\1359 Evidence‬‬
‫‪D:\1361\Evidence1361\KI‬‬
‫‪NGSTON‬‬

‫‪70/80‬‬

‫‪File Names‬‬
‫نقل العينات الى باب الهوى‬

‫‪Folder Location‬‬

‫‪Interview‬‬
‫‪Number‬‬
‫‪1351‬‬

17-11206

Interview
Number

Folder Location

File Names

D:\1361\Evidence1361\KI ٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١١٤٥٣٠
NGSTON\‫ مصابين خان شيخون‬٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١١٤٣٤١
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١١٤٣٣٢
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٥٤٥٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٥٤٤٨
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٥٤٤٦
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٥٣١٩
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٤٩٤٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٤٩٣٩
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٤٨٤٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٤٢٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٤٠٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٣٥٩
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٣٥٢
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٣٥١

1374

D:\1374\1374
Evidence\SD\1374
evidence\1374 evidence
original\-‫ضحايا القصف‬
20170508T091502Z001\1374-evidence-01

00000000000000000
0000000000000000
00000000000000
00000000000
0000000000
00000000
0000000
000000
MVI_8199

00
Ï¦Ï¦Ï¦ÏºÏ¬ Ïº+ä+éÏ¬+ä+ë
+êÏ¡Ïº+äÏºÏ¬
ÏºÏ«Ï¬+åÏº+é Ï¿+éÏÁ+ü
Ï¿+Ç'Ï¦ÏºÏ¦ Ï¦Ïº+à' Ï¦+ä+ë
Ï«Ïº+å Ï¦+èÏ«+ê+å
Ï¿ÏÑÏ»+äÏ¿
Ï¦Ï¿Ï» Ïº+ä+âÏ¦+è+à
Ï¿Ï¦ÏºÏ¦
Ï«Ïº+äÏ»
IMG_8131
IMG_8139
Ïº+åÏ¦

71/80

S/2017/567

D:\1374\1374

٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٣٤٩
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٣٤٧
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٢٥١
+àÏÁÏºÏ¿+è+å

٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٢٤٥
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٢٣٧
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣٢٠٥
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٣١٥٦
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠١٨٣٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠١٨٢٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠١٨١٧
1( 1‫) ج‬
2( 1‫) ج‬
3( 1‫) ج‬
4( 1‫) ج‬
5( 1‫) ج‬
00052
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٠٥١٣٦
‫اسماء المصابين الذين تم‬
‫عالجهم في مشفى سرمين‬
‫اسماء المصابين‬
‫تقرير استقبال حاالت االختناق‬

Folder Location
Evidence\SD\1374
evidence\1374 evidence
original\-‫شهادة‬
20170508T092329Z001\1374-evidence-02
D:\1374\1374
Evidence\SD\1374
evidence\1374 evidence
original\1 ‫ملف‬

S/2017/567

72/80

Interview
Number

File Names

MVI_8200
IMG-20170505-WA0173
IMG-20170505-WA0174
IMG-20170505-WA0175
IMG-20170505-WA0176
IMG-20170505-WA0177
IMG-20170505-WA0178
IMG-20170505-WA0179
IMG-20170505-WA0180
IMG-20170505-WA0181
IMG-20170505-WA0182
IMG-20170505-WA0183
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥-٠٧-١٩-٣٢-٤٥
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥-٠٧-١٩-٣٣-٣٤
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥-٠٨-٠٨-٣٠-٢٤
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥-٠٨-٠٨-٣٠-٣٠

Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥٠٨-٠٨-٣٠-٥٠
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥٠٨-٠٨-٣٣-١٢
Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥٠٨-٠٨-٣٣-١٧
VID-20170506WA0023
VID-20170507WA0091
VID-20170507WA0092
VID-20170507WA0095
VID-20170507WA0096
VID-20170507WA0097
VID-20170507WA0098
VID-20170507WA0099
VID-20170507WA0100
VID-20170507WA0101
VID-20170507WA0102
VID-20170508WA0008

17-11206

17-11206

Interview
Number

Folder Location

File Names
‫عشرات القتلى وحاالت‬
_‫اختناق بقصف بـ_غاز سام‬
‫على خا‬
Untitled2
WhatsApp Image
2017-05-08 at 11.30.45
- ‫ النصف األول‬- ‫نيسان‬
‫مـشـفـى مـغـارة الـرحـمـة‬

Screenshot_٢٠١٧-٠٥-٠٨-٠٨-٣٠-٤٠
D:\1374\1374
Evidence\SD\1374
evidence\1374 evidence
original

1375

1377

1384

D:\1374\1374
Evidence\SD\1374
evidence\1374 evidence
working copy
D:\1375\1375
Evidence\SD\1375Evidences\-4-4 ‫كيماوي‬
‫\الصور‬2017
D:\1375\1375
Evidence\SD\1375Evidences\-4-4 ‫كيماوي‬
‫\فديو‬2017
D:\1375\1375
Evidence\SD\1375Evidences working
copy\2017-4-4 ‫كيماوي‬
D:\1377\1377
Evidence\SD\1377 –
Evidences

Untitled2 (2)
Untitled2 (3)

Back up folder: same as all the subfolders and files in 1374 folders above
IMG_9128
IMG_9129
IMG_9130
IMG_9131
IMG_9132
IMG_9133
MVI_9124
MVI_9125

IMG_9134
IMG_9136
IMG_9137
IMG_9138
IMG_9139
MVI_9127
MVI_9135

MVI_9126
Back up folder: same as all the subfolders and files in 1375 folders above

73/80

MVI_8361
MVI_8366
MVI_8370
MVI_8371
MVI_8373
IMG_1017
IMG_1018
IMG_1019
IMG_1020
IMG_1021
IMG_1022

MVI_8374
MVI_8375
MVI_8377
MVI_8385
IMG_1027
IMG_1028
IMG_1029
IMG_1030
IMG_1031
IMG_1032

IMG_1066 IMG_1086
IMG_1067 IMG_1087
IMG_1068 IMG_1088
IMG_1071 IMG_1089
IMG_1072 IMG_1091
IMG_1081 IMG_1092

S/2017/567

D:\1384\1384
Evidence\SD\1384
Evidence\ ‫قصف مركز الدفاع‬
2017-4-4 ‫المدني‬

Untitled2 (1)

Folder Location

D:\1384\1384
Evidence\SD\1384
Evidence\‫كيماوي خان شيخون‬

File Names

17-11206

IMG_1023
IMG_1024
IMG_1025
IMG_1026
IMG_0915
IMG_0916
IMG_0917
IMG_0918
IMG_0919
IMG_0920
IMG_0921
IMG_0922
IMG_0923
IMG_0924
IMG_0925
IMG_0926
IMG_0927
IMG_0928
IMG_0929
IMG_0930
IMG_0931
IMG_0932
IMG_0933
IMG_0934
IMG_0935
IMG_0936
IMG_0937
IMG_0938
IMG_0939
IMG_0940
IMG_0941
IMG_0942
IMG_0943
IMG_0944
IMG_0945
IMG_0946
IMG_0947

IMG_1033
IMG_1035
IMG_1036
IMG_1065
IMG_0994
IMG_0995
IMG_0996
IMG_0997
IMG_0998
IMG_0999
IMG_1001
IMG_1003
IMG_1005
IMG_1006
IMG_1007
IMG_1010
IMG_1011
IMG_1012
IMG_1042
IMG_1043
IMG_1044
IMG_1045
IMG_1062
IMG_1063
IMG_1090
IMG_1100
IMG_1101
IMG_1102
IMG_1103
IMG_1104
IMG_1105
IMG_1106
IMG_1107
IMG_1108
IMG_1109
IMG_1110
IMG_1122 - Copy

IMG_1082 IMG_1093
IMG_1083 IMG_1094
IMG_1084 IMG_1095
IMG_1085 MVI_1034
IMG_1161 IMG_8110
IMG_1162 IMG_8111
IMG_1163 IMG_8112
IMG_1164 IMG_8115
IMG_1165 IMG_8116
IMG_1166 IMG_8117
IMG_1167 IMG_8118
IMG_1168 IMG_8123
IMG_1169 IMG_8125
IMG_1170 IMG_8126
IMG_1171 IMG_8127
IMG_1172 IMG_8129
IMG_1173 IMG_8130
IMG_1174 IMG_8131
IMG_1175 IMG_8133
IMG_1176 IMG_8134
IMG_1177 IMG_8135
IMG_1178 IMG_8136
IMG_1179 IMG_8137
IMG_1180 IMG_8138
IMG_1181 IMG_8139
IMG_1182 IMG_8140
IMG_1183 IMG_8142
IMG_1184 IMG_8146
IMG_1185 IMG_8148
IMG_1186 MVI_0950
IMG_1187 MVI_0951
IMG_1188 MVI_0956
IMG_1189 MVI_0957
IMG_1190 MVI_0982
IMG_1191 MVI_1040
IMG_1192 MVI_1041
IMG_1193 MVI_1046

S/2017/567

74/80

Interview
Number

17-11206

Interview
Number

Folder Location

File Names
IMG_1122
IMG_1123
IMG_1124
IMG_1125
IMG_1126
IMG_1127
IMG_1128
IMG_1129
IMG_1130
IMG_1131
IMG_1132
IMG_1133
IMG_1134
IMG_1135
IMG_1138
IMG_1139
IMG_1140
IMG_1141
IMG_1142
IMG_1143
IMG_1144
IMG_1145
IMG_1146
IMG_1147
IMG_1148
IMG_1149
IMG_1150
IMG_1151
IMG_1152
IMG_1153
IMG_1154
IMG_1155
IMG_1156
IMG_1157
IMG_1158
IMG_1159
IMG_1160

IMG_1199 MVI_1047
IMG_1200 MVI_1048
IMG_1201 MVI_1049
IMG_1202 MVI_1050
IMG_1203 MVI_1053
IMG_1204 MVI_1054
IMG_1205 MVI_1055
IMG_1206 MVI_1056
IMG_1207 MVI_1057
IMG_1208 MVI_1058
IMG_1209 MVI_1059
IMG_1210 MVI_1112
IMG_1211 MVI_1113
IMG_1212 MVI_1114
IMG_1213 MVI_1116
IMG_1214 MVI_1118
IMG_1215 MVI_1119
IMG_1216 MVI_1120
IMG_1217 MVI_1121
IMG_1218 MVI_1196
IMG_1219 MVI_8113
IMG_1220 MVI_8114
IMG_1221 MVI_8119
IMG_1222 MVI_8120
IMG_1223 MVI_8121
IMG_1224 MVI_8122
IMG_1225 MVI_8124
IMG_1226 MVI_8128
IMG_1227 MVI_8132
IMG_1228 MVI_8141
IMG_1229 MVI_8143
IMG_1230 MVI_8144
IMG_1231 MVI_8145
IMG_1232 MVI_8147
IMG_1233
IMG_1234
IMG_8109

S/2017/567

75/80

IMG_0948
IMG_0949
IMG_0952
IMG_0953
IMG_0954
IMG_0955
IMG_0961
IMG_0962
IMG_0963
IMG_0964
IMG_0965
IMG_0966
IMG_0967
IMG_0968
IMG_0969
IMG_0970
IMG_0971
IMG_0972
IMG_0973
IMG_0974
IMG_0975
IMG_0976
IMG_0977
IMG_0978
IMG_0979
IMG_0980
IMG_0981
IMG_0983
IMG_0984
IMG_0985
IMG_0986
IMG_0987
IMG_0988
IMG_0990
IMG_0991
IMG_0992
IMG_0993

1504

1519

Folder Location
D:\1384\1384
Evidence\SD\1384
Evidence\‫كيماوي‬
D:\1384\1384
Evidence\SD\1384
Evidence
D:\1504\1504
Evidence\SD\1504Evidences\‫المشفى‬

D:\1504\1504
Evidence\SD\1504Evidences
D:\1504\1504
Evidence\SD\1504 Evidences working copy
D:\1519\1519
Evidence\SD\1519Evidences\From Google
drive
D:\1519\1519
Evidence\SD\1519Evidences\From USB

S/2017/567

76/80

Interview
Number

File Names
IMAG0390

IMAG0396

IMAG0392

IMAG0397

‫كيماوي خان شيخون‬
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢١٨٤٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢١٨٥٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢١٩٣٦
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٠٣٢
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢١٥٥
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٣١٦
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٣٢٣

٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٣٣٤
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٣٤١
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٤٤٩
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٥٠٨
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٥١٣
٢٠١٧٠٤٠٤_١٢٢٦٥٧-1

2017-4-4 ‫مصابين الكلور بخان شيخون‬
Back up folder: same as all the subfolders and files in 1504 folders above

17-11206

MAH03290 (1)
MAH03290
MAH03291 (1)
MAH03291
00122
00123
00124
00125
00126
00127
00128
00129
00130
00131
00132
00133
00134
00135

MVI_8311
MVI_8313
MVI_8314
00138
00139
00140
00141
00142
00143
00144
00145
00146
00147
00148
00149
00150
00151

00154
00155
00156
00157
00158
00159
00160
00163
00164
00165
00166
00167
00169
00170

00176
00177
00178
00180
00181
00182
00183
00185
00186
00187
00188
00189
00191
‫روابط‬

17-11206

Interview
Number

Folder Location

File Names
00136
00137

N/A

N/A

N/A

00152
00153

00174
00175

D:\1519\1519
Evidence\SD\1519Back up folder: same as all the subfolders and files in 1519 folders above
Evidences working copy
D:\SAR\Evidence\CD\Stud Study on the casualties resulting from the incident of Khan Shaykhun on 4 April
y of the injuries of the
2017.pdf
Khan Shaykhun incident of Chemical casualties in Khan Shaykhun and the Civil Defence provides services and
04 April 2017
transports them to the medical points.mp4
Over 30 suffocation cases as a result of an attack against the city-Edlib Media
Centre.mp4
Important: chlorine casualties in Khan Shaykhun in Rif Idlib-YouTube.mp4
Civil Defence Idlib Khan Shaykhun 4-4-2017 civilian victims following a toxic
substance raid.mp4
YouTube- Syrian Civil defence Idlib 4-4-2017 (a victim of the Khan Shaykhun toxic
attack).mp4
Tens of deaths and cases of suffocation as a result of a toxic gas against Khan
Shaykhun – Idlib.mp4
1.mp4
Aleppo today camera tour in Bab al Hawa border crossing following the arrival of
casualties affected by chemical weapons in Khan Shaykhun.mp4
Rif Idlib – Statements from Medical Personnel on the attack against Khan Shaykhun
with sarin 4-4-2017.mp4
D:\SAR\Evidence\CD\
KH1/KH.mp4, KH2-1/VID-20170419-WA0044.mp4, KH2-4/VID-20170419Sampling process in Khan WA0030.mp4, KH2-6/VID-20170419-WA0023.mp4, KH2-7/VID-20170419Shaykhun
WA0039.mp4, KH3/VID-20170419-WA0099.mp4, KH3-1/VID-20170419WA0031.mp4, KH3-2/VID-20170419-WA0029.mp4, KH3-3/VID-20170419WA0048.mp4, KH4/VID-20170419-WA0096.mp4, KH5/VID-20170419WA0098.mp4, KH5-1/VID-20170419-WA0035.mp4,
D:\SAR\Evidence\CD\
1/1.vid,
Videos of “improvised”
VID-20170426-WA0177.mp4
interviews

S/2017/567

77/80

10009

Folder Location

File Names

ERN:201706211000903
D:\
1microSD Photos from
phone and audio messages

AUD-20170508-WA0026, AUD-20170509-WA0012, AUD-20170509-WA0013,
AUD-20170509-WA0014, AUD-20170509-WA0015, AUD-20170509-WA0016
IMG-20170413-WA0004, IMG-20170413-WA0005, IMG-20170413-WA0006, IMG20170413-WA0007, IMG-20170413-WA0008, IMG-20170413-WA0009, IMG20170413-WA0010, IMG-20170413-WA0011, IMG-20170413-WA0012, IMG20170413-WA0013, IMG-20170413-WA0014, IMG-20170413-WA0015, IMG20170413-WA0016, IMG-20170413-WA0018, IMG-20170413-WA0019, IMG20170619-WA0007, IMG-20170621-WA0020

S/2017/567

78/80

Interview
Number

17-11206

S/2017/567

Annex 5
CHARACTERISTICS OF NERVE AGENTS AND SARIN
Properties of Nerve Agents
Sarin belongs to a group of organophosphorus chemical warfare agents called nerve agents,
which are chemically and structurally related to organophosphorus pesticides. They are
absorbed by inhalation, ingestion or through the skin. For volatile nerve agents such as sarin,
inhalation is considered to be the primary route of entry.
In their purest form, nerve agents are colourless and odourless liquids, however colouration can
vary from pale yellow to dark brown depending on the level of impurities present. Sarin is one
of the more volatile nerve agents and evaporates at a similar rate to water. It breaks down
fairly quickly in the presence of water (hydrolysis) to give characteristic breakdown products.
Nerve agents are particularly toxic when absorbed by inhalation, but can be absorbed following
ingestion, dermal, or eye contact.
Nerve agent vapour is denser than air and therefore has a tendancy to accumulate in low -lying
areas.
Effects on Humans
Nerve agents exert their toxic action through the sustained inhibition of the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (AChE). When AChE is inhibited, it is unable to break down the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh). This causes a build-up of neurotransmitter at the nerve
synapse which in turn causes excessive stimulation of the nervous system.
Nerve Agent absorbed through lungs or skin casues cramps, muscular contraction, seizures and
severe pain, the effects on diaphragm is to lock the lungs in place, causing asphixiation and
subsequently death.
Local effects such as miosis (pin point pupils), may occurr in the absence of systemic
poisoning.
Dependent on the concentration exposed to and the duration of the exposure, nerve agents can
cause the following symptoms:
•

Mild symptoms include headache, nausea, miosis, blurred vision, tearing (lachrymation)
and painful eyes; runny nose, excess salivation, sweating, muscle weakness and
agitation, chest tighness.

•

Moderate symptoms include dizziness, disorientation and confusion, sneezing coughing
and/or wheezing, marked drooling and excess mucous production, vomiting and
diarrhea, marked weakness, difficult in breathing.

•

Severe symptoms include severe respiratory distress, pulmonary oedema, convulsions,
ventricular arrhythmias, unconsciousness, involuntary urination or defecation.

Medical treatment and antidotes
•

17-11206

Atropine: antagonises the effects of ACh, it is particularly effective in decreasing
secretions and treating bradycardia (slow heart beats).

79/80

S/2017/567

•

Oximes: reactivation of inhibited enzymes, thereby decreasing the amount of excess
ACh.

•

Diazepam: Central Nervous System protector, useful to control agitation and
convulsions.

80/80

17-11206
