UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
pp”

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

4 PV

1 -: ‘;j C’ ”1 lg)$j

2085”

MEETING: 18 SEPTEMBER

NEW

-ji’

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda, 2085) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/l 2845) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

SjPV.2085

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplcn~ents of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Dccisio/ls oj’ t/w
Securify Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2085th
---.v

---..,”

Held in New York
.-I-

iuresi&W: Mr. Ilja I-IIJLINSKY

on Monday,

(Czechoslovakia).

&salt:
The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, [Jnion of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
darn of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of Amprjca, Venezuela.

Provkional agenda (S/Agenda/2085)
1. Ad.option of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (s/12845 j

MEETING
18 September

1978, at 4.30 p.m.
-.*__Y

.-,....--lY

I

-.

._I

3. I take it that membersof the Council are ready to vatl?
on the draft resolution contained in document S/l 2848.
A vote wastaken by show of hands.
In favour: Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
Federal Republic of, India, Wwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to r?one,
with 2 abstentions.’
One member (Chirlaj did not participate it? the 1'UtiFK.

The meeting was called to order at 5..0.5 p.m.

expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (intapretatiorz
from Russian): As tllis
is the first formal meeting of the Security Council in the
month of September, I should like, on behalf of the
members of the Council, to expressto the representative of
China, AmbassadorChen Chu, President for the month of
August, our appreciation of the skilful mannerin which he
conductedthe businessof the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
i% agendflwasadopted,
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General QJI the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/ 12845j
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the LJnitedNations Interim Force in
Lebtinon (UNIFII..) contained in covering the period 19
March to 13 September 1978, contained in document
S/12845, and a draft resolution sponsoredby the United
States of America, contained in document S/12848. In
addition, the Council hasbefore it two letters received from
the representative of Lebanon /S//2835/ and from the
representativeof Israel/S/12840/.

4, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Ur~~ian): ‘The
Secretary-General wishesto make a sfatement at this stage,
and I call on him.
5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Now that the Security
Council has renewed the mandate of UNIFTL for a further
four months, I wish to assure the Clouncil that my
colleaguesand I both here and in Lebanon will do all lhat
we can to give effect to the decisionsof’ the Council and to
bring about as soon as possiblethe fuif’llment of the task
entrusted to UNIFIL in resolutions 425 (1978) and
426 (1978).
6. As I stated in my report, I am very much aware of the
senseof frustration at the fact that six months have not
proved long enough for the discharge of this task. It is
important, however, not to overlook the achievement hy
UNIFIL of a large part of its task under extrcmcly difficult
conditions.
7. 1 hope very much that during the forthcoming period or
the mandate we shall make substantial progress. I fully
share the Council’s anxiety that the presence of I!NIFJL
should not become the pretext for delay in achieving the
Council’s objectives, On the other hand, I am ;11so convinced that the ending of UNIFIL’s mandate at the present
time would have had disastrousresults.
8. 1 wish to stressagainhere that the fldl co-operation 01
all parties and Governments concerned is esscntisl to the
1 SW resolution434

(1978).

strictly respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. However, with the connivance
and support of the super-Powers, the Israeli aggressors have
remained impenitent, trying by every possible means to
prevent the Lebanese Government from exercising its
sovereign right in Southern Lebanon. What is more, the
Israeli Zionists have recently sent military aircraft on many
occasions for wanton air raids on a number of Lebanese
towns and territories, killing innocent civilians there in
obdurate pursuit of their policies of aggression and expansion The Chinese people express great indignation at
the above crimes of aggression committed by the Israeli
Zionists and sternly condemn them.

successful conclusion of this important task. Therefore I
urgently appeal to the parties concerned for their COoperation in facilitating the task of UNIFIL in surmounting
the remaining obstacles. I should also appreciate the help of
all the members of the Council in doing whatever they can
to ensure that this co-operation will be forthcoming.
9. I feel obliged to express here my concern at the
financial situation with regard to UNIFIL. Owing to the
fact that some Governments have made clear that they wiI1
not be paying their allotted share of the budget of UNIFIL,
it is likely that we shall face a growing deficit. If this
happens, those immediately affected will be the Governments that have put troops at the disposal of the United
Nations for this operation. Thus a disproportionate burden
would fall on the small number of States which have
already assumed a heavy burden in providing the contingents for the Force, I am also concerned that budgetary
problems will inevitably affect the capacity of the United
Nations to provide the adequate minimum conditions for
the troops in the field, especially during the hard winter
months. I shall of course keep under constant review the
functioning of UNIFIL
and the distribution of duties
among the various contingents, with a view to recommending to the Council the best arrangements for the
future.

16. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Lebanese, Palestinian and other Arab
peoples in their just struggle against Zionism and hegemonism, for the recovery of their lost territories and the
restoration of their national rights. The Chinese delegation
holds that the Security Council should uphold justice,
sternly condemn Israel for its crimes of aggression and
check all Israeli acts of aggression against Lebanon.
Lebanon’s
independence, sovereignty
and territorial
integrity must be strictly respected.
17. With regard to the question of the United Nations
Force, we have always held a different position in principle.
Therefore, the Chinese delegation did not participate in the
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 12848.

10. Let me take this opportunity once again to pay tribute
to the Commander, the officers and men of UNIFIL and
the civilian staff attached to the Force. They have
demonstrated courage, discipline and devotion in the face
of hardship and danger. Their performance has been a
credit both to the United Nations and to tlleir countries of
origin.

18. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): Mr. President, let me take this opportunity to thank you for the skill
and dedication that you have brought to the conduct of the
work of the Council and the exceptional energy that you
have put into that work, along with the previous President
of the Council, the representative of the People’s Republic
of China We have found that we are able to get much more
work done in consultations through the kind of skill and
private diplomacy that has, I think, brought us to this point
so successfully. So I should like to take this opportunity to
thank the previous President and also to welcome you as
President of the Council.

11. Let me also express to you, Mr. President, and to the
members df the Council my deep appreciation for your
support and for your tireless and successful efforts to
achieve agreement on the resolution that has just been
adopted, I hope that this resolution will serve as a basis for
speedy progress in the future.
12. I should like also to express my appreciation to the
Government of Lebanon and to the Permanent Representative of Lebanon, Ambassador T&i,
for their constant
co-operation in carrying out the decisions of the Council.

19 The Council’s action today in renewing the mandate
of UNIFIL is a significant contribution to the maintenance
of stabJlity in the Middle East. AI1 of us here recall the
circumstances in which the Council met last March to
consider the situation in Southern Lebanon. The contrast
between the situation which prevailed then and that which
exists today in Southern Lebanon is the best measureof
UNIFIL’s success.

13. I shall not fail to keep the Council informed of
important developments in Southern Lebanon and I hope
that I shall be able to report steady progress in the
fulfilment of UNIFIL’s mandate.
14. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fLom Russian):
thank the Secretary-General for his statement

I
20. The credit for that successbelongsto many parties,
but, in the first instance, I want to acknowledgethe
remarkable achievementsof the Commander,the officers
and the men of the contingents that compriseUNIFJL.
They undertook their task under very difficult circumstancesand at substantialrisk. They are performing in a
fashion which has reflected great credit both on their
countries and on the United Nations. UNIFJL’s performance has demonstrated the effectivenesswith which the
United Nations can mount and implement a peace-keeping
operation. That in itself is sufficient to instil confidence

15. Mr. CHOU
Nan (China) (interpretation
from
Chirzese): In March this year, the Israeli Zionists undertook
a flagrant massive invasion of Southern Lebanon, This act
of aggression met with firm resistance on the part of the
Lebanese Government and people and was unanimously
condemned by the Palestinian and other Arab peoples as
well as all the justice-upholding countries and peoples. They
demanded that Israel should withdraw immediately and
unconditionally all its military forces from Lebanon and
2

with respect to the future both for UNIFIL and for other
present or possible peace-keeping operations.
21.. Turning to that future, we must acknowledge the
important task remaining to UNIFIL. In the six months
available, UNIFIL has managed to fulfil part of its mandate.
What remains is the most difficult part of its task:
assistance to Lebanon in the restoration of its effective
authority over the area. Prospects for success in this effort
cannot be separated from the terrible domestic difficulties
confronting Lebanon. Moreover, that success will depend
both on UNIFIL’s continued effectiveness and its ability to
achieve freedom of movement throughout its area of
operation.
22. The world has followed events and developments in
Lebanon with great concern. The international community’s attention to the dangers in the Lebanese tragedy has
been revealed in important ways, including through the
adoption of resolution 425 (1978) and the establishment of
UNIFIL. We believe that the international community’s
sense of responsibility will remain high but we also consider
it important that Lebanon’s neighbours and factions
within Lebanon should take into account the wider
implications for the region’s peace and stability if domestic
tranquillity throughout all Lebanon is not soon established.
We hope that all concerned quarters will take steps which
are consistent with the establishment of security and law
and order and with the successful implementation of
UNIFIL’s mandate in all its parts.
23. At the same time, Article 25 of the Charter states:
“The Members of the United Nations agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the . . . Charter”. My Government calls upon all
concerned, in the spirit of Article 25, to take the urgent
steps required to enable UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate by
full deployment to Lebanon’s internationally recognized
borders in Southern Lebanon.
24. We also recognize that Member States can contribute
to the fulfilment of UNIFIL’s mandate in several ways. One
can assist UNIFIL in fulfilling its mandate by encouraging
the removal of obstacles in the path of complete UNIFIL
deployment. One can also assist UNIFIL by helping to
create conditions in Lebanon generally which encourage
moderation, the relaxation of paralysing tensions and the
extension of Lebanese authority throughout the country.
To resolve the crisis of Lebanon, we all need to move
together in parallel steps that reinforce one another and
that encourage growing confidence.
25. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I should like
first of all to join the other speakers in congratulating YOU
and your country on the assumptionof this important
office and particularly on the handling of the business
that
has culminated in this meeting today. I think that the
consultationswere well orchestrated, and we are most
grateful to havehad the privilegeof servingunderyou.
26 I should also like to expressmy appreciation to the
representativeof China, who wassuccessfulin keeping the
Council goingin a sufficiently placid manner sothat I did
not haveto comeback from my holidays.

27. Canadavoted in favour of the resolution to extend the
mandate of UNIFIL for four months because,in spite of
the enormousdifficulties with which it hasbeen faced, the
Force has made a vital contribution in facilitating the
resumption of normal life for the inhabitants of most of the
area in which UNIFIL is operating. It has also, by its
firmness and restraint, reduced the chronic instability in
Southern Lebanon with all the attendant risks that gowith
that instability. As the Secretary-General has said, if
UNIFIL were to be removed, the result would almost
certainly be a disastrouschangefor the worse.
28. Despite UNIFIL’s successto date, seriousdifficulties
remain. The men of UNIFIL remain subject to attack and
impediment when they attempt to perform the functions
assignedto them in their mandate. It is intolerable that
United Nations forces should be subjectto obstruction and
attack in attempting to carry out their mandate. The Force
has been unable to deploy fully within its entire area of
operation. The full co-operation and influence of all the
parties concerned are essentialin creating the conditions
under which that deployment can take place.We hopethat
there can be rapid progressin accomplishingthis goalwith
the full co-operation of all those in the region and those
who clearly have influence there.
29. The erosion of respect for peace-keepingactivities
evidenced by the difficulties which UNIFIL has encountered could, if unchecked,be seriouslydetrimental not only
to the return of normal life in Southern Lebanon but also
to the future ability of the United Nations to contribute
elsewhere to world peace and security through the
peace-keepingprocess.
30.. We urge all Member States to support the activities of
UNIFIL not only politically but alsofinancially in order to
meet the forecast expensesof the Force in the renewed
mandate period. Peace-keepingoperations must be conducted with due regard to economy, but, at the sametime,
the health and efficiency of’ the troops deployed is a sine
qua lzun of the Force’s ability to perform its duties
effectively.. Eighty per cent of contingent personnel are
living under canvas.We fully support the requirementfor
urgent action to provide prefabricated buildings to house
the troops during the approachingrainy seasonand winter.
31. As was made clear when my country acceptedon a
temporary basisin answerto the Secretary-General’sspecial
appeal to provide a communic?tions unit for the opening
phasesof the operation, our commitment will expire on
1 October. We are happy to have been able to provide our
servicesto assistin the establishmentof UNIFIL, notwithstanding the fact that to do so seriously strained our
already stretched communicationscapabilities.
32. I should like to expressthe CanadianGovernment’s
sympathy to the familiesof those who have beenkilled and
to those who were wounded in the service of peace..I
should also like to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and to all those in the field and in New York for
carrying out a difficult task under very trying conditions.
That they have done so well is a tribute to their fortitude
and dedication.

33. Mr. JAWAL (India): Mr. President, I would extend to
you the formal congratulations of my delegatian on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Security
I!ouncil during this difficult month and convey to you
assurances of my delegation’s co-operation and assistance.
We have no doubt that, with your objectivity and diplomatic skill, you will guide the work of the Council to
fruitful results.

Lebanese Army. However, the representative of Lebanon
has informed us in his letter that these armed groups are no
longer considered representatives of the Lebanese Army,
nor are they empowered to negotiate with the United
Nations or to exercise any legal command in the area.
39. Thus, we now have a new situation, one which was
probably not anticipated when resolution 425 (1978) was
adopted. Today, parts of Southern Lebanon remain under
the control of these de facto armed groups which have so
far refused to accept or submit to the authority of’the
established Government of Lebanon. There is no doubt that
this has created a dilemma not only for the United Nations
Force as a whole but also for the countries that have
contributed their contingents. Furthermore, it has prevented
the deployment of UNIFIL in the southern border area, If
that had been possible, it would have enabled UNIFIL to
guarantee strict respect for Lebanese territorial integrity
and sovereignty. But, according to the letter from the
representative of Lebanon, lsrael is actively opposing the
deployment of the Lebanese Army and UNIFIL in the
border area.. All this has complicated the role of the Force
and the fulfihnent of the mandate entrusted to it.

34. We have before us two important documents, first, the
report of t.he Secretary-General on the work of UNIFIL
[S/.l2??45] and, secondly, a letter dated 5 September
(~/1283,5] from the representative of Lebanon, in which he
gives expression to the views of his Government on the
present situation there.
35. We should like first of all to compliment the Secretary-General and his band of dedicated officers for having
quickly established the United Nations Force in Lebanon
and for having successfully implemented the major portion
of the Force’s mandate. We congratulate the Force Commander and his troops as well as those countries that have
generously offered their contingents for carrying out duties
that are both complex and delicate. It is deplorable that
there should have been some tragic incidents and casualties,
which, in our view, could have been avoided if the parties
concerned had shown greater understanding and respect for
the duties that the Force is called upon to perform. The
Security Council through the Secretary-General should
insist on unconditional and unqualified respect for UNEIL,
if it is to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to it.

40. The Secretary-General has reminded us that UNlFlL is
restricted to using force only in self-defence. Consequently,
negotiations, persuasion, conciliation and so forth are the
means at present employed by UNIFIL. These methods have
not so far produced results, but UNIFIL has no option but
to persist in them, The alternative and its far-reaching
consequences are too grim to contemplate. United Nations
peace-keeping forces have a tradition of not getting
involved militarily in the internal affairs of Member States.
We should not deviate from that well known tradition lest
we jeopardize the very nature of peace-keeping, It seems to
us, therefore, that UNIFIL should undertake only such
tasks as it can fulfil peacefully in Lebanon. Where there is
any danger of the Force going beyond wellestablished
traditions and practices, the situation should be reviewed at
once and its mandate should be redefined, We presume that
this is what the representative of Lebanon has in mind
when he calls in his letter for a redefinition of the Forti’s
mandate,,

36. I should like to say a few words about the letter from
the representative of Lebanon. My delegation has profound
sympathy for the people and Government of Lebanon in
their present predicament, which has been brought upon
them by the stresses and strains of the conflict situation in
the Middld East. One hopes that, if these external factors
are removed, the process of internal reconciliation can be
speeded up. For without internal reconciliation there is
little prospect of reestablishing the Lebanese Government’s
effective authority peacefully in all the remaining areas.
37. It is in this context that we should reassess the role of
the United Nations Force, which by its mandate is required
to assist the Lebanese Government in reintroducing its
authority effectively in areas where that authority has been
usurped.. The Force has not yet been successful in performing these duties, which are unprecedented because they
impinge on the internal affairs of Lebanon. For example,
such a role is not part of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, which in other respects
presents certain curious similarities.

43 o In the light of these considerations, we think that it is
wise to have extended the mandate of the Force for only
another four months and to assess the situation in two
months’ fime, as proposed in the resolution just adopted.
We supported this careful and calculated approach because
one cannot be too careful about the need to preserve the
excellent record of the United Nations peace-keeping
operations. What is urgently needed at the moment are
supplementary diplomatic efforts by those countries that
have the necessary will and the necessary capacity to help
in the peaceful resolution of outstanding difficulties, and I
am referring in particular to some members of the Council
which are parties to resolution 425 (1978).

38. In Lebanon, the United Nations Force has not fully
succeeded in its mission because its initial expectation that
all the occupied areas would be handed over to it by Israel
was not realized. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, contacts were maintained between Israeli and
I!NIFIL officials regarding the modalities for carrying out
the withdrawal of lsraeli troops, but no common ground
was reached. In the event, the Israeli Army handed over the
areas in the South to certain armed groups because Israel
considered .t.hem to be legitimate representatives of the

42. It is a mistake to imagine that having established the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and having
extended its mandate we have done all that we can ‘l’lie
efforts of the Force need, in our opinion, to be reinforced
and supplemented by diplomatic persuasion and pressure.
4

43* Mr. KICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr President,
although the members of the Council have consulted
together under your presidency this month, I’have not had
the occasion previously to congratulate you personally on
your assumption of the office of President of the Council.
This
I now do willingly, while at the same time congratulating your predecessor, the representative of the People’s
Kepublic of China, for his skilful and diplomatic handling
of last month’s Council affairs.

of peace in the Middle East. May all those who have
influence over events in Southern Lebanon heed and indeed
follow the example that has been set by Presidents Sadat
and Carter and by Prime Minister Begin.
47. Mr. LEPKETTE
(France)
(in~cqvetahw~
jh’cwn
i+enclzJ: Mr,, President, the French delegation wishes
cordially to congratulate you on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council, You represent in the
United Nations a country with which France has traditionally friendly relations. I should like to add that your
outstanding qualities and your patient efforts have made it
possible for us today to reach a decision that represents an
undeniable success for the Organizatiun. We’should like to
express the hope that this will be true of the rest of the
month during which you are to preside over the Council.

44. It is customary when delivering statements during
debates on the renewal of peace-keeping force mandates to
express appreciation of the efficient performance of the
commanders and the soldiers of the force and to thank the
SecretaryGeaerai and his staff for their wise guidance of
the force, While I would in no way wish to belittle the tasks
facing other United Nations forces in existence today, I
have no doubt that for sheer complexity and physical
h;u-dship-.-not to mention danger-the problems facing
UNIFIL have been and are greater than any which have
confronted a United Nations force since the Congo operalion. It is n0 secret that when, last March, we agreed to set
up UNIFIL, there were those who were openly sceptical
about any chance of its success. There can be few now,
however, who would not acknowledge the great achievements of Major-General Erskine and his men under the
guidance of the Secretary-General and his staff. The cost
has, however, been high, and I should here like to join the
others around this table who have paid a tribute to the
memory of those members of the Force who have given
their lives in the cause of peace in Southern Lebanon.

48. I would also address my thanks to the representative
of China, who during the month of August presided over
our consultations and the meetings of the Council with his
usual authority and skill.
49. France has always clearly and unambiguously displayed its support for the United Nations operation in
Lebanon, Last March, my delegation was the first to refer
in the Council to the possibility of’ resorting to the
establishment of a peace-keeping force in an attempt to put
an end to a situation created by Israeli intervention in the
southern part of that country. The principle of establishing
a United Nations force was accepted by the Council, and
my Government was one of the first officially to announce
that it was prepared to make available to the United
Nations a contingent from its country. At that time 1 had
occasion to explain the reasons underlying my country’s
position. The historic ties-and even more the human
ones-which
traditionally link us with Lebanon prompted
us to participate actively in an international action designed
to safeguard the territorial integrity of that Member State
and to ensure respect for its sovereignty and independence.
In the six months that have passed since then, the French
Government has frequently v&iced its full support for the
untiring efforts of the Secretary-General, to whom, on
behalf of my Government, I wish to pay a well deserved
tribute, at the same time reiterating our thanks and our
complete confidence in him.

4.5 Although the achievements have been great there
remains, as the Secretary-General has pointed out, much to
be done before the task entrusted to the Force is fulfilled
It is for this and for other reasons that my Government
accepts the judgetnent of the Secretary-General and has
today voted for the renewal of the Force’s mandate for a
further period. Like other members of the Council, I am
concerned that a situation should not arise whereby further
renewals of the UNIFIL mandate are regarded as automatic.
We believe a further four months are necessary for the
Force to fulfil its mandate. But we do note with concern
that, as the Secretary-General has made clear in his report,
the Force has met with interference and obstruction from
armed groups receiving “support from outside”. In our view
there can be no excuse for ‘this. The Force has clearly
demonstrated that it is capable of restoring peace and
normal life to the sorely afflicted peoples of Southern
Lebanon. It. must be allowed to establish full control and
freedom of movement in the area covered by this mandate.
To t.his end, we repeat that the full co-operation of all
parties is an essential prerequisite for the restoration of
peace and security in the area. If this is not forthcoming we
ihce, as the Secretary-General has indeed pointed out, the
sombre possibility that the co-operation already extended
f.o the Force will be jeopardized.

.S@ Does that mean that the mission entrusted to UNIFIL
has been completely carried out? The task we entrusted to
it under resolution 425 (1978) had a dual nature. ‘The
Force was first to confirm the withdrawal from Southern
Lebanon of the Israeli armed forces; to a great extent, it has
done so. However, no one can be unaware that, as is
pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report, the UNII;IL
contingent has not been able to deploy its troops in the
border zone occupied by the dc Jircrn Lebanese forces that
are receiving active support from Israel.
51. With reference to the second part of the mandat+
that is, the action designed to make it possible for the
Beirut Government
to recover its authority over the
southern part of its territory, it is quite obvious that the
results achieved so far are inadequate. All can discern quite
clearly that the responsibility does not lit with the United
Nations, which has used every means in its power with

46 I do not think we should let this occasion pass without
making at least some mention of the extraordinary diplomatic events of the last two weeks. The dramatic contents
of‘ last night’s press conference at the White House, and
above all t.he spirit ot’ that occasion, serve, I think, as an
inspiration to all who are genuinely committed to the cause
5

the terms of the mandate we drew up, and which cannot
itself carry out this important task. It is Israel’s duty to give
up those practices that still impede the reestablishment of
Lebanese authority. It is our hope, for its part, the
Lebanese Government will be able to take the necessary
steps to speed up the restoration of the national administration in that particular region. As far as the United
Nations is concerned, it cannot take the place of a Member
State in the exercise of its sovereignty.
52, In these circumstances, while being aware of the
complexity of the problem and the difficulties involved in
this undertaking, the French Government believes that the
time has now come to foster a greater awareness that will
make possible the strengthening of the actions of those
leaders of that region who consider, as many of us do, that
the difficult steps made necessary by this situation will have
to be taken. That is why the French delegation has
suggested that, rather than simply uttering exhortations and
appeals, which, though they may be justified, are sometimes disappointing in their effects, we must clearly state
that time is running out. The Council’s decision responds to
that concern. We approved that decision and we appreciate
the fact that our views were shared, But we do feel that
when the new mandate expires the Force’s mandate should
be reconsidered and its composition revised in order to
make it better balanced.
53. While deciding to renew for a further period of four
months the mandate of UNIFIL, the Security Council has
chosen to show quite clearly that it refuses to be bogged
down in dangerous routine and automatic renewals that
would in no way facilitate settlement of the substantive
problems. We are certain that this choice will with the onset
of winter involve practical problems for those responsible
for the organization and administration of the Force, and
this in itself should involve a warning to all parties. It
should prompt them immediately to take measures that
would produce greater stability in the region by restoring
the authority of Lebanon, as laid down in the mandate
given to LJNIFIL.
54. This is our main concern since we are anxious to see
an end to the trials and tribulations of those peoples which
we hold dear and to whose common destiny we cannot
remain indifferent.
55. I wish to pay a tribute to the leaders of the Force,
both officers and civilians, and to the men that make up the
Force, since no such action could have been undertaken
without their assistance. On behalf of the French authorities as well as on my own personal behalf, 1 should like to
salute the memory of those among them who, in the course
of the last six months, have laid down their lives in the
performance of their duties. I should like to reiterate to the
others, in particular to their Commander. Major-General
Erskine, our gratitude, our confidence and our support.
56. TO the Secretary-General and his colleaguesI should
now like to say that we are awareof the difficulties that
will be involved for them in the decisionjust taken by the
Council. Because it has participated in the Force, my
country has more than ever been in a’position to appreciate
the breadth and complexity of their task ih planning and

organizing the Interim Force. The French Government
would like to thank them for the extra effort that they will
now have to make.
57. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. Piesident, my delegationis particularly pleasedto
see you presiding over the Security Council during the
month of September, and we congratulate you most
warmly, We likewise congratulate the Chinesedelegation
which dischargedthat responsibility last month with great
skill and efficiency,,
58. When we supported the establishmentof the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we did so in the
conviction that its presence would contribute to. the
lesseningof the serioustensionsprevailingin the area.Now
we have voted in favour of resolution 434 (1978) which
renewsthe mandateof the Force, after havingobservedthe
effective role that UNIFIL hasplayed in maintainingcalm
in Sou?l;emLebanon.Without its presence,in our opinion,
the damageinflicted on people and property would have
been even more deplorable.The presenceof UNIFIL, asthe
Secretary-Generalhasinformed us, hasmadeit possiblein
part for the inhabitants of the area where the Force has
been deployed to resumetheir normal life. This enablesus
to consider that UNIFlL’s role in this processhas been
constructive in the discharge of its first task under
resolution 425 (1978).
59. The second task, the restoration of the authority of
the Government of Lebanon in the area, is one of the
objectives yet to be attained and is of graveconcernto us.
We are awareof the efforts of the Secretary-Generaland of
the staff assistinghim to contribute towardsthe attainment
of this end, as well as of the many obstaclesbeing
encountered. In the remainingmonths, and in particular in
the light of the most recent initiatives taken in the search
for peace in the Middle East, we trust that the SecretaryGeneral and his staff will be able to play an outstanding
role in Lebanon in order to permit the dischargeof the
secondpart of the mandategiven the Force underSecurity
Council resolution 425 (1978). We have shownthis confidence in supporting the renewal of the mandateof the
Force for a four-month period. Wehope that, in addition to
thesemeasures,we will be able to rely on the co-operation
of all States in the fulfilment of the mandategiven under
this resolution.
60. ,Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation I?OLQ
It is really difficult to speakasbeautifully asour
colleaguefrom Venezuelahasjust spoken,but, accordingto
an old Latin American saying, it is alwaysgoodif thereis a
roseamongthe thorns.

Spanish):

61 Mr. President,at this first meeting of the Council for
this month, 1 should like to say how pleased1 am to see
you presiding over the work of the Council. You have
shown an indefatigablededication, sacrificingyour daysof
rest during the pastweek-end.As you haveyourself pointed
out more than once, Bolivia enjoys the most cordial
relations with Czechoslovakia, whose valuable industrial
co-operation has been increasedand proved to be very
significant for the development of my country in recent
times.

62. I also wish to congratulate the representative of the
People’s Republic of China, Ambassador Chen Chu, most
warmly for his efficient discharge of the duties of the
presidency last month.

tion is our highest responsibility
world.

in each region of the

69. My delegation wishes to place on record once again
our appreciation of the efficient work done by the
Secretary-General and all his assistants. In the case of the
forces in Lebanon, Major-General Erskine has played an
outstanding role. The objectivity and prudence of the
Secretary-General have always facilitated the solution of
problems such as this, despite the obstacles it presents, for
the very reason that peace must be considered as global,
covering an entire region, and that there is a dynamic
process of tensions and conflicting interests.

63, In the reliable and always reasoned information
whereby the Secretary-General guides the work of the
Council and which served as the basis for the draft
resolution proposed by the United States and voted for by
Bolivia, we are told that the problem of Lebanon can be
solved only when, in its turn, the entire problem of the
Middle East is settled. For the peaceful solution of that
problem Latin America, including Bolivia, has made, and
will continue to make, the most sustained efforts. In the
context of the region as a whole, the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
has another aspect, that of providing a dynamic factor, as in
all human questions.

70. Finally, r reiterate my appreciation of the efforts and
of the work done by the representatives of Kuwait and of
the United States.
71. Mr, VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
It gives me great pleasure indeed to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month, a function which you have
exercised with such excellency.. It is also gratifying to note
that the relations between the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany have
steadily developed in many fields in recent years-a fact
that was highlighted by the visit of President Husti to the
Federal Republic of Germany a few months ago.

64. We have listened closely to all the points of view
expressed by our colleagues, and we also feel the same
dissatisfaction and concern lest these renewals of the
mandates of United Nations forces should end up by
becoming routine. We are convincer) that these forces are a
means and not an end in themselves, and we fully share the
concern of the French delegation that no force should
replace local Governments in the autonomous administration of their territories. Our mission is to assist them, not to
take their place.
65. All efforts combined to. achieve regional peace in
accordance with the principles of international justice and
the self-determination of peoples will have the firmest
support of Bolivia.

72, At the same time, I should also like to thank the
President for last month, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China, for the efficient way in which he
conducted the Council’s business in August.

66. The achievement of the noble objective of world peace
is possible through the resolution of local conflicts. World
peace can be achieved through regional peace. Hence, our
constant concern that all factors threatening and disturbing
the peace in any part of the world must be dealt with in
time and decisively resolved by all means of peaceful
negotiation before bloody confrontations result with loss of
human lives and destruction as painful as that suffered by
Lebanon, with which Bolivia once more expresses its
solidarity. We also express our condolences on the loss of
life suffered by the United Nations forces in another costly
international tribute to peace.

73. My delegation has joined with the majority ln the
Council in casting a positive vote regarding the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, which my Government has supported since its
inception through airlifts and supplies of equipment. We
have based our vote on the Secretary-General’s recommendation contained in his thoughtful and comprehensive report
and also on the request of the representative of Lebanon.
Our vote was motivated by the Secretary-General’s assessment that, if UNIFIL were to, be removed in the present
circumstances, that would bring about a disastrous change
for the worse.

67. The problem of peace, like all social and human
questions, is global as well as dynamic. Peace is no longer
formally broken by what can strictly be called an act of
war. In our time neither peace nor war “breaks out” in a
conventional manner. They are there, the one constructive,
the other hateful. That is why in our time such a curious
expression as “cold war” was invented to indicate that
perhaps there is a strange “hot peace”.

74. It is my Government’s firm hope that the present
extension of UNIFIL’s mandate will enable it fully to carry
out its task or at least to advance its fulfilment to a point
where the end of the tunnel can be seen and a substantial
reduction of the Force envisaged, In this respect, we share
the apprehension and concern of the Secretary-General and
many Council members regarding the notion of an indefinite and almost automatic renewal of the mandate, which
must be warned against and resisted. Those concerned
should therefore by no means view the present extension as
another reason for delaying the necessary decisions. The
Security Council, the international community as a whole
and also the troop-contributing
countries have a right to
expect not only the full co-operation of but also an active
effort by all parties concerned to overcome the existing
difficulties

68. Just as internal injustices threaten social peace, international injustices threaten regional and/or world peace.
Hence our sustained and vigilant concern that those
injustices should be resolved before internal violence erupts
in each society and before wars break out in every region of
the world. Peace is not an unexpected act, nor is war a
sudden event. Both follow a process whose timely percep7

79. I would also thank you, Mr. President, and all those
within and outside lhe Council who have contlibuted to
bringing about an extension of UNll~IL’s mandate.

75. While expressing this view, we are of course aware of
the fact--alSO
stressed in the Secretary-General’s report-that the situation in Southern Lebanon cannot be separated
from the problems of Lebanon as a whole and that those
problems are in turn closely linked to the unresolved
Middle East crisis. My Government continues to believe
that only a just and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East crisis will make it possible to achieve a durable
peac;e 111itll the area, The inescapable connexion between
the situation in Southern Lebanon and that of the MiddIe
East as a whole should not, however, obscure the responsibility of the various. parties in the area to contribute by
their own efforts to creating an atmosphere in which such
over-all progress would become possible. As true as if may
be, therefore, that the situation in Lebanon cannot be seen
in isolation from the over-all situation in the area, it is, on
the other hand, equally true that that cannot serve as a
pretext or an excuse for the parties involved in Southern
Lebanon to withhold co-operation from UNIFIL
or to
compromise its mandate.

80. Mr. N’DONG (‘Gabon) (irltr~,pretariolz jhm Fw~~(~/I):
Mr. President, I am particularly happy to set you guidi11~;
our work. The bonds of friendship which link your
beautiful country, Czechoslovakia, to mine, the Republic of
Gabon, your vast experience in international affairs, your
brilliant personal qualities, which we have had occasion to
appreciate more than once -all tllis, in the opinion of lily
delegation, constitut,es sufficient reason for us to rejoice 011
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for fllc
month of September. Accordingly I congratulate you nlosl
warmly on behalf of my delegatior:.
81. I also wish to express my sincere gratitude to your
eminent predecessor, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China, who last month guided the work of the
Council with great tact and competence.

76. We completely agree with the Secretary-General’s
statement that the present situation confronting UNIFIL at
the border of Southern Lebanon is unacceptable. The
remaining de facto armed forces in UNIFIL’s
area of
operation in Southern Lebanon must be expected to
comply with UNIFIL’s mandate, and thus with a decision
of the Security Council, in the same way as other defacto
armed forces have already been persuaded to do. Those
with influence on those de facto armed forces should
actively encourage them to co-operate with UNIFIL and to
trust in its ability and determination to carry out its
mandate in the best interests of all parties. Moreover, those
groups--as, indeed, all others-should
realize that the
support they can expect for their cause will largely depend
on their ability and willingness to co-operate with UNIFIL
in an effort to restore Lebanese sovereignty and authority,
and thus allow normal and peaceful life to be resumed.

82. Finally, I wish to congratulate the Secretary-Cencml
on his excellent report and to pay a tribute to all the
members, both civilian and military, of UNIFIL, who arr
fighting heart and soul IO ensure that peace will be restored
to Southern Lebanon.
83. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution that
the Council has just adopted extending the mandate of
UNIFIL for four months. We believe that if LItat Force were
witlldrawn
today it would undoubtedly mean a serious
aggravation of the present situation in Southern Lebanon.
However, allow me to point out that UNlFIL has been in
Lebanon for six months for the purpose ui“confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring
international peace and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its efl’ectivc
authority in the arca” ~resolttti~n 42.5 (I V78)l.

77. The way in which LJNIFIL has been approaching this
goal in the past six months deserves our full admiration and
gratitude. My delegation would therefore like to join the
Secretary-General in paying a tribute to the Force Commander, Major-General Erskine from Ghana, his military
and civilian staff, the officers and men of UNIFIL and also
the military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Field Service
staff assigned to UNIFIL for their restraint, power of
persuasion and courage. Our praise also goes to the
Secretary-General himself, his Under-Secretaries-General for
Special Political Affairs, Mr. Guyer and Mr. Urquhart, as
well as to General Siilasvuo, the Chief Co-ordinator of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the Middle East,
and to Mr. Saunders, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for humanitarian assistance in Lebanon,
for their multiple, persistent and successful negotiation
efforts, Without their diplomatic skill, their dedication and
experience, the success that UNIFIL has achieved so far
would not have been possible.

84. We are bound to recognize that UNIFIL is far from
having achieved the objective assigned to it by the Council,
not because it was intrinsically incapable of attaining that
objective but becausk it has not received the cotnplete
co-operation from all parties and Governments concerned
which it needed to enable it to continue and succeed in its
endeavour. However, those who placed obstacles in the
path of UNlFIL to prevent if from duly discharging its
mandate must beware. They must remember that the
establishment of UNIFIL and the renewal of its nlaudafic
impose a heavy financial burden on the United Nations and
its Member States and that the international community is
na longer prepared to commit itself in Lebanon to the kind
of process that is going on in Cyprus, That means that an
automatic and indefinite renewal of [JNIFIL’s mandate is
out of the question, and those who think that they have
found in the presence of UNIFIL in Lebanon a pretext to
delay the fulfilment of the objectives set by the Security
Council should face the facts.

78. Our most deeply felt tribute is directed to the memory
of those who gave their Iives for the cause of peace in
Southern Lebanon. Our sincere appreciation also goes to
the countries which have provided the contingents of the
Force.

85. In this regard, my delcgatiom wishes to make an ur!$fit
appeal to all the parties involved in the setl1ement of the
problem of Lebanort to co-opelate frankly with UNlFlL so
that Lebanon may recover its au! horily over the territory,
8

86. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, let me begin
by expressing our warmest congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of Septenmber. It has been d really busy month, but you
have handled the business with remarkable skill and
conscientiousness. You have brought to the presidency a
great deal of experience. We wish you good luck and we
should like to assure you of the co-operation of the
delegation of Kuwait.

9 1. Resolution 425 (1978) calls for the establishment of a
United Nations interim force for Southern Lebanon for the
purpose of confirming the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanor;, restoring international peace and security and
assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return
of its effective authority in Ihe area.
92. Have those salient points of resolution 42s (197X)
been implemented? Let us identify the areas in which that
resolution has not been observed.

57. I should like also to thank the outgoing President, the
representative of China, under whose presidency the
Council discharged its responsibilities with efficiency. It
was due to his refined skill and dedication that the Council
had plain sailing in the month of August.

93. There has been no restoration of international peace
and security in Southern Lebanon. There is a hot war and
real bloodshed. It is so because Israel, jn defiance of the
Council, in breach of resolution 425 (1978), in disregard of
the pIeas of its benefactor, has not allowed UNIFIL to be
deployed in the whole area that Israel occupied last March.
Instead, the area adjacent to the borders was handed over
to the illegal rebels, who are nothing but servants of Israel
and tools manipulated in the service of its goals. ‘These
robots controlled by the Zionists at Tel Aviv have been, at
the behest of their masters, shooting at UNIFIL in line with
their master’s policy of undermining the Force and frustrating its efforts so as to bring it to despair. These notorious
rebels could not sustain a campaign of defiance of UNIFIL
but for Israel, which is underwriting their existence and
managing their objectives. They are no different from any
battalion of the Israeli Army. They receive their directives,
operation tactics, ammunition, arms, logistics, supplies and
military uniforms from Israel. The phoney argument that
Israel has no control over its lackeys holds no water. The
world, including Israel, knows who Haddad is and whose
servant Chidiac is.

88. The Secretary-General has submitted a lucid and
comprehensive report on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. The delegation of Kuwait thanks him profoundly for this report. The efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his dedicated staff at Headquarters as well as of
those stationed in Lebanon are praiseworthy. They are
working against almost impossible odds in order to fulfil
the mandate of UNIFIL. But we also sympathjze with these
efforts, which Israel and its lackeys are determined to
frustrate The report is an indictment of Israel’s intentions
and its behaviour, It is clear in its language and courageous
in its conclusions, which place the blame where it rightly
belongs. 1 should like to salute the Secretary-General for his
unambiguous observations contained in section V of the
report.
80. The resolution just adopted by the Council falls short
of’ our demands. Noticeably absent among its elements is a
direct and clear indictment and condemnation of Israel
because of’ the obstacles it is placing in the path of UNIFIL.
There is a great distance between the observations of the
Secretary-General in his report and the provisions of the
resolution we have just adopted Kuwait voted in favour of
the resolution primarily because it renews the mandate of
UNIFIL for another four months. We are unhappy about
the absence of condemnatory elements from the resolution.
‘I$ overwhelming majority of the United Nations Members
expecled such indicting language, but, unfortunately, those
expectations were sha,ttered on the ugly rock of reality. I
SIKNI~CI like to make it clear that our vote should be seen in
the light of our wish to see the mandate renewed. Nothing
encourages intransigence and defiance more than the
velvet-glove treatment. Israel has been constantly accorded
this special pampering treatment, which has produced more
defiance with enviable impunity. In the course of our
negotiations over the resolution, we were bluntly told that
any criticism of Israel was taboo, Only mild references
couched in the most unintelligible and ambiguous language
could be tolerated. So we were told. That is exactly what
encourages Israel to take the law into its hands not only in
Southern Lebanon but also in all other areas of the Middle
East.

94. The truth of the matter is that Israel acted in bad faith
and outsmarted and outwitted UNIFIL in handing over the
area under its occupation to the illegal rebels. It did so in
order to maintain its occupation of the area, but this time
by means of a force which has confusing features. The army
of Israel does exist in Southern Lebanon, notwithstanding
Israel’s argument to the contrary. The Secretary-General’s
report clearly establishes the responsibility of Israel tbr the
chaotic situation in the South, He wrote:
“The fact that the Israel Defence Forces handed aver
control of the border area to (kc facto armed groups
rather than to UNIFIL has continued to make impossible
the full deployment of UNIFIL and the restoration of the
authority of the Lebanese Government in the whole area
of operation.” /S/1284.5, pwu. fi1.f
What greater indictment can there be than the judgement of
the Secretary-General,
whose colossal efforts are being
frustrated and whose usually cool temper was so much
provoked that he could not hide any longer his justified
irritation?
95. hlt.hougb the Government of Lebanon was graPPling
with an indescribable problem, it sent a battalion of its
army as an advance guard to the Lebanese territory in the
South. The battalion was stupped by the Israeli-controlled
rebels, shelled and prevented by brute force from reaching
its fir& destination. ‘This battvliort was straflilcd Some milts
north of the border because Israel did not want to see even

90. We often speak here of the responsibility of the
Council to rise to the challenge posed by Israel and to act in
accordance with the Charter in invoking its relevant
provisions, but such an argument is always glibly brushed
aside! and inaction always triumphs.
9

in terse ambiguity has encouragedIsrael in its continued
forays of destruction into the territories of Arab States.
The criticism, if any, is in no way commenwlratewith the
prize which Israel enjoys in the face of a Council which,
more often than not, shunsits responsibility with pcculi;lr
meekness.

a symbol of Lebanese authority in the South, let alone the
effective authority called for in resolution 425 (1978). It
wasnot possiblefor the Lebanesebattalion to shoot its way
down to the border becausethe’odds were impossibleand
the stakes too high UNIFIL could not assistthe Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective
authority in the areabecauseUNIFIL itself is a captive of
this insidious Israeli trickery. The result of this turmoil in
Southern Lebanon is a situation which is fraught with
danger to international peace and security. There is no
tranquillity, but chaos;there is no security, but confusion;
there isno peace,but phoney war.

103. The delegation of Kuwait looks forward to the
discussionswhich will take place in two months after the
submissionof the Secretary-General’sinterim report. The
resolutionjust adopted speaksof the Council’sintention of
assessing
the situation and examiningwhat further measures
should be taken in order to enable UNIFIL fulfil its
mandate.We welcomethis occasionwhich will providethe
Council with an opportunity to debate at length the
situation in Southern Lebanon in order to identify thereal
criminal in that ravagedregion. The major advantageof the
forthcoming debateis the absenceof the unwelcomeghost
of renewal of the mandate. In the absenceof the pressure
of renewal, the Council will have ample opportunity to
identify and study in depth the causesof the paralysisthat
afflicts UNIFIL. My delegationwill strive for concreteand
tangible action with militant openness.

96. So what of resolution 425 (1978) hasbeenachieved?
1identified earlier the salientpoints of that resolution.
97. The first is the confirmation of the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Lebanon. My delegation is not convinced that this provision hasbeen compliedwith. There is
an Israeli presencein Southern Lebanon and Haddadand
other Majors are its manifestations. There is occupationvisible and invisible, direct and bv tmvy.
98. The restoration of international peaceand security, as
mentioned earlier, has not yet beenobtained. The situation
in Southern Lebanon is a far cry from what resolution
425 ( 1978) envisaged.There is neither peacenor security.
There is a threat to wortd peace and the situation is so
explosive and precariousthat it may at any time engulf the
whole area in a confrontation with the most incalculable
consequences.
99. The return of effective Lebaneseauthority in the area
has been aborted by Israeli-controlled agents, who, in a
treacherous act of bravado supported by Israel, prevented
the Lebanesebattalion by force from reachingits planned
deslination. Since UNIFIL is alsocrippled and paralysedby
this unexpected treachery of Israel, it hasnot beenable to
fulfil its duty in assistingthe LebaneseGovernment in its
quest for the return of its effective authority in Southern
Lebanon.
100. The unimpeded deployment of UNIFIL in Southern
Lebanon is already impeded by the Israeli-controlled
puppets. The unimpededmovement of UNIFIL is in fact
“overimpeded”, and United Nations troop movements,
which are supposedto usher in tranquillity and quiet,
nowadays trigger armed confrontation owing to the insistence of lsrael on preventing UNIFIL from being
deployed on the internationally recognized Lebanese
borders.
101. So what if resolution 425 (1978) hasbeenachieved?
Apart
UNIFIL’s
physical
presence in
from
Lebanon, not very much hasbeen implemented.There has
been 110actual withdrawal, no restoration of international
peaceand security, no free and unimpededdeployment of
UNIFIL and no return of Lebaneseauthority.

104 In conclusion, I should like to add that the letter
dated 8 Septemberfrom the representativeof Israel to the
Secretary-General[S/12840/ speaksof the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Lebanon and refersto a United Nations
document regardingconfirmation of this withdrawal. As I
saidthis morning in our consultations,my delegationisnot
convinced that withdrawal hastaken place.LJNIFIL isin no
position to tell usthat withdrawal hasbeencarried out. It is
kept far away from the border, It is strandedno less than
eight miles from the border and is in no position to pass
judgement on the withdrawal of Israeli troops franl
Lebanon. There are--aswe were told this morning-five
points in what is called the “good fence”. I do not know
what is good about it, but this “good fence” no doubl
provides for rather surreptitious and secret Israeli occupa.
tion of Southern Lebanon during the night, which nlay
disappearat sunriseTherefore, my delegationwould like to
place on record that it is not convincedthat UNIFIL isin LI
position to passjudgement asto whether the IsraeIitroops
have withdrawn.
105. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): Mr. President, I should
like to congratulate you warmly on your accessionto the
presidency of the Council. I haveno doubt whatsoever that
our deliberations at this crucial time will be the ricbcr
under your wise guidanceand wide experience.Your very
prudent approachin handling the various issuesbefore IIS,
and the careful, fruitful, full and deliberate consultalions
you have held have madeour task easier.1 shouldalsoIike
to draw attention to the fact that relationsbetweenyour
country and minehave grown closerand closerand to recall
this afternoon the very interesting visit of your Fore@
Minister to Nigeria during the last few weeks.
106. I should also like to express the gratitude of Ill)'
delegation to the Secretary-Generalfor his succinct, lucid
and frank assessment
of the situation in Southern Lebanon,
particularly the graphic details of the formidable obstacles
in the path of the implementation of the mandateof the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanonunder resolutions
47.5 ( 1978) and426 (I 978).

102. The responsibility lies squarely with Israel, which
unabashedly challengesthe United Nations as a whole and
the Security Council in the full knowledge that its backer
will thwart any attempt to invoke the Chapters of the
Charter that call for sanctions.A slap on the wrist couched
10

lO7. I also wish to congratulate the representative of the
great People’s Republic of China, who fulfilled his term of
office as President of the Council with great skill and
authority during the month of August.
108, Admittedly, there are now noticeable results on the
ground to justify the action taken in the first instance by
the Council in dispatching peace-keeping forces to
Lebanon. Thus UNIFIL has been able to assist in the
maintenance of the precarious cease-fire arranged just prior
to its arrival in Southern Lebanon. Secondly, some 80,000
of an estimated total of 120,000 refugees who fled the
fighting zone early in the year have been able to return to
their homes, again thanks largely to the measure of quiet
and stability which UNIFIL has brought to the area under
its direct control.
109. With the return of peace and quiet, UNIFIL, in
compliance with resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978),
has also devoted considerable time and energy, in close
co-operation with the Lebanese Government and others
conccrncd, to an effort to bring about the effective
reestablishment
of Lebanese authority
in Southern
Lebanon. According to the Secretary-General’s report,
initial attention was focused on the provision by the
Government of Lebanon of administrative personnel and
gendarmes in Southern Lebanon.. Accordingly, by the end
of July, the Lebanese Government was represented south of
the Litani River by civilian administrators in Tyre, Qana,
Jwaya, Tibnin and Hasbaya. We were happy to learn that
Lebanese gendarmes have effectively worked in co-operation with UNIFIL at many check-points, where they assist
in the inspection of persons and vehicles. In many instances
they also constructively serve as interpreters and liaison
officers, As a result of this healthy and growing mutual
confidence existing between UNIFIL units, on the one
hand, and the incoming agents of the Lebanese Government, on the other, purely civil offences and crimes which
are normally reported to UNIFIL are now being handed
over with confidence to the Lebanese gendarmes for
investigation. We thought that things were moving in the
right direction and moving very fast.

112. In contrast to its previous procedure of handing over
evacuated areas to UNIFIL, the Israeli invading forces on
I3 Juneformally turned over the remaining evacuated areas
to Christian militia under the command of officers with ,
allegiance, logistic and other support in the so-called
security band zone, thus continuing occupation by proxy.
Since this Illegal transfer, the armed groups have immobiltied UNIFIL, which is restrained by the traditions of
United Nations peace-keeping from using force. Those
militia have had no qualms about attacking both UNIFIL
units and units of the Lebanese Army trying to regain
sovereignty and control in the South in accordance with
resolution 425 (1978). The Israeli action, which, in its
mildest form, began as a thoughtless and brazen adventure
against the already devastated State of Lebanon, whose
people have been crying for a long time for peace and to be
left alone, is an affront to the sovereignty of a Member
State and an unwarranted provocation of the Security
Council. In the view of my delegation, the Israelis are
merely using the armed groups as a means to perpetuate
their destabilizing role in Southern Lebanon, subvert the
integrity of that country and create conditions that favour
their continued dominance over th,e entire region. What
they fail to realize is the fact that a strong and virile
Lebanon will serve Israel’s interests a lot better in terms of
its security needs on its northern front than will a weak
Lebanon. Lebanon has never been an aggressive State,
113. The Nigerian delegation voted for the present resolution extending the mandate of UNIFIL for another four
months in the hope that UNIFIL will be able to fulfil its
mandate within that period. It will continue to maintain its
contingent within UNIFIL in furtherance of the objectives
that led Nigeria to seek admission to the Council last year.
We cannot, however, condone a situation whereby Israel
contrives to surround itself by a cordon of United Nations
peace-keeping forces while it proceeds virtually without any
scruples with its reprehensible policies of unbridled expansion, provocative incursions and acts of aggression against
its neighbours, in a lop-sided display of arrogance and
brazen contempt of the entire world. As I have often
repeated, peace-keeping forces of the United Nations must
not become logistic support for aggression, occupation and
the consolidation of occupied territories.

110. I-lad all parties to the current conflict in Southern
Lebanon extended full co-operation to UNIFIL, the task
given to it by the Council would have been completed well
ahead of schedule and, in any event, long before the
expiration of the first mandate given to it last March..

114. Finally, my delegation congratulates Major-General
Erskine on his outstanding performance and his creditabIe
maintenance of the morale of UNIFIL in the face of
extreme provocation and danger. Some have lost their lives
in this exercise, which would have been a smoother one but
for the antics of Israel. May all parties concerned work
expeditiously towards peace in the area, so that those men
will not have lost their lives in vain

111 I recall with utter disappointment that the Council
had to meet several weeks after it had adopted resolution
425 (1978) simply to reiterate an earlier demand for Israeli
withdrawal from the areas which Tel Aviv was occupying in
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon. It is not necessary for my delegation to recall
the genocide and destruction involved in that invasion and
occupation. Israel is always dealt with in terms of gentle
persuasion; there is never condemnation. If persistent
international pressure had been brought to bear on the
invaders, the Israelis would not have contemplated defying
the wiIl of the international community. The action of
Israel, particularly during its last phase of withdrawal, has
posed major problems for UNIFIL.

115. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Comrade President,
first I should like cordially to welcome you, the representative of the fraternal Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, to
the post of President of the Security Council and to wish
you every success in the discharge of your very lofty and
responsible functions and also in the solution of the very
difficult problems that are now yours, inherited from your
predecessor in this post, the representative d’~hiIla.
11

1.16. We arc very gratified to se? that the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic i5 playing an important role in international life and is an active ;md productive participant in
the solution of the most urgent international problems in
the process of strengthening European and world-wide
peace. The recent visit to Czechoslovakia of a party
qoveernmental delegation af the Soviet Union headed by the
ken&
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the Chainnan of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Comrade
&ezhnev, has once again convincingIy shown that SovietCzechoslovak friendship has stood the test of time and is
now revealed as an important factor in the strengthening of
intcrnational,co-operation
in the cause of peace in Europe,
and not only in Europe. I should like to assule you, that
you can always count on csmplete and constructive
co’-operation and support for your work from the Soviet
delegation.
11’7. Six months have elapsed since Israel committed its
blatant aggression against L,ebanon, a sovereign State and,
fllrthermore, one nf the original founder Members of the
United Nations. In its resolution 425 (1978), the Security
(.‘ouncil called upon Israel immediately to cease its military
action against Lebanon and withdraw forthwith its forces
from all Lebanese territory and strictly observe the territorial intcgrkty, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon. However, subsequent events have clearly shown
that Israel has thrown down the gauntlet to the United
Nations, is overtly sabotaging the fulfilment of its resolutions and has not in fact ended its intervention in the
inter& affairs of Lebanon..

Lebanon. The report makes it abundantly clear that
responsibility for the continuing tension in Southern
Lebanonis borne by Israel and by Israel alone. It muslbe
emphasizedthat that responsibility is sharedalsoby those
who pursuea policy of concluding separatedealswith the
aggressor
and who stimulate it to consolidatethe resultsof
its aggressionand prevent the achievementof a compre.
hensiveand just settlement regardingthe situation in the
Middle East.
121. At the stie time, foundations for a comprehensive,
just and lasting Middle East settlementalready exist. They
are enshrinedin decisionsof the United Nations, and the
Soviet Union has consistentlyfavoured the implementation
of thosedecisions.They consistof the following: complete
withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967; the exercise by the Arab people of
Palestineof its inalienable rights, including the right to
self-determination and the creation of its own State;
guaranteesthat the rights of all the States of the region
involved in the conflict will be observedand that they will
be allowed to exist and enjoy security. Recauseof its very
nature, a just settlement in the Middle East is attainable
only if there are collective efforts by all parties concerned
within the framework of the GenevaPeaceConference.
122. As far as the separatedealspolicy is concermd, a
policy towards which some are energetically trying to
move the course of events, that will not bring a compre.
hensivesettlement in the Middle East any .closer. On the
contrary, such separatedeals are an attempt to hatch a
conspiracybehind the back of the Arab peoplesin order to
frustrate a genuine Middle East settlement that would
accord with the interestsof lasting peaceand the interests
of all the peoplesof that part of the world. This represents
a seriousperil to the national independenceof the Arabs. It
is also in contradiction with the broad interests of
international peace.It should be recalledin this connexIot1
that the Middle East region is directly contiguous with the
boundaries of the Soviet Union and other countries
belonging to the socialist community, which are by no
meansindifferent to the turn eventswill take. The Soviet
Union will continue unswerving in its solidarity with the
Arab peoples waging a struggle to do away with the
consequences
of Israeli aggressionand to achieveajust and
durableset,tIementin the Middle East.

118. For some time now Israel has under various pretexts
bean protracting its illegal occupation of Southern Lebanon
and refusing to withdraw its forces from Lebanese territory.
Essentially, the aggression of Israel against Lebanon is still
gorng on. Despite the decisions of the Security Council and
the demands of the Lebanese Government, Israel has
handed over control of the important border areas in
Southern Lebanon not: to United Nations forces but to
anti-Government armed detachments that are virtually the
agents of. Israel, Making use of the gains it has made
through aggression, Israel continues actively to interfere in
the affairs of the Lebanese State and has not ceased its
policy of threats and military provocation. In Israel, no
attempt is made to disguise the fwt that they intend to
123. The position of the Soviet Union on the questionof
maintain under their control vast regions of Lebanese
an end to Israel’s intervention in Lebanon’s affairs and
territory righl up to the Israeli-Lebaneseborder, in that
normalization of the situation in Lebanon was recently
way leaving the door open for new invasion,
confirmed in the Soviet-Syrian communiqudpublishedon
1 September on the occasion of the visit to the Soviet
II 9. The developmentof events in Lebanon hasborne out
Union of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
the correctness of Ihe Soviet Union’s evaluation of the
Arab Kepublic, Mr. .Khaddam.In that communiqu8,i~rf~r
fa.r-reaching aims of Israel’s aggressionagainst Lebanon.
alia, it wasemphasizedthat
Israel’sactions in Lebanon representa premeditated blow
againstthe Arab national liberation movement to prevent
“The parties condemnedthe continual intervention of
the achievement of a lasting and just settlement in the
Israelin the internal affairs of Lebanon. They stated that
Middle East. Israel’s on-going aggressiveactions against
they intended to promote normalization of the situation
Lebanon are part andparcel of the generalaggressive
policy
in Lebanon on the basisof guaranteesof its sovereignly,
of Israel towards the Arab countries and peoples.
independenceand territoriaI integrity. The parties aIs0
favoured consolidation of the legal aut,hority of the
l%O. The facts contained in the Secretary-General’sreport
LebaneseGovernment over the entire territory of the
confirm the presenceof evidence attesting to the on-going
country and actions consistent with the legitimate i*
gross intervention of Israel in the internal affairs of
‘terestsof the Palestine resistancemovementin Lebanon,”
12

124. The Soviet delegation wishes to express its regret that
the resolution I;he Security Corincil has adopted does not
coIitajI1 my fitting contlc~nnai.ion of” Israel for its Whotaging of the decisions of the Council, its continuing aggressive
actions against I.,,cbanon and ils intervention in the internal
affairS of that COUIltky.

132. ’ Recent eventsin Lebanon and the very fact that the
Security Council 1sonce againconcernedwith the question
of the United NationsInterim Force in Lebanon cannot but
cause conceln, The entire course of events, as js further
borne out by the information to he found in the SccretaryGeneral’sreport, hasonceagainconvinced us that the tragic
situation now facing the people of Lebanon is the direct
result of aggressionand continued intervention on the part
of Israel in the internal affairs of that country, It emerges
from the facts presentedin the report that UNIFII, has to
date been unable to act effectively throughout the territory
of Southern Lebanon becausethe Israeli authorities have
not complied with resolution 425 (1978). inter o&z, the
report also mentions that “Israeli forces handed over
control of the evacuated area not to UNIFIL but to.. ,
[so-called] de facto armedgroups” /S/12845, para. 171, in
other words, armed groups that refuse to obey the
LebaneseGovernment. Theseactions,the report goeson to
emphasize,are preventing the United Nations Force from
exercising “the, measureof control that is required for the
full dischargeof its mandate” [ibid,, para, 45/. ‘These,as
well as numerous other actions, have simply provided us
with further proof that Israel continues to interfere in the
internal affairs of Lebanonand is preventing the consolidation of the legitimate authority of the LebaneseGovemment over the entire territory of the country and attempting to jeopardize its territorial integrity.

12.5. In view of the position of the Arab parties directly
concerned in favour ‘of the prolongation of the Unitccl
Nations Force in Lebanon, the delegation of the Soviet
Union has not stood in the way of the adoption of the
resoluLion. At the same time, the Soviet delegation would
like: to confirm the position of the Soviet, 1Jnion regarding
the Force as set forth in the Council on 19 March(207Hz
and 207.fth mretiu,qsJ, including the question of its
financing. We should once again like to cnlphasizethat any
expensesincurred in eliminating the consequences
of the
armed aggressionof Israel against Lebanon should be
defrayed by the party responsiblefor the situation, and the
party responsiblein this caseis Israel.
126. The I’RESIIXNT (interpretation ,from Russian): I
the represcntativc of the Soviet Union for the very
kind words that hc said about my country and about me
pcrson:llly. Our fricndshi13with the Soviet Union and our
joint strugglefor peaceform the cornerstoneof the foreign
policy of socialistCzechoslovakia.
thank

1?7. Mr. IXJI.I!,NA (Mauritius): Mr, President, my Permanent Representativehas rcqucsted me to present his
apologiesto you for not beingahlieto be personallypresent
at this meeting of the Council. On his behalf and on my
own, 1 wish to expressto you my warmestcongratulations
on
your accessionto the presidency. My delegationwould
~!SO like to congrntulatc your predecessor
on his brilliant
presidencyduring the month of August,
l28. The delegation of Mauritius voted in favour of the
draft resolution containedm documentS/l 2848 becauseit
consitlcrsthat the period decidedon is a happy compromise
between the parties most directly involved and becauseit
has
beendeterminedin 21 spirit of co-operation. Weshould
l&e to hakethis opportunity to congratulatethe delegation
of the United Statesfor its initiative in this respect.
129. I-lowever, we note that the IJnited Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon has not so far been able to fulfil to its
own satisfactionthe mandategiven to it. This is obviously
due to the many obstaclesplaced in its path by Israel. We
regret this situation and hope that within the next four
monthsIJNII% will have completed its extremely delicate
and difficult lask.

133. The events that have occurred in Lebanon should
not, of course, be consideredin isolation from the over-all
situation that prevailsthroughout the Middle East area.The
Lebanesetragedy is occurring at a ttine when repeated
diplomatic efforts are’being madeto replace a comprehensive solution of the Middle East conflict through the
existing machinery for holding peace talks-that is, the
Geneva PeaceConference--by piecemealseparatedeals.The
real purpose of this policy is to disguisethe fact that, until
now, the necessarystep towards a just solution of the
Middle Eastproblem hasnot been taken at all.
134. The basis for a just settlement of the Middle East
problem c,onsists, first and foremost, in the complete
withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967, the exercise by the Arab people of
Palestine of their legitimate rights, including the right to
self-determinationand the creation of their own State, and
guaranteesof the security of all Statesin that areaasWell as
their right to an independent existence. A genuinely just
settlement can be achievedonly ifjoint efforts are madeby
all parties concerned.
135. Despite the fact that the Arab peoples are now
passingthrough a difficult stagein their history, history’s
final verdict will be to condemnthoseplanswhosepurpose
is to shelve the possibility of solution for the fakstinian
problem, to destroy the unity of the Arab peoplesand stifle
the aspiration of the Arab working massesfor social
progress.

130, We pray and hope that the territorial integrity of
I.,ebanon,aswell asthe authority of its legitimate Government, will soon be establishedand that peaceand harmony
will
again reign over this crossroadsof cultures that is
I.,ebanon.

136. At the sametime, despitethe intense difficulties and
complexities of the situation in the Middle East, the
Security Council can even now immediately promote the
strengthening of international security in the Lehancse
region by opposingthe forces of aggression,
which, through

131. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j~orn Russian):
There are no other speakers.Therefore, I shallnow make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
CZECHOSLOVAKIA.
13

the direct support and provocation of intermediaries, are
trying to frustrate the process of normalization of the
situation in Lebanon, undertaking action aimed against the
restitution of Lebanese authority over the whole territory
of Lebanon, and, in the final analysis, trying to undermine
the State of Lebanon and to break the I’alestinian resistance.
137. The Czechoslovak delegation, as before, did not
object to the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. A decisive factor in that
.decision was the position taken by the Lebanese Govern-

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

ment itself, which gave its consent to the deployment oi
the Force in its territory, as well as the position taken by
other Arab countries concerned. At the same time, I should
like to state that we are not in any way withdrawing the
reservations expressed by the Czechoslovak delegation a~
Council meetings on 19 March /207&h and 207Srh
meetings] and 3 May [2076th meetingl, when the question
of UNIFIL was being discussed. For that reason, we were
forced once again to abstain in the vote just taken.

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

in other

currencies)

7&70005-February

1980-1,2&~
