S/PV.8392

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8392nd meeting

Tuesday, 6 November 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Melki
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 30 October 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/974)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36250 (E)
*181836250*

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 30 October 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/974)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/974, which contains the text of
a letter dated 30 October 2018 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the fifty-fourth report of the
High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Before I start, I would like to
acknowledge that a number of Central European
States — including Poland, the Czech and Slovak
Republics and others — are currently celebrating the
100th anniversary of their modern existence. My own
country, Austria, will commemorate this date next
Monday in a solemn ceremony in the State opera house.
Only two days ago, Presidents Macron and Steinmeier
commemorated the end of the First World War, which,
as Council members know, started with shots in
Sarajevo in June 1914.
2/21

06/11/2018

France and Germany, which once seemed eternal
adversaries, are now among the main pillars of the
European Union. This is a lesson for the people of the
Western Balkans that it can be done, lasting peace is
achievable and reconciliation must be possible. The
countries of the Western Balkans should emulate the
German/French ideas of common history books, youth
exchange programmes, common Government meetings
between neighbouring countries and a common
television programme, such as the French/German Arte
programme. This could be called Arte Balkans.
The defining political event of the past six months
in Bosnia and Herzegovina was the 7 October general
elections. While international observers characterized
the poll as genuinely competitive, the preceding months
saw a worrying escalation in divisive public rhetoric,
including hate speech and voter intimidation. Moreover,
the immediate post-election period has been fraught
with complaints of election irregularities. Public
trust in the integrity of the electoral system seems to
be at an all-time low, and restoring this trust through
meaningful improvements must be addressed by the
new authorities as an urgent priority.
Looking ahead, the announcement of final,
certified election results is expected today, after which
the period of forming parliaments and Governments
will begin. Overall, the main ethnically defined parties
seem to have won the most support in the parliaments,
although in the Federation, certain multi-ethnic parties
appear to have improved their results remarkably since
the last elections. As no party has a clear majority, it is
too soon to speculate on which coalitions will ultimately
be formed at various levels of authority.
While the process of constituting parliaments and
governments is just beginning, the future members of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency are already
known: Šefik Džaferović of the Party of Democratic
Action, Željko Komšić of the Democratic Front,
and Milorad Dodik Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats. Mr. Komšić’s defeat of the outgoing Croat
Presidency Member Dragan Čović has led a number of
officials from the Croat Democratic Union of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and from neighbouring Croatia to
declare the election illegitimate and even illegal or
anti-Dayton, despite the fact that it was carried out
according to the same rules used in every election
since 1995.
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8392

While some may have the political goal of wishing
to change the current system, this cannot be used to
deny the legality of a process conducted in line with
the law and the Peace Agreement, nor can it be misused
to justify future boycotts or blockages. The election
of Mr. Dodik as the Serb member of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency has also raised questions,
given his past numerous statements against the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Additionally, since the
elections, he has made some provocative public
statements about the Bosnia and Herzegovina flag and
the taking of the oath.

the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights
in the so called Sejdić and Finci and related cases,
leaving in place severe discrimination against some
citizens in exercising their right to stand for public
office in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and
House of Peoples. Similarly, a number of cantons in the
Federation still have not met their legal obligation to
harmonize their Constitutions and to ensure the full
equality of Serbs as a constituent people. This too is
unacceptable, because in this case we also have a
Constitutional Court decision that Serbs are, of course,
a constituent people wherever they live.

Nevertheless, I strongly believe that it is not helpful
or appropriate to judge the new Presidency before they
have even taken office. They will have significant
challenges ahead, and I for one will give them the
benefit of the doubt in their ability and willingness to,
as the oath of office requires,

In addition to the issue of unimplemented court
decisions, Bosnia and Herzegovina is also facing a
problem with deep-rooted public disappointment in the
criminal justice system’s seeming incapacity to tackle
corruption and deal with organized crime. For example,
in Banja Luka, daily public protests have continued
over seven months, including a demonstration with
tens of thousands of citizens in the days before the
elections, over what activists allege is a cover-up by the
authorities in the suspicious death in March of David
Dragičević. This case of that young student has to be
solved urgently, and I will report to the Security Council
again on it. This and a similar cases in Sarajevo have
raised public outrage, and they are unfortunately not
the only such cases. They are symptomatic of the state
of the rule of law and the profound disappointment of
citizens therein.

“to respect the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and its Annexes in their
entirety, protect and promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and protect the interest and
equality of all peoples and citizens”.
Despite the difficult environment, integration with
the European Union (EU) has remained a bright spot in
the political landscape over the past six months. This
is one area where leaders with often competing visions
of the country can find common ground. In this regard,
it is noteworthy that following the submission of an
initial 3,300 answers to the European Commission
questionnaire during the previous reporting period, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities are now working
on answers to some 650 follow-up questions received
in June.
Despite this good news, other developments over
the past several months have highlighted serious
deficiencies in the rule of law. As I have said in past
briefings, a lack of respect for the final decisions of
the judiciary remains a problem. This was seen in
the continued failure to implement the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court’s decision in
the Ljubić case, while local elections in the city of
Mostar have not been held since 2008 due to another
unaddressed Constitutional Court decision. Thus, for
10 years no elections were held in the city of Mostar.
In this regard, I must call attention to the
authorities’ ongoing failure since 2009 to implement

Besides the elections, another defining political
issue of the past six months has been the dramatic rise
in migrant arrivals in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
authorities’ response. We have not had such dramatic
numbers in past years as we have seen this year. Given
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s complex constitutional
structure and internal political tensions, we need to be
aware that this issue could deteriorate in a number of
ways — as a humanitarian crisis, in the first instance;
from a security point of view; and in terms of the
political stability of the country.
Regrettably, the reporting period has continued
to see a tendency on all sides for some politicians to
deny or relativize war crimes and even to glorify war
criminals. In this respect, keeping in mind the fact
that two international tribunals have confirmed that
genocide was committed in Srebrenica, I consider
the repeal by the Government of the Republika
Srpska of its earlier 2004 report, which had officially
acknowledged the involvement of Republika Srpska

18-362503/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

06/11/2018

military and police forces in the July 1995 events, to
be a significant step backwards for reconciliation. As
Council members know, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was created
by the Security Council 25 years ago, in 1993, has
declared that genocide took place at several locations,
and that decision of the ICTY is now being questioned.
This also stands in contrast with neighbouring Serbia,
whose Parliament adopted an historical declaration
condemning the crimes committed in Srebrenica in
2010, a declaration that has remained unchanged and
in force.

submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

In conclusion, I would like to make a few
recommendations not only to be taken up by the
incoming Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, but
also to be supported and encouraged by the wider
international community. First, measures need to be
undertaken immediately to strengthen the rule of law.
Secondly, official institutions need to be supported
and strengthened in their functionality, independence
and stability. Stability is very important to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its future. Thirdly, economic
development needs be kick-started. And finally, these
reforms need to be addressed with a sense of urgency
in the light of the huge departure of young people from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, amounting to some 20,000 to
30,000 a year.

We are exceedingly disappointed with the working
methods that the penholders for the draft resolution
chose this year. Instead of taking the logical course of
adopting a technical resolution extending Operation
Althea’s mandate, which in itself raises no doubts,
the sponsors took the dangerous path of introducing a
highly politicized document. And yet our reaction was
easy to predict ahead of time. After all, we already had
one sad experience in 2014, when the Russian delegation
abstained in the voting and for exactly the same
reasons that this time very nearly produced negative
consequences for Althea in its current form. At the time,
four years ago, we made it clear to colleagues that it had
better not happen again (see S/PV.7307). It seemed as if
it had worked and over the course of the next few years
we had a more or less satisfactory document. And yet this
year, for some reason, the sponsors decided to introduce
complications into the draft text by imposing their own
foreign-policy approaches and thereby manufacturing
a crisis. Happily, common sense prevailed. We have to
note that in recent years we have seen a trend among
some of our Western partners during the process of
arriving at agreements on United Nations decisions
in which the culture of negotiation has been seriously
devalued. That should be rectified immediately.

Despite the absence of these issues from the
campaign platforms of many of the leading parties, once
they take power they will not be able to ignore them.
Those who declare EU membership as their goal will
need to find compromises, support the functionality of
the institutions and accelerate the pace of reform. We as
an international community can best support the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina by promoting a vision of
the country that recognizes that its integration with
Euro-Atlantic structures will also require its leaders
to work on integrating its people. After the elections,
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders will have an
opportunity for a fresh start for the country, its entities
and cantons but, above all, its wonderful citizens.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/989, which contains the text of a draft resolution
4/21

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the vote.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution (S/2018/989) extending the
mandate of the European Union-led Operation Althea
for peacebuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is
because the sponsors took into account our principled
considerations, if only at the very last moment.

We want to stress that no Security Council
document should predetermine the domestic or foreignpolicy priorities of any State Member of the United
Nations, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is no exception.
In the Council’s relevant resolutions and decisions, we
need to do everything possible to avoid wording that
might be interpreted as supporting the non-consensusbased Euro-Atlantic aspirations of a number of Bosnian
forces. If the Security Council approved such provisions,
they could undermine the already fragile situation in
the country and put pressure on certain ethnic groups.
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2443 (2018).
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for his briefing today and for the work
of his Office in maintaining peace and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has long been a very
important and almost totemic issue for the Council, if
one goes back to the start of the conflict in the early
1990s. The United Kingdom remains committed to
the continuing role of the High Representative and his
Office. The Office of the High Representative remains
the final authority and theatre regarding the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and that includes our support for the use of
Bonn powers if the situation requires.
We welcome today’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2443 (2018), which authorizes the European
Union (EU)-led Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea) for
a further 12 months. The consensus on the resolution
demonstrates the commitment of the United Kingdom
and the international community to security in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative
and EUFOR Althea are crucial vehicles for enabling the
international community to support the maintenance
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s security, stability and
territorial integrity, which are vital to the country’s
future as a modern democratic European State.
As I said, there was once a time when the Council
dealt with Bosnia every day of its existence. I have had
the privilege of working on the Balkans file for more
than 20 years, on and off. I am somewhat saddened
by what the High Representative tells us of how

S/PV. 8392

some issues are still unresolved and how they repeat
themselves. But I also want to point out that the hardwon peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are fragile and should not be taken for granted. While
the current situation remains calm, threats to security
remain, alongside new challenges such as increases in
migration, as the High Representative mentioned. That
is a very important issue for the EU and for Europe. It is
our regional crisis, as it were, and something in which
the EU has invested a huge amount of time, effort,
money, coaching and patience. We will be hearing later
from the EU Ambassador, who will be able to outline
the EU’s position more clearly.
I wanted to briefly address what the Russian
Ambassador said in his statement before the vote. Russia
is a member of the Contact Group and of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We would much rather see Russia
trying to do everything it can to consolidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State and to help it modernize and
make progress towards the Euro-Atlantic institutions
that since the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed
have been the foundation of its existence as a modern
State in its region, Europe. I think that would be the
best service that we could all do for Bosnia.
Turning to the subject of the elections, the United
Kingdom welcomed the calm and orderly conduct of
the elections, which were generally competitive, but we
continue to be concerned about the level of the ethnic
divisions in politics and the reports of irregularities. The
inability to resolve key issues of election reform prior
to the elections was disappointing and is a clear and
ongoing concern. The divisive and nationalist political
rhetoric, which was especially loud in the run-up to
the elections, is dangerous and creates an environment
where real long-term security and stability will be
difficult to achieve.
It is also backwards-looking, and what Bosnia
needs most of all is to move forward. Other countries
in the Balkan regions are moving forward and making
progress on their EU accession arrangements. Where
they wish to, they are making progress with getting
closer to NATO. That benefits regional security and
stability, and Bosnia and Herzegovina once again
risks being left behind in that regional modernization
and progress. In particular, those in positions of
responsibility should act in the interests of all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina rather than spreading
divisive sentiment.

18-362505/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I want to echo what the High Representative said
about waiting until those leaders have taken office
before we properly hold them to account. I also want
to make it clear that we will hold them to account.
Political leaders need to show leadership and tolerance
and they need to help modernize their country. At a
crucial time following the elections, political leaders
must work together in a cooperative manner to form
Governments quickly so that progress can be made
on key reforms, Euro-Atlantic integration and the 5+2
agenda. Those reforms are important because they
will bring improvements to the day-to-day lives of all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens. They are also
important because they help to embed national and
regional security and stability — an issue that, as I said
at the beginning of my statement, has long occupied
the Council.
Those in positions of responsibility should act in
the interests of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and it is especially concerning that the rhetoric
and reluctance to compromise are indicative of the
wider political environment. We will be watching
developments closely. It is also important that the
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently
address all judgments regarding elections in order to
ensure that all citizens have the ability to participate
fully in the democratic process, as they all deserve. It
is regrettable that many of those issues have remained
unresolved over several election cycles, which is a
significant amount of time. Any resolution to those
issues needs to meet international standards and uphold
the principle of equality for all citizens, including the
ability to elect officials and be elected.
Conversely, we welcome the progress made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina on certain aspects of reform,
for example in the adoption of agricultural and energy
strategies and the eventual adoption of the criminal
procedure code — although the delay in doing so was
regrettable. We have also welcomed the continued
cooperation on women and peace and security and
encourage that to continue.
Finally, I want to echo what the High Representative
said about reconciliation. Srebrenica remains the worst
massacre in Europe since the end of the Second World
War. Nine thousand Muslim men and boys were taken
from their homes and murdered. It is absolutely vital
that reconciliation efforts be made in genuine earnest
and accelerated.
6/21

06/11/2018

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
comprehensive briefing on the fifty-fourth report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2018/974, annex).
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent years, following
the implementation of the Dayton-Paris Accords on
14 December 1995. The Accords, signed under the
auspices of the international community, have helped to
restore peace and endow the country with multicultural,
multi-religious and multi-ethnic institutions.
My country notes with satisfaction the firm
commitment of the Bosnian authorities to undertake the
necessary reforms, particularly in the areas of the rule
of law and the independence of the judiciary, in order to
complete the cycle of socioeconomic transformation in
the country and to encourage a favourable review of its
application for membership of the European Union. My
delegation also welcomes the Parliamentary Assembly’s
adoption of the necessary amendments to the code of
criminal procedure in order to effectively combat the
scourges of corruption and organized crime, which are
the main obstacles to the economic and social take-off
of the country. The adoption of those legislative
amendments is an important step in the establishment
of the rule of law and the fight against impunity, in
order to promote national reconciliation.
However, that positive momentum should not prompt
us to lose sight of the administrative and institutional
dysfunctions, especially those of the general elections on
7 October. According to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and local non-governmental
organizations, those elections were marred by unequal
access to public media, irregularities on electoral lists
and the partiality of local observers at polling stations.
My delegation therefore encourages the Bosnian
authorities to remedy the shortcomings observed in the
organization of the elections and invites all stakeholders
to submit their complaints in the context of the existing
legal procedures.
Côte d’Ivoire is concerned about the persistence
of ethnic tensions. We therefore call on all political
groups and Bosnian populations to combine their
efforts to preserve the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In conclusion,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the spirit of compromise of
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the States members of the Security Council that has
made it possible to renew the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea, whose
mission remains relevant in the search for peace,
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to join previous speakers in
welcoming to the Chamber Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report on the implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/974, annex).
Our delegation has taken note of the report of
the High Representative on the achievements and
positive developments in the country over the past six
months, such as the recent adoption of the long-awaited
amendments to the code of criminal procedure by the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in line with international standards, as well as the
completion of the country’s eighth general elections
on 7 October. We also commend the progress made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting
period with respect to economic reforms in order to
strengthen the economy, reform institutions and reduce
unemployment. Those are all signs that there is a
common vision for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, while significant progress has been
made, we are concerned by the decision in August
of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to
revoke its support for the Srebrenica report of 2004.
That revocation only serves to undermine the political
stability and prosperity of the country, endangering
all the achievements and efforts made by the parties
for reconciliation among various ethnic groups and
communities and prospects for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we call on all parties
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and actions that could
endanger the stability of the country and hinder the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
On the other hand, regarding the general elections
on 7 October, the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the fact that the elections
were held without any serious security incident, as
reflected in the report of the High Representative. At the
same time, we regret that the parties did not implement
the recommendations of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights in order to improve the

S/PV. 8392

integrity of the electoral process before the elections.
In that context, while we praise the progress made,
we believe that there is still much to be done and that
we must continue working towards a common vision
of the future that will help to foster a lasting national
unity that will cement Bosnia and Herzegovina’s role
in the Balkans, Europe and the world. We therefore
encourage the parties to amend the laws regarding
the House of Peoples of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to strengthen the rule of law, ensure the
full implementation of the election results and pursue
efforts to contain and eliminate ethnic divisions, crime,
corruption, violent extremism and terrorism, which
remain key issues in ensuring stability and prosperity
in the country and the region.
In conclusion, my delegation advocates full respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the
commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina within his mandate and we emphasize our
support for his efforts to promote the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also welcome the
extension of the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea, which we have
just unanimously adopted (resolution 2443 (2018)), and
we hope that the mission will continue its important
work of assisting the country and facilitating the
process of achieving lasting peace and stability, as well
as its support for the work of the High Representative
and the United Nations country team. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea is ready to work with the
international community to support the process towards
lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
also thank High Representative Valentin lnzko for his
important briefing. We would like to highlight the work
done by his Office in support of the implementation
of the civilian mandate of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and express our support for
his leadership.
Peru recognizes the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and considers it
necessary to move to strengthen its independence. For
that reason, we note with concern the limited progress
made on the implementation of the 5+2 agenda,
which has five objectives and two conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative for

18-362507/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We consider the general elections of
7 October and the political process that led up to them
to have been positive to the extent that they were carried
out peacefully and inclusively. It is always important
for citizens to be able to choose their representatives
freely through free and democratic elections. At
the same time, we must deplore the fact that Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s electoral procedures could not be
amended to facilitate a more far-reaching democratic
process and that ethnic confrontation prevailed over
the constructive approaches that the country and its
citizens require in order to build sustainable peace.
Faced with such a situation, we must continue to
emphasize the need to strengthen the rule of law, build
inclusive institutions and, in that connection, promote
political dialogue and reconciliation. We cannot
continue to lament incidents of violence. Political
leaders must live up to their responsibility in that
regard and share a vision for the future that is centred
on the economic and social development of the country.
In that regard, we emphasize the value of diversity and
the importance of safeguarding it in order to build a
strong democracy based on inclusive, transparent and
accountable institutions that guarantee access to justice
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts and prevent
further violence.
We view positively the efforts aimed at European
integration and compliance with the decisions of
the Constitutional Court. With regard to the latter,
however, we must stress the urgent need to harmonize
local legislation. We underscore the importance of
the amendments to the criminal procedure code that
have been adopted in order to more effectively combat
organized crime and corruption, as well as the need
to complement them with the creation of a specialized
prosecutor’s office and criminal chamber. We also
underline the importance of safeguarding the autonomy
of the various parts of the system of administration of
justice and of respecting the role that the press and civil
society organizations are called upon to play in order to
guarantee the rule of law in a democratic society.
We deplore the rhetoric of hatred, ethnic
confrontation, belligerence and the glorification of war
criminals. We believe that the decision of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska to repeal the report
on the Srebrenica genocide reveals a rejectionism
that must be condemned. We note with particular
concern that those tensions continue to hamper access
8/21

06/11/2018

to justice, reconciliation and the safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes, with full recognition of their ethnic and
religious diversity.
I conclude by stressing the importance of the
parties’ full cooperation with the High Representative
and with the European Union-led peacekeeping force
Operation Althea. They can count on Peru’s full support
in fulfilling the mandates we have just renewed.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the past nine years and for his dedicated
leadership of the Office of the High Representative.
The Office’s mission reflects the very ideals that
the Security Council envisions for a modern Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a peaceful and viable democracy
that is on course for Euro-Atlantic integration and
responsible for its own destiny and future. The United
States reiterates its strong support for the mandate of
the High Representative under the Dayton Accords as
the final authority on the interpretation of the civilian
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
consider the role of High Representative Inzko to be
essential, especially in the aftermath of the October
general elections and as the country continues to contend
with the divisive nationalistic rhetoric that threatens
to undermine gains made under the agreement. We
also commend the continued work of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea and
its role in preserving a safe and secure environment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United States is pleased
to support the renewal of its mandate.
We are concerned about those who seek to weaken
the constitutional order of the single State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, composed of two entities and three
constituent peoples, and we call on the members of
the Council to remain vigilant against any efforts to
undermine Bosnia and Herzegovina’s State-level
institutions. We renew our collective commitment to
upholding the Dayton Peace Accords by maintaining
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
The United States will hold accountable those who
threaten Bosnia and Herzegovina’s peace, security and
stability. Accountability is essential to discouraging
spoilers to the country’s political process. Let me
reiterate a position that we have repeatedly made clear
in the Chamber. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
must demonstrate the political will to follow through
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

on the commitments necessary to cementing their
country’s path into the European Union and NATO.
Euro-Atlantic integration is the only path for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s future as a responsible global player.
Those steps must be taken in concert with efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, tackle corruption, increase
economic opportunity and otherwise respond to the
needs of all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
regardless of their ethnicity or religion.
There is much to be optimistic about. We see
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future in the 23-year-old
poet who organized a nationwide poetry contest to
fight hate speech. We see the country’s future in the
work of its Interreligious Council, which just celebrated
its twentieth anniversary and dedicates its time to
promoting interfaith dialogue and visiting the sites of
attacks on religious institutions, four of which it has
visited in the past year. We also see the country’s future
in the ethnically diverse students from the town of
Jajce, who protested the further segregation of schools
after local authorities sought to build a school just for
Bosnian Muslim class members.
The United States looks forward to a time when
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully satisfies the objectives
and conditions for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative, also known as the 5+2 agenda, as
established by the Peace Implementation Council.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive
update on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
based on his recent report (S/2018/974, annex). We are
also pleased to see in the Chamber the delegations of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Union, Serbia,
Croatia and neighbouring countries.
Over the past six months since the last meeting
of the Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/PV.8248), important events have
occurred in the country, most importantly the general
elections held on 7 October. We believe that the elected
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
new opportunity to focus on the future of the country
and not on its past and to meet the national interests
of all of its peoples and citizens. It is now vital that
the new leadership realize and accept responsibility for
the situation in the country and make every effort to
move further in a unified direction. The international
community should help it engage in constructive
dialogue in a spirit of cooperation. That is where we

S/PV. 8392

can see the growing importance of the special role
and responsibility of external actors who have the
opportunity to positively influence the situation.
In that context, Kazakhstan welcomes the
continuous efforts of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in promoting
stability and reconciliation, while assisting Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its path to regional, political,
economic and social integration. We commend the
project activities of the mission in the areas of good
governance, justice and education, which uphold
human rights and the rule of law for all citizens. We
also believe that today’s extension of the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea for another 12 months is a necessary step on the
path to bringing peace and sustainability to the region.
In May, the members of the Security Council
voiced in this Chamber both the achievements and
their concern about the many serious problems that
exist in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately, those
challenges have not gone away and are waiting for their
further settlement. We therefore consider it necessary to
speed up the process of forming the House of Peoples,
in accordance with the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the functional
Government of the country at all levels for their urgent
implementation in practice.
We take positive note that, within the framework
of the reform agenda for 2015 to 2018, the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are implementing measures
for broad structural socioeconomic reforms. However,
as mentioned by the High Representative in his report
(S/2018/974, annex) most of those reforms remain at
the preparatory stage, including the depoliticization
of public administration and the restructuring of
State-owned enterprises, as well as reforms in
legislation entrenching the rule of law in every region
of the country.
In that regard, the main challenge is still in
formulating constitutional reform in order to improve
the system of public administration. The Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina should work closely with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to
improve the state of the economy and implement reforms
to improve the business and investment climate. The
Government-led reform of the financial system should
be aimed at reducing the share of the shadow economy
and the related negative implications of corruption. To

18-362509/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

that end, the role of the citizens themselves is invaluable,
and non-governmental organizations and the media
must be supported at the legislative and executive
levels. In that context, it is important to accelerate the
adoption of a nationwide strategy for managing public
finance, as well as strategies in areas such as energy,
employment and the national programme to harmonize
the Bosnia and Herzegovina legal system with European
Union standards.
Kazakhstan additionally notes the issue of
migration and refugees that was brought to the attention
of the Council at its previous meeting on this issue. The
recent events that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina
on the border with Croatia at the end of October clearly
demonstrated the existence of that problem and the
need for the timely and high-quality response of the
authorities and international organizations. Along with
the resolution of priority issues on the accommodation
of migrants, it is necessary to comprehensively
approach the settlement of that big challenge in the long
term. Stability not only in Bosnia and Herzegovina
but in South-East Europe in general depends on that.
Therefore, not only the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also international organizations,
foundations and relevant European Union structures,
should actively participate in that process.
To conclude, our delegation calls on the new
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all
measures to eliminate the existing costs of the judicial
system and ensure depoliticization, impartiality and
independence, including in the consideration of war
crimes cases. Kazakhstan also considers it crucial to
emphasize the high importance of respecting the Dayton
Accords as the basis not only of civil peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also of stability and security in
the region. Reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can be an example of resolving one the most complex
and protracted conflicts in the history of Europe and
become a pattern for other States and regions of the
world to follow.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for presenting his twentieth
report (S/2018/974, annex) as High Representative,
a sobering milestone. We highly value his dedicated
personal efforts and persistence in carrying out his
mandate for the greater good of the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
10/21

06/11/2018

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later this morning.
I will focus on the following issues: first, the rule
of law; secondly, the Office of the High Representative;
and thirdly, the issue of stability.
First, with regard to the rule of law, in the previous
debate on this item in the Council in May (see
S/PV.8248), we expressed concerns about the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have seen some
responsible steps taken since then, such as the passing
of amendments to the criminal procedure code, but
serious concerns remain. Erosion of the rule of law is
a threat to any democracy. When in combination with
divisive and revisionist rhetoric, such as that which we
continue to see in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it becomes
a toxic mix. We therefore call on the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to strengthen the rule of law
in their country, and to do so convincingly and at all
levels. Let me reiterate that the divisive and revisionist
rhetoric of political leaders is conducive neither to
reconciliation and cooperation, nor to the political
need to make compromises. We underline the points on
accountability in that context that were just made by
our American colleague. We also call on the authorities
to amend the election law, and State institutions must
continue to function properly.
Secondly, I turn to the High Representative and
his Office. With the rule of law under pressure and
rhetoric thriving, upholding the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace becomes
even more crucial, and the engagement of the Office of
the High Representative becomes even more pertinent.
The circumstances for closure of the Office are not
yet there As was pointed out by Mr. Inzko, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made limited progress in completing
the 5+2 agenda. The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
steadfast in its support for the High Representative and
his Office. Twenty-three years after it establishment,
the work is far from done — unfortunately, I would like
to add.
Thirdly and finally, I will address stability. It is
a precondition for strengthening the rule of law and
a precondition for upholding the civilian aspects of
the Framework Agreement. The European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea is key in
supporting the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in maintaining a safe and secure environment for its
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

citizens and maintaining stability in the region. We
therefore welcome the unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2443 (2018), renewing the mandate of
Operation Althea.
In conclusion, in his first report to the Security
Council, the first High Representative, Carl Bildt, wrote
that lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina “requires
a genuine commitment to ... the building of a future
in common” (S/1996/190, para. 104). That observation
still holds truth today. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EuroAtlantic integration in order to ensure the future
prosperity and security of its people and the region.
That future depends on the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and their will to reconcile, cooperate
and conclude highly needed political compromises. In
short, it depends on their will to truly lead. The time to
do so is now.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let be begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing.
Poland would like to convey its full support for his Office
and appreciation for its pivotal role in maintaining
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international
community has entrusted the High Representative with
great responsibility and provided him with far-reaching
prerogatives, the Bonn powers, which should be used if
the situation requires.
Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in our discussion.
There are clear conditions set by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, namely, the 5+2 agenda.
Like all other members of the international community,
Poland would like nothing more than to see them
fulfilled. As yet, however, that has not happened.
We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2443
(2018), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea for another year, and the
European Council conclusions of 15 October, which
confirmed its readiness to continue the mission’s
executive military mandate of maintaining a safe and
secure environment. As contributors to the mission
since its inception, we are proud to be part of that effort.
We note with appreciation the commitment of the
State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European integration as manifested in the ongoing

S/PV. 8392

work on the European Commission questionnaire. We
would also like to see the activation of the membership
action plan as soon as possible so that all citizens might
benefit from stability and security within Euro-Atlantic
structures. It lies squarely within the responsibilities
of the governing elites to remove all obstacles along
that path, particularly with regard to the registration of
immovable defence property.
There is much cause for concern in Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. It is worth recalling that, although
there is no imminent danger of armed conflict, stasis
should not be mistaken for stability. Almost a quarter
of a century after the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
country’s political elites have signally failed to instil
the sense of common destiny that could unite the
country’s peoples. Loyalties still lie along the ethnic
lines. Young people, the future of the country, emigrate
to seek a better future elsewhere. Centrifugal forces
fuelling nationalistic rhetoric glorifying convicted
war criminals and a lack of economic perspective,
combined with the endemic weakness of the State, are
a dangerous mix.
We meet today at a very delicate moment as
the outcome of the October elections is just being
finalized. We welcome the fact that they were genuinely
competitive and conducted peacefully. Regretfully,
however, neither the reform of the electoral law nor the
rulings of the European Court of Human Rights have
been introduced, and the situation remains sensitive.
It is now incumbent upon political parties to proceed
promptly with the formation of a Government on all
levels so that the will of the people is implemented and
fundamental institutional stability is put in place. It is
also the responsibility of the political elites to continue
with the reform agenda with firmness renewed energy.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland is vitally
interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united,
prosperous and modern democratic country, strongly
anchored in the Euro-Atlantic structures. We have been
with Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning, and
we will continue our active support as we have done
so far.
Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
Inzko, for his enlightening briefing on the latest
developments, particularly in the electoral process.

18-3625011/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina went to
the polls on 7 October to elect their representatives at
the level of the cantons, parliamentary assemblies and
the presidencies. More than 20 years after a deadly
conflict was brought to an end by the Dayton Peace
Accords, we can today be pleased by the holding of
elections deemed free by observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. However, the
many irregularities referred to in the report (S/2018/974,
annex) of the High Representative deserve our attention
so as to prevent their recurrence in future elections.
The new authorities will face three priorities
following the elections. The first, which is essential
for the future of the country, is national cohesion. As
pointed out by the High Representative and several
members of the Security Council, the provocations
and controversies launched by some political leaders
fuel inter-community tensions and undermine efforts
to build trust among the communities. It is the
responsibility of the new leaders to reject rhetoric
and positions that are likely to reopen the wounds of
the past. As such, almost a year after the closure of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the creation of the Residual Mechanism, France
strongly condemns the glorification of crimes and war
criminals, regardless of their community of origin.
It is unacceptable that after the commission of cruel
acts — and we all remember the Srebrenica massacre,
among others, as has been recalled — that politicians
continue to lift up as examples those responsible for the
most serious crimes. Strengthening national cohesion
requires more than ever that there be progress towards a
more consensual operation of the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We welcome the amendments made
to the criminal procedure code, which are an all-toorare example of a constructive approach.
National cohesion will have to be based on
justice. That is the second priority, no less essential,
on which I wish to expound. The rule of law and
respect for human rights are not a luxury to which only
prosperous countries can lay claim. On the contrary,
it is a condition for just and sustainable economic and
social development, the vitality of civil society and
the stability of institutions. France therefore calls on
all political actors to respect the decisions taken by
national and international judicial bodies, including on
the issue of electoral reform, in the interests of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Bosnian citizens.
12/21

06/11/2018

On the other hand, it is essential to make progress in
the fight against corruption and organized crime and to
ensure that all investigations are conducted in the most
impartial manner. We expect the Bosnian authorities
to take strong measures against a phenomenon of
corruption that fuels mistrust of the authorities and
encourages younger generations to continue to leave the
country. The High Representative has just mentioned
the statistics of those departures, a worrying indicator
for the future of the country.
That brings me to the third and last priority,
which is the European perspective. France associates
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union in a few minutes. The prospect of
European Union integration, in due course and when
the conditions are met, is an extension of the European
Union’s widespread and multifaceted involvement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Throughout that involvement,
the European Union military Operation Althea, to
which we have just renewed our collective support
and which must continue its transition with regard to
its non-executive tasks, continues to contribute to the
stabilization of the country. The competent European
services, for their part, are redoubling their efforts to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its rapprochement
with the European Union and to prepare an opinion
on the candidature of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
membership in the European Union. It is up to Bosnian
political leaders to implement the necessary reforms,
particularly in the areas of the rule of law, human rights
and economic and social development, in order to
make progress along their path towards Europe. In that
perspective, we encourage Bosnian political leaders to
favour a consensual decision-making process.
As we commemorate the centenary of the end of the
Great War, we have the responsibility to bear witness
to the cruel violence that ravaged Europe over the past
century and to defend, with force and conviction, a
spirit of reconciliation. It is not only an ideal but also
a practice, as has been mentioned. France does that on
a daily basis with Germany. We encourage the leaders
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage resolutely in that
direction with the interests of all Bosnian citizens as
their sole objective.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by
thanking the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko,
for his informative briefing today. Sweden continues to
fully support his mandate and his important work for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Twenty-three years have passed since those intense
November weeks in Ohio, when the DaytonAagreement
on the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina was being
negotiated. The Agreement marked the starting point of
the long path towards reconstruction and reconciliation.
While much has been achieved over the years, important
steps remain for Bosnia and Herzegovina to build a
country of prosperity, peace, stability and equality
for all.
The conduct of general elections last month was
one such important step. We welcome that the elections
could proceed without any major security incidents.
At the same time, we condemn the threats and attacks
against journalists during the election campaign. We
also regret that the campaign was tainted by divisive
and nationalistic rhetoric, and that more attention was
not given to what is most urgently needed — reform.
Socioeconomic reforms and improvements in
the rule of law must be at the centre of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political priorities. High unemployment,
widespread corruption and mismanagement erode the
trust between citizens and authorities. As we heard from
the High Representative, young and educated citizens are
leaving the country to look for opportunities elsewhere.
That is a worrying trend that must be reversed. Yet the
pace of reform has unfortunately stalled in recent years.
The country’s political leaders must now take on the
responsibility they have to enable it to make a rapid
return to a path of reform. To that end, all the relevant
actors must now engage in constructive dialogue aimed
at forming Governments and parliaments at all levels
without further delay.
Bosnia and Herzegovina reconfirmed its strategic
priority of joining the European Union (EU) with
its application for membership in 2016. The further
integration of the Western Balkans remains a top priority
for the European Union. We welcome the participation
of the observer of the EU in our meeting this morning,
elaborating on EU efforts, and align ourselves with
his statement. A credible EU perspective, based on
progress according to its own merits, continues to be
one of the most powerful drivers of peace, stability and
prosperity in the region. In the work of achieving deeper
integration, Bosnia and Herzegovina and its European
partners must now strengthen their cooperation to
meet their common challenges, which include trade
and sustainable economic development, environmental
protection, organized crime, terrorism and migration,
to mention only a few.

S/PV. 8392

Regional cooperation and reconciliation in the
Western Balkans is crucial to stability and progress.
Sweden therefore supports the Regional Cooperation
Council’s important work in strengthening goodneighbourly relations in the region. Bridging cultural
and social differences through increased regional
exchanges is essential, not least among children
and young people, and involving young people in
peacebuilding activities is definitely an important
prerequisite for sustaining peace anywhere, as outlined
in resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). In that
same context, a stable peace also requires the full
participation of women. More attention and devotion
to that issue is needed, and future reports from the
High Representative should better reflect the specific
challenges and opportunities for women. Such analyses
integrating a gender perspective would benefit our
future briefings and inform a more strategic response.
Finally, for a country to move forward, its focus
must be on the future rather than mired in the past. That
is true both for reconciliation within the country and for
its relations with neighbours. Bosnia and Herzegovina
can continue to count on strong international support,
and in that regard we welcome today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2443 (2018), renewing the
mandate of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union’s commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU perspective is unequivocal. Sweden,
for its part, will remain a steadfast partner of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its path towards a stable and
prosperous future.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2018/974,
annex). We would like to reiterate our support for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We welcome the positive developments apparent
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the reporting period,
particularly its continued engagement with the European
Union (EU) on the country’s accession process and
progress on some legislative aspects, such as the code
of criminal procedure. That progress is testament to the
country’s commitment to the EU integration process,
with far-reaching long-term positive consequences

18-3625013/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

for the stability and prosperity of the country and the
region at large.
We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that have undermined Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political stability. In particular, we
note the divisive rhetoric and actions that continue to
challenge the constitutional order and integrity of the
State-level judiciary system in the country. In that
regard, we call on all authorities and political leaders
to fully respect the decision of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respect for the rule of law
and the authority of the State institutions established
under the Dayton Accords is fundamental to the
State-building process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is therefore important to ensure that all parties
refrain from provocative statements and actions that
could undermine the country’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity, cohesion and constitutional order.
We also note the continued disagreement concerning
changes to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s electoral law. We
believe the issue must be handled very carefully, as it
has the potential to undermine the country’s continuity
and stability. It is our hope that the Constitutional
Court’s ruling on its review of the election law will be
implemented in a manner consistent with the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We also encourage the relevant
parties to undertake serious political dialogue to
address and solve differences amicably.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his Office in discharging
their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Accords. We call on the
parties to extend the necessary cooperation, which is
crucial to the work of the High Representative. We
also recognize the vital role played by the EU military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea,
in maintaining safety and stability in the country.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2443 (2018)
renewing the mission’s mandate for another 12 months.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Regrettably, we have concluded that the
quality of the reports of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina gets worse every time. It is clear that
Mr. Inzko is trying to tailor his assessments of what is
going on in the country according to his notion — which
suits him and the other supporters of the never-ending
preservation of an outside protectorate for Bosnia
14/21

06/11/2018

and Herzegovina — of the incapacity of the country’s
governing bodies and entire political class generally.
We believe that approach is fundamentally mistaken,
disrespectful to Bosnians and untethered to reality.
Despite the painful legacy of the 1992-1995 conflict,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is gradually developing on
both the social and economic fronts. Its gross domestic
product, exports and people’s incomes are increasing and
unemployment is falling. On 7 October general elections
were once again held in accordance with democratic
standards, as was confirmed by international observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. A foreign policy based on a balance of the
interests of the Bosnian parties is being implemented.
In 2010 and 2011, Sarajevo successfully carried out the
functions of a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, and in 2015 it presided over the Council of
Ministers of the Council of Europe. Problems arise, as
with any State, but they are far from insurmountable
for Bosnians.
The successful experience of the Brčko District,
where the foreign Supervisor’s activities had been
frozen since 2012, clearly shows that the Office of the
High Representative is a relic of the past for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Worse than that, its very presence hampers
the internal Bosnian dialogue and fuels attitudes of
dependency among a certain part of the establishment.
For the entire period of almost 10 years that the High
Representative has been in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
he has exploited the resources of his Office to advance
the NATO and European Union agendas and settle
accounts with Bosnian leaders who acknowledge the
protectorate’s irrelevance, instead of carrying out the
tasks assigned to him with regard to implementing the
civilian aspects of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.
In future, we urge the High Representative to
avoid tendentious comments about one or other of the
country’s political parties on the eve of elections, as
occurred during Mr. Inzko’s interview with the Austrian
newspaper Wiener Zeitung on 2 October, widely
reproduced in the Bosnian media. In the interview, the
High Representative directed one-sided criticism at the
major Bosnian Serb party, the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats, breaching every democratic norm
and his own mandate by essentially joining the election
campaign on the side of the opposition.
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The smearing of Bosnian Serbs and Croats who are
against the erosion of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
attempts to centralize the country long ago morphed
into an end in themselves for the High Representative,
who in his most recent report (S/2018/974, annex) has
no qualms about referring to unverified media accounts
or simply plucking overreaching conclusions out of the
air. For example, he expounds on the alleged rampant
corruption and the Bosnian authorities’ inability
to combat it based on the overtly politicized and
completely unsubstantiated decision — which means
there should be no place for it in a report — of the United
States Department of State to include a Bosnian-Serb
parliamentarian, Nikola Špirić, on its restricted list on
the eve of the elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The High Representative also speculates about the
tragic death of a student, David Dragičević, in a way
that portrays what occurred as some sort of systemic
flaw in the Republika Srpska judiciary. In our view
such assessments are cynical and irresponsible. For
those of our colleagues who would like to have a more
balanced and factual picture of what is happening in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we once again recommend
that they read the report of the Government of Republika
Srpska, which according to tradition is drafted in Banja
Luka to coincide with today’s meeting. We urge the
High Representative to abandon his one-sided selfinvolvement in Bosnia’s internal political wrangling
and do his proper job, the implementation of the 5+2
plan, which the Office has so far abandoned that this
key task is barely mentioned in passing, like some
minor side issue.
A clear inadequacy in the High Representative’s
report, in our view, is the absence, for all practical
purposes, of any serious analysis of possible ways to
emerge from the crisis situation in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina related to the exclusion of the
procedure for filling the upper house of the Parliament
from the current version of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
election law. The situation is fraught with issues
regarding the composition of the House of Peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Parliamentary Assembly and
the installation of the President and members of the
Government of the Federation. We hope that the Office
of the High Representative will prepare the relevant
completed plans at least by early December, when the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board meets.
As for Russia’s approach to a Bosnian settlement,
we continue to focus on doing everything possible to

S/PV. 8392

facilitate compliance with the Dayton Agreement and
to develop a mutually beneficial dialogue with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Our message about the importance
of respect for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the broad powers
of the two entities and the equality of the country’s
three constituent peoples, as provided for in the
Peace Agreement, were received in a constructive
spirit by all the Bosnian parties during the working
visit on 21 September by Sergey Lavrov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. We believe
that the time for an outside protectorate has passed.
The international community’s role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be based on helping Bosnians
broaden the scope of their common interests and
find their own recipes for compromise solutions to
problem issues, including reforming the judicial system
and removing the foreign experts from the country’s
Constitutional Court.
The Bosnian Croats’ idea for fine-tuning Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s electoral system deserves attention.
It would provide sufficient guarantees for filling
senior leadership positions exclusively with legitimate
representatives of each of the country’s constituent
peoples. Unfortunately, during the recent elections a
member of the Presidium of Bosnia and Herzegovina
from the Croats was once again elected by votes from
the Bosniak majority. It would be desirable for the
Bosnians to reach an agreement on how to prevent this
practice in the future. It is not acceptable to artificially
crank up the pressure on the Republika Srspka in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its legitimately elected leaders.
We have a principled objection to unilateral sanctions
on Bosnian Serb leaders.
In response to my British colleague, I want to
confirm that as a member of the Contact Group of the
Steering Board, Russia is committed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stability and development. But we have
not signed on to any obligations to drag the country into
Euro-Atlantic structures. That is not our business and
it is not the United Kingdom’s, either. It is the business
of the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
we definitely do not agree with the policy of dragging
Bosnia and Herzegovina into NATO. Such actions only
worsen the tensions in the country and distract the
Bosnian parties from working for reform. In this case,
the consensus on domestic political issues provided
for in the 1995 Peace Agreement cannot be achieved,
owing to the principled position of the Bosnian Serbs,

18-3625015/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

who are not prepared to see alliance-based dividing
lines drawn between the Republika Srpska and Serbia.
We stand in solidarity with the views of many
European States on the gravity of the threat of the
proliferation of radical extremist ideologies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The activities of the Islamic underground
must be eliminated by the country’s relevant bodies,
including in the context of regional cooperation.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his valuable briefing and recent report
on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2018/974, annex). I also want to
underline our full support to the High Representative
in implementing his mandate and in his efforts to assist
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to overcome
the challenges they are facing.
We commend the efforts to maintain stability and
unity in Bosnia and Herzegovina for all its racial and
cultural components. We also recognize and appreciate
the important role of the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force in achieving that goal.
We also welcome the Council’s unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2443 (2018), which sends a strong
message from the international community to the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina that we are committed to
maintaining security and stability there and determined
to continue providing the support needed to enhance
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, signed more than two
decades ago, continues to represent the cornerstone
of institutional stability and to serve as a constant
reference point for sustainable peace in the country. We
are therefore concerned about the ongoing escalation
of divisive and inflammatory rhetoric, and we call on
all political leaders to prioritize the national interests
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina above all
other considerations and to disregard any narrow
racial or political interests that could undermine the
chances for progress and stability. They must also
work constructively to implement the results of the
7 October elections, including the formation of the
Government, in order to make further progress in the
political process as soon as possible. The Parliament
must also intensify its efforts to adopt new legislation
16/21

06/11/2018

to provide the judicial system with the necessary tools
for combating organized crime, corruption, terrorism
and extremism, which constitute a direct threat to the
rule of law and hinder efforts to achieve economic and
social development and accomplish integration with the
European Union.
As the report states, these events are happening
at a time when limited progress is being made in
implementing the 5+2 agenda established for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative,
especially where the registration of defence property
in the Republika Srpska is concerned. In that regard,
we reiterate our full support to the Office of the
High Representative, pursuant to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. We call on him to intensify his efforts to fully
implement the plan.
We are concerned about the increase in the number
of refugees and displaced persons who returned to
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning of the year.
Their number had grown to nearly 18,000 by October,
whereas last year it stood at 758. Aid agencies have
warned that this could potentially lead to thousands of
people being left without adequate shelter.
In conclusion, Kuwait underlines the importance of
respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All stakeholders must
respect its national Constitution and all the judgments
rendered by its judicial bodies to strengthen the pillars
of stability in the country. We call on all parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make concerted efforts
to implement the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to respect the
mandate of the High Representative, pursuant to annex
10 of that Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his briefing.
Taking into account the early renewal of the mandate,
we hope that Operation EUFOR Althea and the Office
of the High Representative will continue to cooperate
closely and play a constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bolivia reiterates its commitment to full respect for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, we emphasize
that safeguarding them requires that its Constitution and
the decisions rendered by the judiciary be respected,
in accordance with the rule of law. We also call on
political leaders and all parties to refrain from using
rhetoric that promotes the division of the country.
With regard to recent events, we commend the
holding of general elections in October and welcome
the fact that they took place in an atmosphere of calm.
However, we are concerned that the parties did not reach
an agreement on electoral reform. We therefore call on
them to work together in an inclusive environment and
to respect the Dayton Peace Agreement, which remains
the legal basis and benchmark for stability and the
peaceful settlement of disputes among the parties.
We also welcome the adoption of the amendments
to the criminal procedure code, a joint endeavour that
demonstrates the commitment of the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue undertaking the
necessary reforms in order to promote the country’s
stability and contribute to the initiatives aimed at
achieving the development and stability they seek. We
therefore encourage them to focus on those aspects and
to intensify their efforts in implementing the 5+2 plan
as a prerequisite for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.
Despite those advances, certain challenges remain
with regard to the political environment. We call on
political leaders to pursue dialogue and take consensual
action. The challenges should not be an obstacle that
threatens the stability of the country. We urge all parties
to put the interests of their people before particular
political or ethnic interests.
Similarly, we call on local authorities, the
international community and all regional, subregional
and United Nations agencies to intensify efforts
to support the thousands of refugees who have
applied for asylum throughout the year, especially
with the coming of winter, since many do not have
adequate accommodation.
Finally, we encourage the entire population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to live together in harmony
by overcoming the divisions of the past and putting
shared development first. In that regard, we urge the
international community to take a neutral and equitable
approach in considering the concerns of all parties with
a view to achieving lasting stability.

S/PV. 8392

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
At the outset, I thank High Representative Inzko
for his briefing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a major country in the
Balkans. General elections were held there recently.
Maintaining the peace, stability and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interests of
the region and of the international community at large.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice made by its people
for the future of their country. We support the peaceful
coexistence and common development of the various
ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope
that they will commit to dialogue and consultation to
seek common understanding, implement the Dayton
Peace Agreement, promote economic development and
achieve greater progress in nation-building so as to
ensure that the dividends of peace and development are
shared by all.
The international community should increase its
support for the economic development of the country
and create favourable conditions for achieving national
reconciliation and lasting peace. The international
community should pay special attention to the
views and concerns of all affected parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and take a balanced and prudent
approach. China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko in facilitating the political process
in the country and hopes that he will continue to play a
constructive role in the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement, in accordance with his mandate.
China supports the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2443 (2018), which renewed the mandate of
the European Union-led Operation Althea. We hope
that the European Union force will continue to play a
positive role in maintaining security and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Together with the rest of the
international community, China is ready to do its part
in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve long-term
peace, development and prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

18-3625017/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. Dronjic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): As this is
the first time that I am addressing the Council, allow
me to begin on a personal note by expressing my feeling
of pride and humility, for there is no greater honour
for a career diplomat than to represent his country
at the United Nations, and especially at a Security
Council meeting.
I would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency for the month of November and wish you,
Mr. President, success in your endeavours.
As the Council is aware, on 7 October general
elections took place in my country. The results of the
elections have still not been declared official by the
Central Electoral Commission. Pending the official
confirmation of the results, the newly elected members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be sworn in and take office on 20 November, in two
weeks. According to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Presidency is responsible for the
country’s foreign policy, which requires the approval
by consensus of public statements made on behalf of
the Presidency at international organizations and their
bodies. As this is a transitional period, the outgoing
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
could not reach consensus at this stage on the substance
of the statement to be delivered at this meeting.
Therefore, in my personal capacity, I can only thank
Mr. Inzko for his twentieth report (S/2018/974, annex)
and his briefing today.
I would also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for adopting the resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and extending
the mandate of the European Union-led stabilization
force, Operation Althea, for an additional period of 12
months (resolution 2443 (2018)). I note that, in spite of
some difficulties, the resolution deems that the security
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains calm
and stable.
Furthermore, I would like to thank the European
Union for allocating €7.2 million in grants to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the area of migration and
border management.
In addition, I would like to thank the Government
of the Netherlands and the United Nations Development
Programme for granting $245,400 for the EXPLODE+
project, which will help to dispose of the ammunition
surplus and further contribute to the security of the
population in the country and the region.
18/21

06/11/2018

In conclusion, I sincerely hope that the newly elected
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will find the modus operandi that will enable them to
overcome situations like this one and spare me from
being put in a somewhat awkward position.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I would like to share with
the Security Council the conclusions reached by the
European Union (EU).
The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to its perspective on Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single, united and sovereign country.
Following the elections on 7 October and recalling
the conclusions reached in June, the European Union
expects all leaders to engage constructively on the
formation of Government at all levels, which is in the
interests of all citizens. The European Union recalls that
it expects the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
prioritize taking forward the reforms that are needed
for the country to advance along its EU path, while
ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
reform agenda.
In that context, the European Union welcomes the
continued presence of Operation Althea, which, in the
follow-up of the 2017 strategic review, has refocused
on its core mandate, while retaining the elements of
capacity-building and training that are deemed still
necessary and phasing out the other elements that are
no longer relevant. In that context, as part of the overall
EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Union confirms its readiness at this stage to continue
the executive military mandate of Operation Althea to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities in order
to maintain the safe and secure environment under a
renewed United Nations mandate.
The European Union looks forward to the
presentation of the next strategic review in 2019 as a
basis for discussion with member States on the tasks of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force and options
for the future of Operation Althea, while also bearing
in mind the need to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
progress in its EU integration process and taking into
account the security situation on the ground. The
European Union recognizes the importance of the
continued coordination of the European Union-led
Operation Althea with other international actors on the
ground. The European Union at the same time continues
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with the support of the international community, to
accelerate its efforts to address the disposal of excess
ammunition, weapons and explosive devices, as well as
demining and other outstanding issues.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Bilateral cooperation with
neighbours has always been the linchpin of Serbia’s
approach to foreign policy. It has considered it catalytic
for a new type of relations of a higher quality in the
Western Balkans and the whole of South-East Europe.
That is particularly true of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
our next-door neighbour and one of my country’s
closest partners. The endeavour has been motivated
not only by immediate and practical needs but also
by larger considerations, such as restoring confidence
and achieving reconciliation, both inside and outside
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and promoting the aspirations
of both countries to join the European Union.
Serbia is a guarantor of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, which was instrumental in putting an
end to the tragic conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
more than 20 years ago. The Agreement also laid the
foundation for the peaceful and stable future of its
peoples and, very important, for their reconciliation. It
is our firm belief that that Agreement also continues to
be the basis of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in
the future.
As a staunch advocate of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States in the conduct of
international relations, my country has also been guided
by that principle in its respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
development and stability of that country within the
framework defined by the Dayton Agreement has
always been of the utmost importance to Serbia, given
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is also home to 1.5 million
Serbs. After all, it is only through political stability and
economic development that the country can ensure
progress to all of its constituent peoples and become a
prosperous country and reliable partner of the region.
More than two decades after the signing of the
Dayton Agreement and the establishment of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a sovereign independent State, the
key role of dialogue and consensus has been paramount
in addressing all of the issues among the country’s
three constituent peoples and two entities. Those are

S/PV. 8392

just as important now — at a time of reforms, the
pursuit of European Union membership criteria and the
implementation of the required standards in the process
of European integration — as they have ever been.
We trust and believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leaders have the will and resolve to address
those issues through dialogue and that they will reach
consensus to the benefit of all its peoples, who have a
great stake in the well-being of the country.
Different opinions have been bandied about of late
on Bosnia and Herzegovina vis-à-vis various questions,
one of which pertains to the election law and its possible
amendment. Serbia considers that those are internal
questions that are best resolved through agreements
among political actors within the existing legal system,
in a constructive atmosphere and with mutual respect.
On 7 October, however, general elections were held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is expected that Government
institutions will soon be established and that they will
assume their responsibilities in the interests of all of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens.
Serbia will remain an eager and reliable partner
in achieving ever-more dynamic cooperation in the
interests of both countries. We continue to invite
dialogue at all levels and promote bilateral relations.
Regular contacts have also been maintained at the
working level and concrete questions requiring joint
efforts have been identified. Those questions are
also expected to be addressed upon the completion
of the electoral process and the establishment of new
institutions. In that connection, Serbia stands ready
not only to maintain its level of cooperation but also
improve it, together with the central authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to intensify its relations
with the Republika of Srpska and conduct those
relations in a transparent way, in accordance with the
Dayton Agreement, and to expand cooperation with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia continues to be interested in furthering
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially in the fields of investment, joint ventures,
energy and infrastructure, among others. The trade
exchange between the two countries is robust and
increasing; it is expected to reach the €2 billion
mark by the end of this year. Having invested over €l
billion, Serbia is one of the largest investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

18-3625019/21

S/PV.8392

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Consolidation rather than enlargement may be the
ongoing priority of the European Union. We in the
Western Balkans, however, have been emboldened
by the messages from Brussels that the continuation
of the policy of enlargement in our region is a stable
process and that new regional memberships are even
being envisaged before 2025. Serbia is ready to share
its experience on the integration process and with
respect to the negotiation chapters available to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We wish our neighbour and partner
success in its reform and accession processes.
Serbia is one of the strongest proponents of
regional cooperation. Political and economic stability
is in the common interests of all of us in South-East
Europe. Relentless in its efforts to create even better
conditions to bring about economic growth and
increase the living standards of the population of the
region, my country will not be deterred by occasional
divergent and disruptive messages, which we believed
belonged to the past. Instead, we shall continue to
work hard towards promoting stability, development
and good-neighbourliness in the region, particularly
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the aim of bringing
about prosperity and a better future on both sides of the
Drina River.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia welcomes this
opportunity to discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the outset, I would like to welcome the
High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thank him
for his report (S/2018/974, annex) and briefing today.
High Representative Inzko pointed out in his report
that the Dayton Agreement guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
internal constitutional position of the entities and that
three constituent peoples are equal. That should be our
point of departure for today’s debate.
As the only European Union member State
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina, and one of
its main trade and investment partners, as well as a
signatory of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Croatia
has a special responsibility and interest in the overall
well-being and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are therefore
one of Croatia’s foreign-policy priorities.
20/21

06/11/2018

Croatia would like to see Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a member of the European Union and NATO and
as a country where genuine institutional and political
equality among three constituent peoples — Bosniaks,
Croats and Serbs — and all citizens is not only
guaranteed on paper but implemented in practice
as well.
At the previous Council meeting on this matter
in May, Croatia cautioned that the period ahead of us
would be of key importance for the future development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.8248). On
7 October, general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina
were held in an overall orderly manner and without
major incident. We note that the elections were assessed
as genuinely competitive by international observers.
However, we have witnessed that in those elections
the fundamental principle of the full equality of three
constituent peoples was not respected. Once again,
in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a more
numerous constituent people chose the representative
of the smaller one. Contrary to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution and democratic standards,
Croats were deprived of the opportunity to elect their
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That runs contrary to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
It will not contribute to overcoming the legacy of the
past or to the better functioning of the country, and
neither will it strengthen the democratic standards
and respect for the rights of all citizens. Quite to the
contrary, that misuse of the election process has the
potential to further burden relations among peoples
and lead to the loss of trust among ordinary citizens in
democratic institutions. Nothing could jeopardize the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina more than creating
such misbalances among constituent peoples.
Croatia has continuously pointed out, including
through our statements in this very Chamber, the
complexity of the political and legal fabric in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which requires constant attention
and carefully designed solutions. Regrettably, it seems
that on too many occasions there has not been enough
understanding and willingness to appropriately address
the crucial problems of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we emphasized in our statement in May, the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
confirmed that the legitimate and proportional
representation of three constituent peoples at all levels is
the overarching principle enshrined in the Constitution
18-36250

06/11/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8392

of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia fully respects the
constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a federal State in which the three constituent peoples,
along with the others and all citizens, should be equal
at all political and administrative levels.

political representation and to work together towards
the country’s institutional stability. That institutional
stability is crucial for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet in full its obligations arising from the European
integration process.

The pending reform of the election law and all
further institutional reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should respect that fact. It is of key importance to
embark on reform of the election law without delay in
order to avoid possible similar electoral engineering in
the future. By the same token, the latest election results
need to be implemented in line with the Constitutional
Court decision on legitimate and proportional
representation, whether that is done based on an ad hoc
solution or a permanent solution.

Croatia has always been ready to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in improving its institutional
and administrative capacity and fulfilling all the
requirements on the path towards integration into
the European Union. We encourage our friend and
neighbour to proceed without delay with the reforms
in many fields, including the judiciary, the fight
against corruption, economic reforms, efficient border
management, as well as the fight against political
radicalism and elements of religious extremism.
Advancement in those processes is not only the best
investment in the country’s future, but also a way to
help it overcome difficult burdens of the past.

The refusal to implement the decision of the
Constitutional Court on the reform of the election law
jeopardizes the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
leaving open space for further political manipulations.
It cannot be overstated: the principle of the equality
of Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs represents the very
foundation on which Bosnia and Herzegovina is built.
We now expect that all political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will assume their responsibilities
and engage in the formation of the parliaments and
Governments at all levels, by working constructively
together, in the interests of the constituent peoples
and all citizens of their country. In that respect,
finding a domestic solution to enable the formation
of the Federation House of Peoples and other political
institutions dependent upon its formation, as required by
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court rulings,
is of the utmost importance. Other election-related
issues, including provisions for holding local elections
in Mostar and the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency,
should also be immediately addressed.
As the strongest supporter and advocate of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s stability, prosperity and territorial
integrity, Croatia will continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, at the
European and international levels. Its future depends
on the ability of three constituent peoples to embark
together on a progressive and modern platform that
embraces the highest democratic standards of legitimate

Taking into account the political and security
situation on the ground and the importance of
maintaining a safe and secure environment, Croatia
voices its support for the European Union’s Operation
Althea and the mandate entrusted to it by the Council.
Croatia strongly encourages the three new members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work in
the interests of their country, with particular sensitivity
for the constituent peoples they represent, but also to
rise above entity-focused and nationalist politics and
reach out to all citizens. We expect the Presidency
and the new Governments to uphold the common
principles of the rule of law, respect for diversity and
the commitment to lasting reconciliation, in a true
European spirit.
Finally, as the strongest supporter and advocate
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability, prosperity and
territorial integrity, Croatia advocates, and will continue
to do so, for a strong and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
levels, this Chamber included. A sovereign, peaceful,
stable and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina — a
multiethnic country of three equal constituent peoples
and all citizens — was, is and should remain our
strategic goal.
The meeting rose at noon.

18-3625021/21
