A /70/PV.95

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

95th plenary meeting

Friday, 13 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/859)
The President: I invite members to turn their
attention to the note by the Secretary-General contained
in document A/70/859. In his note, the SecretaryGeneral informs the General Assembly that in its
decision 60/409, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the Secretary-General, elected Mr. Achim Steiner as
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for a four-year term of office, beginning on
15 June 2006 and ending on 14 June 2010.
In its decision 64/420, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, the Assembly re-elected Mr. Achim
Steiner for an additional four-year term of office,
beginning on 15 June 2010 and ending on 14 June 2014.
In its decision 68/416, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral, the Assembly re-elected Mr. Steiner for an
additional two-year term, beginning on 15 June 2014
and ending on 14 June 2016.
In accordance with section II, paragraph 2, of
General Assembly resolution 2997 of the twentyseventh session, of 15 December 1972, and following
a thorough review and evaluation of the candidates
proposed to succeed Mr. Steiner, the Secretary-General

16-13644 (E)

wishes to nominate Mr. Erik Solheim for election as
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for a term of four years, beginning on
15 June 2016 and ending on 14 June 2020.
Accordingly, may I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to elect Mr. Erik Solheim as Executive Director
of the United Nations Environment Programme for
a term of four years, beginning on 15 June 2016 and
ending on 14 June 2020?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c)of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: In order for the General Assembly
to consider the report of the Fifth Committee under the
sub-item, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 114. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 114 and
proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The President: Accordingly, the General Assembly
shall now resume its consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 114.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1613644*

A/70/PV.95

13/05/2016

Agenda item 114 (continued)

Agenda item 78 (continued)

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

Report of the International Criminal Court

(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Netherlands to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.21.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/540/Add.1)
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the report of the Fifth Committee concerning
a vacancy in the membership of Committee on
Contributions as a result of the resignation of Mr. Kunal
Khatri of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
In paragraph 3 of the report, the Fifth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint
Mr. Simon Hough of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning on 13 May
2016 and ending on 31 December 2017.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Simon Hough as a member of the Committee
on Contributions for a term of office beginning on
13 May 2016 and ending on 31 December 2017?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 114.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held its debate and concluded its consideration
on agenda item 78 at its 49th plenary meeting, on
6 November 2015.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 78, “Report of the
International Criminal Court”. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to reopen consideration
of agenda item 78 and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided.
2/13

Draft resolution (A/70/L.47)

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 78, draft resolution
A/70/L.47, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”.
In addition to the 62 countries listed in document
A/70/L.47, 17 countries have indicated their wish to be
included as sponsors of the draft resolution. It is my
understanding that the Secretariat will read out the
names of the countries involved. This brings the total
number of sponsors to 79.
On 5 November 2015, following in the footsteps of
her illustrious predecessors, the third President of the
International Criminal Court, Judge Silvia Fernández
de Gurmendi, presented the eleventh annual report
of the International Criminal Court (see A/70/350)
to this body (see A/70/PV.48). Once again we had a
very constructive and in-depth debate that revolved
around three basic elements: universality, cooperation
and complementarity.
First, with regard to universality, in order to bolster
the Court’s success in fulfilling its mandate, universal
adherence to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court remains essential. This year, we
welcomed El Salvador as the latest State to accede to
the Rome Statute, bringing the number of States parties
to 124. It is our sincere hope that others will join in the
near future. It is our firm opinion that all those that are
committed to holding the perpetrators of international
crimes to account should show no hesitation and become
parties to the Rome Statute. Universal adherence to
the Rome Statute is the only way to guarantee that
perpetrators of the most horrible acts imaginable can
no longer count on impunity.
My second point is on cooperation. Let me highlight
that the situation with respect to the outstanding arrest
warrants remains worrying. President Fernández de
Gurmendi reminded us that the Court relies heavily
on the cooperation of States and organizations at every
step of the process — from investigation to arrests, from
witness protection to the enforcement of sentences.
16-13644

13/05/2016

If States do not provide the cooperation necessary
for the Court’s functioning, in accordance with their
legal obligations, the Court will not be able to fulfil its
mandate and impunity will continue to flourish. The
cooperation of States, international organizations and
civil society remains essential.
We are pleased that the United Nations has
continued to assist the Court in its endeavours through
implementation of the Relationship Agreement. We
have noted that the Court has expressed gratitude for
the support it has received from the United Nations,
but we have also heard its requests for attention to the
ongoing challenges the Court is facing due to a lack
of full cooperation. The only way to make progress
towards our common goal of ending impunity is for all
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
civil society to work together. We therefore commend
the Court for expanding its interaction and cooperation
with other international and regional organizations,
institutions and entities all over the world.
My third point is about complementarity. The
principle of complementarity is a hallmark of the
Court, of course. The primary responsibility to comply
with their obligations under the Rome Statute lies with
national authorities. It is also their responsibility to
address cases that involve crimes under the Court’s
jurisdiction. If the national authorities are able to do
that effectively, the Court’s investigations become
superfluous. In view of the Court’s massive workload,
all States can do a better job in that regard, not only by
improving the prevention of international crimes and
the protection of civilians, but also by prosecuting the
perpetrators of such crimes.
To conclude discussion of this issue, the eleventh
report of the International Criminal Court and the
ensuing debate once again emphasized the role of the
Court in upholding the rule of law and human rights,
but also in promoting peace and security. Sustainable
peace cannot be achieved if the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes go unpunished. Peace and justice remain
complementary requirements, and together they serve
as a trigger for development.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands continues to
take pride in being the host State for the International
Criminal Court. On 19 April, the Court moved to its
permanent location, and in the presence of His Majesty
King Willem Alexander, the Secretary-General, the
principals of the Court and many other dignitaries, the

A/70/PV.95

inauguration ceremony of the new premises took place.
As Mr. Bert Koenders, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands, said at the event, the Court owes its
existence to two basic human instincts: empathy and
a collective resolve — empathy for victims and their
loved ones, and the collective resolve to work together
and shape our common future to ensure peace and
justice. To put that empathy and resolve to the best
possible use, we must all work together with the Court,
for the sake of those victims and their loved ones, and
for future generations.
The Netherlands reiterates its commitment to
being a partner in the pursuit of peace, justice and
development. Those three fundamental pillars are
inseparable and form the cornerstone of the work of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands here, within the United
Nations.
I will now turn to the draft resolution itself, which
continues to serve three main objectives. The first is to
provide political support for the International Criminal
Court, its mandate, its aims and the work it does. The
second is to underline the importance of the relationship
between the Court and the United Nations on the basis of
the Relationship Agreement and the two bodies’ central
role in ending impunity and upholding human rights.
Lastly, it serves to remind States and international and
regional organizations of the necessity of cooperating
with the International Criminal Court as it carries out
its tasks.
The Netherlands presents draft resolution
A/70/L.47 to the Assembly today with the desire that
it once again be adopted by consensus. I hope that it
will contribute to continued and even greater support
for the Court in its fight against impunity and its efforts
to hold the perpetrators of serious crimes accountable
for their actions. Let us all continue to work together
for peace and justice.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.47.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft resolution,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): During the prolonged negotiation process, our
delegation repeatedly urged that we work together on

16-136443/13

A/70/PV.95

a pragmatic approach to the draft resolution before us
today (A/70/L.47) and to our efforts to finalize it. It is
regrettable that not everyone supported our constructive
attitude. The amendments proposed by States that are
not party to the Rome Statute were ignored.
In our view, such amendments are long overdue.
The majority of the optimism-drenched provisions that
are mechanically transferred, year after year, from one
resolution on the report of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to the next have little in common today
with the real state of affairs both in and around the
Court. In the ICC’s early years, however, such passages
seemed more of an expression of the hopes that the
international community had placed in the new judicial
body. The Court was loudly proclaimed to be a new
chapter in the history of international criminal justice,
heir to the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals.
As time has shown, however, the Court has clearly
not inherited the Tribunals’ efficiency. The entire
Nuremberg process was completed in the course of a
year. In the almost 15 years of its existence, the ICC has
handed down only four convictions, at a cost of more
than $1 billion. It has worked significantly quickly only
once, in 2011, when in just a few days, right when the
NATO bombing of Libya began, it transitioned from
a preliminary examination of the situation referred to
it by the Security Council to a formal investigation of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi.
And yet the long decade of civilian deaths in Iraq
and Afghanistan is still at the preliminary examination
stage. The perpetrators have not been named. The
Prosecutor of the Court has recused herself from
investigating the issue of civilian casualties of the
NATO bombing strikes in Libya. There has been no
visible progress in investigating the acts of insurgents.
Such selectivity is hardly good for the image of any
court with claims to impartiality and independence.
And the Court has procedural problems as well.
We need only recall instances when cases that the
Prosecutor had been investigating for years almost
literally fell apart either because witnesses refused to
testify or because the judges had to admit that their
testimony was not credible. More than once, the poor
quality of the evidence resulted in the Court’s resources
and time being spent in vain. On the Darfur file, the
Court disregarded the international legal standards
regarding immunity for State officials. In that regard,
we understand the concerns that have been voiced by
4/13

13/05/2016

African States individually and the African Union as a
whole. We continue to hold the view that the mere fact
of the transfer by the Security Council of a case to the
ICC does not strip away the immunity of officials of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute. In such
cases, the standards of international law are still fully
applicable.
Finally, and probably most importantly, it is difficult
to name even one case where the ICC would have made
a real contribution to stabilizing the situation, ending
the violence and mitigating the fate of the civilian
population. The results of its five years of activity in
Libya are particularly revealing in that regard.
Despite those issues, a number of delegations still
refuse to allow anything in the General Assembly
resolution other than praise and enthusiasm for the
ICC. Its shortcomings were previously ascribed to the
Court’s infancy; now it is deemed to be at a difficult
age. Calls for a balanced approach and realism are
interpreted as a step backwards. That approach has
meant, for example, that the draft resolution does not
reflect something so obvious, from the standpoint of
international treaty law, as the lack of obligations under
the Rome Statute — including regarding cooperation
with the ICC — on States that are not party to it.
Such an attitude to the negotiation process on the part
of States that are party to the Statute is likely to put
a stake through the heart of the practice of adopting
the resolution by consensus. It does not help the Court,
either. The lack of truthful assessments of its activity
prevents the Court from dealing soberly with the
serious shortcomings of its work.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again
that with every passing year the resolution has less
and less relationship to reality. In fact, it has become
a funhouse mirror. My delegation therefore cannot
support the text and we dissociate ourselves from the
consensus on the draft resolution.
Mr. Saeed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The Sudan
would like to reaffirm the lofty goals that are the pillars
of the United Nations: the maintenance of international
peace and security, sustainable development and the
protection and promotion of human rights, as well as
dialogue, based on international cooperation, aimed
at strengthening relations among States and achieving
the peaceful settlement of disputes. In order to reach
those goals, the Charter of the United Nations lays
down principles that guarantee full respect for States’
16-13644

13/05/2016

sovereignty, non-interference in their domestic affairs
and political independence, and territorial integrity.
It also proposes international cooperation as a means
of dealing with political and economic challenges
and avoiding the use or threat of use of force in
international relations.
We all agree that fighting impunity is a major
objective in honouring and respecting justice, and it is
a key responsibility for judicial bodies with a mandate
to tackle such issues in accordance with their internal
rules. Politicizing global justice in order to make it a
kind of channel for attaining narrow goals runs counter
to the joint efforts of the international community to
apply justice and uphold the objectives of the Charter’s
purposes and principles. It also violates rather than
strengthens the principles of international law, which is
a key purpose of the United Nations.
I recall that the relationship between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court must take
into account the independent and completely separate
natures of the two bodies. No structural relationship
should exist between them. The attempts of some States
parties to the Court to make the General Assembly
an assembly of States parties to the Rome Statute,
which created the Court, are extremely worrying.
My delegation has always categorically rejected that
position, which is clearly reflected in the text that
appears year after year. Time and again, the sponsors
of the draft resolution try to put forward proposals for
broadened interpretations that fail to reflect the spirit
and the text of the report of the International Criminal
Court. The report has a clear goal that should not be
used to attain narrow goals within the United Nations.
The International Criminal Court is not a subsidiary
body of the United Nations. It is an independent body
under the Rome Statute. Within the framework of the
bodies dealing with the Court’s issues, it is out of
the question to try to tie the two together. The Sudan
will continue to stand up for that position and to call
for respect for the Relationship Agreement between
the Court and the United Nations, without allowing
an expanded or mistaken interpretation of it. When
informal discussions were held this year, some Member
States resisted dealing with some issues raised by
the Sudan concerning States that are not party to the
Statute. Those proposals were rejected by the States
parties to the Statute without explanation, but they
were proposed only by States not party to the Statute,
and that appears to be the only possible explanation.

A/70/PV.95

The practices of the Court have revealed the ways
in which it is becoming a tool of international conflict, a
mechanism for politicization that is entirely focused on
Africa and on targeting Africa’s leaders. The African
people see it as a court for powerful people to target
and oppress the less powerful, while the problem of
crimes being committed all over the world continues.
Why does the Court fail to address those scandals? In
theory, it is a global, international court, and it should
be fighting impunity regardless of where it occurs. That
is why my delegation is raising questions about the
principles of integrity, impartiality and independence,
and once again we get no answers.
The Court’s current situation provides a logical,
Cartesian response, which is that it has a unique mandate
to target African countries, and only African countries.
When President Museveni of Uganda was sworn in
as President in Kampala on 12 May in a ceremony
attended by President Hassan Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
he reaffirmed in his statement the degree to which the
Court targets the African continent and its States and
leaders, as well as the importance for Africa’s adopting
a shared position against such practices. Mr. Museveni’s
statement is a reflection of the strong position taken
by the African Union, its leaders and people against
the Court’s practices. That was evident in the questions
raised by Kenya and the Sudan.
The relationship between the Court and the Security
Council clearly polarizes the work of the Court. It
is unacceptable to see political interests advanced
through a judicial body. The Security Council is the
organ mandated to refer some issues regarding States
to a tribunal and to reject others. We all know who pays
for that. A close relationship exists between certain
political interests and various judicial bodies, and
when that happens, such bodies do not adhere to proper
legal principles. The Secretary-General’s report must
respect the content, spirit and text of the Rome Statute
without expanding its interpretation of it or delving into
political or politicized issues.
My delegation would like to express its concern
about such interference with the International Criminal
Court, about the Court’s flagrant interference in
the work of the General Assembly, and the repeated
attempts to get General Assembly representatives
to deal with Member States as if the Assembly were
working for the Court and subordinate to it. We are not
the only ones to voice such concern about the harmful

16-136445/13

A/70/PV.95

effect of voluntary contributions to the Court’s work
and budget. We know who is funding the Court.
Among countries of which we are all aware, there
is a persistent lack of clarity. One of those issues is
complementarity, and the first President of the Court
has referred to “positive” complementarity. That issue
has always been a channel for an expanded political
interpretation, which prompted a European foreign
minister to state that the Court’s mandate did not apply
to his country. He was correct. Its mandate targets only
small and weak countries. States that are not party to
the Rome Statute manipulate and use it as a tool for
imposing their own foreign policy, in testimony to
the Court’s politicization. They are not parties to the
Statute, yet they use the Court to advance their foreign
policy aims.
In conclusion, we must all endeavour to work
together to deliver justice and combat impunity through
appropriate and honest judicial bodies. We cannot
engage with the International Criminal Court when the
Sudan is not a State party to it. In that regard, the Sudan
has no concerns whatever about the draft resolution to
be adopted today by the General Assembly. It does not
apply to us and it requires no commitment on our part.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/70/L.47, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/70/L.47, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Antigua and Barbuda,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Botswana, the Dominican Republic,
Greece, Madagascar, Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro,
the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, Sierra Leone,
Tunisia and Ukraine.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.47?
Draft resolution A/70/L.47 was adopted (resolution
70/264).
6/13

13/05/2016

The President: Before giving the floor to those
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Argüello González (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): The International Criminal Court was
founded with the aim of judging crimes of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity and to ensure
that justice for such crimes would prevail. However,
that goal has been undermined by those who want to see
their interests prevail over the safeguarding of national
sovereignty and the principles of non-interference
and non-intervention. Nicaragua rejects the double
standards by which the International Criminal Court
has acted to date. The Court does not judge all countries
equally and only one continent has been affected by
its judgements.
We would like to point out that Nicaragua is not
a party to the International Criminal Court, but we
consider our participation in the negotiations on today’s
resolution 70/264 to be of vital importance, because
we are dealing with an issue on the United Nations
agenda, and specifically that of the General Assembly,
of which 193 States are members with equal rights. It is
also crucial to ensure that non-party States participate
actively in the negotiations. In the inspiring words of
our President, Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the United
Nations must fulfil its role of promoting dialogue,
respect, understanding, sovereign security, peace and
a future, without interference or influence, and by
working on an equal footing — that is, with everyone,
for everyone and for the good of everyone. May that
be so.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Kenya acknowledges
today’s adoption of resolution 70/264, entitled
“Report of the International Criminal Court”, and we
would like to thank the coordinator for steering the
lengthy negotiations.
At the outset, we should recall the independent
and separate nature of the relationship between the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the United
Nations. Save for the Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, there is no structural relationship between
the two institutions. As the only General Assembly
resolution that deals with the two institutions’
16-13644

13/05/2016

relationship, the resolution we have adopted today
should address the most pressing challenges to the
benefit of both partners and should neither be used
to convert the General Assembly into an assembly of
parties to the Rome Statute nor to Balkanize the United
Nations membership into diametrically opposed groups
on matters related to the Rome Statute.
In principle, treaties are binding only on State
parties. According to the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, the obligations of non-party States
differ from those of State parties. That ought to be
obvious. That is precisely why in many aspects, the
Rome Statute makes different provisions for State
parties and for non-States parties.
My delegation is frustrated by the process and the
outcome of our negotiations this year. As one of the
two African States parties that actively participated in
this year’s negotiations, Kenya notes that this technical
rollover is largely attributed to the lack of flexibility of
position adopted by some members and the rejection of
the views of other members — even when those views
were clearly informed by treaty law and practice.
Consequently, Kenya is of the considered opinion
that the proposal made by a Member State on the
obligations of non-States parties was consistent with
international law, its interpretation and its application.
Therefore, during the negotiations, the request by that
Member State should have been accepted without any
challenge whatsoever. Accordingly, we recognize and
applaud the commitment of the delegations that put in
extra effort to try to bridge that gap between Member
States.
It is sad, but it would seem that some States would
like to see the law of the jungle prevail among civilized
States. There is a worrying trend whereby powerful
States that have little or no regard for the primacy
of the principles of international law seek, when and
where its suits them, to skew the interpretation and
implementation of international law and practice as we
know it. As we have said before in this forum, might
does not make right. The Rome Statute system must
unshackle itself from the group of States that represent
an ethos and jurisprudential paradigm that represents
only one segment of the Assembly of States Parties.
That group of States claims and exhibits proprietorship
over the ICC and have hijacked the Court’s operational
mandate, thereby creating a distorted institution.

A/70/PV.95

We want to see a resolution that is consistent with
international law and, further, that truly addresses the
most pressing challenge facing the two institutions,
namely, the financing of the Security Council referrals.
The General Assembly should not be prevented from
exercising its mandate on this matter, as it is fully
empowered to do by the Charter of the United Nations.
In realization of the very urgent need to shift our
emphasis to issues of seminal importance, we request
that going forward, Member States consider changing
their focus to best reflect the realities on the ground.
We want to see an interpretation and implementation
of the Rome Statute that treats all Member States
equally without artificial divisions and categorizations
that depict one group as owners and gallant defenders
of the ICC and the other group as the subjects of the
ICC for which the ICC was established. This deeply
pathological state of affairs has to be brought to heel.
The artificial dichotomy between defenders and lowly
subjects has not achieved much, and there is a need to
see a radical change of heart and mind and reformation
to ensure a level playing field for all States. Indeed,
the survival of the ICC — as I have said here many
times — very well depends on our forward movement
in that regard.
In that vein, African States have tried to engage
constructively with the ICC but, sadly, with little
success. Our individual and collective efforts to initiate
and develop an enabling environment for constructive
dialogue with the ICC has met with marginal success,
if not utter failure. While we remain fully committed to
the fight against impunity, we are concerned that any
attempt to discuss and interrogate our issues publicly
and transparently continue to be met with stiff resistance
under the guise of protecting the independence of the
Court and its organs.
As members, our actions should ensure that the
ideals enshrined in the Rome Statute are realized in a
manner that the original drafters and authors envisaged.
More importantly, our actions should ensure that this
resolution is negotiated, interpreted and implemented
in a manner that is consistent with the law while
recognizing the social, cultural, economic and political
realities that the world faces today.
In conclusion, peace and justice are what we all
seek. Kenya is an unstinting champion of both. We
believe in peace and justice. But, peace and justice
cannot be founded on a deeply flawed institution that

16-136447/13

A/70/PV.95

creates false hope among millions of people who have
had their human rights abused and their lives destroyed
by ruthless individuals and powerful global and
national powers. Kenya therefore calls for a complete
overhaul of the negotiation process, the philosophical
outlook and outcomes of this resolution. We hope that
we will be able to embark on a better process in the
future and to agree on a text of improved quality and
greater relevance — a text that truly addresses the
human rights that we all seek to uphold.
Mrs. Diéguez La O (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Our
country reaffirms its intention to combat impunity, and
maintains its commitment to international criminal
justice, its attachment to the principles of transparency,
independence and impartiality, and the unrestricted
implementation of and respect for international law.
Cuba believes that it is appropriate that the
International Criminal Court inform the General
Assembly of its activities, as established in the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court. Our country,
although not a party to the Court, has been and
is prepared to continue its active participation in
negotiations of the resolution on the report of the
International Criminal Court, which is adopted every
year by the General Assembly, including just a few
moments ago (resolution 70/264).
However, bearing in mind the nature of the
resolution and its adoption within the General
Assembly — a body of the United Nations that includes
both States parties to the Rome Statute as well as
non-party States with equal rights — it is indispensable
that the negotiation of the resolution weigh and take
into account the opinions and concerns of all the States
members of the General Assembly.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the adoption of resolution 70/264, on
the report of the International Criminal Court by the
General Assembly.
China believes that the technical rollover reflects
the compromise reached during the previous sessions of
the General Assembly on the resolution. China joined
the consensus. China attaches importance to the role
of the International Criminal Court in safeguarding
world peace, security, justice and prosecuting serious
international crimes.
8/13

13/05/2016

China hopes that the Court will perform its
functions justly and avoid any politicization and judicial
selectivity while ensuring that criminal justice is not
achieved at the expense of peace, stability and national
reconciliation. The Court and the United Nations
are independent, although related, organizations.
Cooperation between the two organizations should be
conducted strictly in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court
and other relevant legal frameworks while respecting
their respective mandates. The rights of non-party
States to the Rome Statute should be fully respected, in
accordance with international law.
Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
is convinced of the importance of justice. It is for
that reason alone that we were among the countries
that actively contributed to negotiations on the
Rome Statute, which led to the establishment of the
International Criminal Court. My country was also
among the first signatories to the Rome Statute. Our
perspective has always been based on the importance
of international justice being truly just in every sense
of the word — free from politicization, selectivity and
double standards. Unfortunately, that has not been
achieved, as evidenced by a number of international
issues, which I will not go into here.
Justice is a whole unto itself and should be exhaustive
in order to ensure that those responsible within State
Governments that work to destabilize other States,
interfere in their internal affairs and bring down their
regimes through the support of terrorism and violent
extremism, the spread of chaos and destruction, and
the shedding of innocent blood are brought to justice.
We should avoid undermining the lofty principle of
justice and tailoring it to the will of powerful States and
their allies, as that is liable to undermine international
relations and the very foundation of international law
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Justice cannot be transformed into a tool only used by
the powerful against the poor or the weak. That would
be a concrete expression of the law of the jungle 70
years after the establishment of the United Nations, and
a century after the League of Nations and a number
of international organizations that were founded to do
away with the law of the jungle.
16-13644

13/05/2016

In conclusion, my country’s delegation reaffirms
its unswerving support for the statements made by
the representatives of the Russian Federation and the
Sudan. We support them and emphasize that we reject
resolution 70/264 and the paragraphs contained therein.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Palestine, Paraguay, Romania,
Switzerland, Slovenia, Spain, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uruguay and my own country, Costa Rica.
At the outset, we wish to reiterate our strong and
outright support for the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The ICC is the most significant achievement
of the international community in its quest to put an
end to impunity for mass atrocities, regardless of who
commits them, and to provide justice to the victims.
Because these are global goals, the world demands
that no State allow room for impunity. We celebrate
El Salvador’s accession to the Rome Statute, which
brings the number of States parties to 124, and reiterate
the importance of continuing to promote the Statute’s
universality. In joining the Rome Statute, States do not
only support the International Criminal Court, but also
undertake the obligation to investigate and prosecute
the most serious crimes at the national level — a key
contribution to ending impunity. The ICC is designed
as a court of last resort, and it becomes active only
where national judiciaries fail to do their work.
We welcome the consensual adoption at the
seventieth session of the General Assembly of resolution
70/264, on the report of the International Criminal
Court (see A/70/350), as well as the substantial number
of sponsors. The resolution constitutes an important
avenue to strengthen and improve the implementation
of the Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court, which
was approved by consensus by the General Assembly at
its fifty-eighth session.
It is the task of all United Nations
Members — irrespective of their relationship with
the ICC — to follow up by adequately reflecting the
ongoing cooperation between the two institutions,
while addressing the most pressing challenges, for the
benefit of both partners. In that regard, we believe it is

A/70/PV.95

very unfortunate that we were not able to advance the
resolution this year. However, that should not stop us
from addressing the challenges reflected in the annual
report of the Court (see A/70/350).
Currently, there are a number of challenges.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the ICC
needs to be strengthened, and United Nations offices,
funds and programmes should collaborate effectively
with the Office of Legal Affairs as the focal point for
such cooperation. The Secretary-General’s guidance on
contacts with persons who are subject to arrest warrants
or summonses issued by the ICC are important and
need to be implemented consistently.
The Court requires adequate financial resources to
fulfil its mandate, and it is under constant budgetary
pressure. We find it worrisome that it continues to
carry out activities as a result of decisions made by the
Security Council, but with no support from the United
Nations budget. The General Assembly should therefore
ensure the implementation of article 13, paragraph 1, of
the Relationship Agreement.
With regard to referrals, our delegations believe that
the Security Council should be consistent and coherent
in its use of referrals and establish legally sound
language for the referral of situations to the Court.
That entails avoiding the inclusion of jurisdictional
exceptions that go against the principle of equality
before the law and endanger its own credibility and
that of the Court. Furthermore, it is up to the Council
to enforce its own decisions, which requires effective
follow-up. In addition, we encourage the Council
to consistently mandate the relevant peacekeeping
missions to assist the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
The Rome Statute system is growing. The Court
is extending its jurisdictional reach and is currently
dealing with more cases and situations than ever
before. Also, the relationship with the United Nations
is becoming an even closer one, whether it is about
technical support for ICC staff in situation countries
or the exchange of information and good practices.
Nevertheless, our job is not done, and all members need
to continue to work together in order to fight impunity.
We are committed to continue doing our part. We call
upon all State parties to do the same.
Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
El Salvador co-sponsored resolution 70/264, on the
report (see A/70/350) of the International Criminal
Court as a way of expressing its support for the Court

16-136449/13

A/70/PV.95

and our strong commitment to the values that motivated
its establishment. As evidence of this, on 3 March, in an
emotional act of historical relevance for our country, the
Republic of El Salvador deposited with the Secretariat
its instrument of accession to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and its two amendments
adopted in Kampala. In doing so we became the 124th
State party to the Rome Statute and twenty-ninth State
party to the amendments to articles 8 and 27, on the
crime of aggression. This is a clear demonstration of
our willingness to contribute to the strengthening of
the universalization of international criminal justice for
heinous crimes, and our recognition of the work that
the Court has carried out since its establishment.
We are not blind; we know the Court must improve
and make progress. That applies to all institutions,
beginning with our own — the General Assembly.
However, it is one thing to ask for change and progress
in international justice for this type of crime, but it is
very different to try to surreptitiously establish, under
the Vienna Convention, universal impunity for specific
people. That destroys the principle we all aspire to
that there could be a possible and future universal
jurisdiction for crimes against humanity and similar
crimes. We believe that the Court has already begun
to issue its first judgements on the matters under its
competence, thereby providing tangible proof that it is
possible to close the gaps for impunity and that, when
the national criminal justice system does not work, it
is possible to activate the international criminal justice
system.
The Republic of El Salvador is aware that great
achievements have been made, but we also recognize
that a great deal remains to be done, that we have a path
beset with challenges and opportunities to advance this
process, which has been undertaken and which opens
the door to the prosecution of serious human rights
violations and to the possibility of judging those who
have committed crimes under the Rome Statute and,
even more important, to the existence of a deterrent to
the commission of these types of crimes.
We cannot ask the Court, with its resolution, to be a
peacemaker. That is a role that we in the United Nations
have to play. The Court’s role is essentially to make
clear through its judgements that serious and massive
violations of human rights cannot be repeated and or
increase and must be prevented.
10/13

13/05/2016

I would like to conclude my statement by reiterating
the deep commitment and support of my country to
the work of the International Criminal Court. We urge
those that have not ratified the Rome Statute and its two
amendments to continue their process of analysis with
a view to achieve in the near future full universality
with the aim of promoting justice and peace among all
people on the planet.
Mr. Luna (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
consensual adoption of resolution 70/264, on the report
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). My country
co-sponsored it as a means of expressing its unwavering
support for the Court and our steadfast commitment
to the values that motivated its establishment. The
increased number of sponsors is another clear
demonstration of the support that combating impunity
for the most serious international crimes has in the
General Assembly.
My delegation would have welcomed, however,
a more ambitious text than a technical update of the
resolution adopted during the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly. The distance between this resolution
and the challenges faced in the relationship between
the United Nations and the ICC is not decreasing. We
hope that, through continued transparent and inclusive
dialogue, we can reverse this trend at the seventy-first
session and deliver a text truly deserving of our shared
goal of promoting the universalization of access to
peace, security and justice.
I would like to reiterate my delegation’s growing
concern on an issue of a structural nature that relates
to the core of the relationship between the Court and
the United Nations, in particular the General Assembly.
Despite the clear guidance provided by article 13 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the ICC in the sense that the United Nations must
bear the costs of investigations and cases related to
referrals by the Security Council, the Assembly has
once again limited itself to merely acknowledging the
fact that those expenses continue to be borne exclusively
by States parties to the Rome Statute. It is regrettable
that the resolution does not call upon Member States to
actually address this issue. At a time when the Court
faces an unprecedented workload and Security Council
members frequently entertain the idea of referring
situations to the ICC, we must objectively reflect on
the sustainability of a system in which the costs of the
implementation of such a decision are met solely by the
States parties to the Rome Statute. It is also important
16-13644

13/05/2016

to bear in mind that the General Assembly has the
exclusive responsibility over the consideration and
approval of the budget of the Organization, as laid out
in article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Every new ratification of the Rome Statute is an
important step towards the promotion of peace and
justice. Brazil welcomes the recent accession of El
Salvador to the Rome Statute and hopes that it serves
to encourage others to become parties. Enhancing
the universality of the ICC is a means of promoting
peace and justice and of addressing a key international
dimension of the rule of law that all States should
commit to. International criminal justice should apply
to all.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia, faithful to its commitments as a State party
to the Rome Statute, today once again demonstrates
its unwavering will to support the work carried out
by the International Criminal Court by co-sponsoring
resolution 70/264, which we adopted today, on the
report (see A/70/350) of the International Criminal
Court to the General Assembly.
The unswerving struggle of the Colombian State
against impunity and its defence of the rule of law have
been repeated on many occasions, even from the very
start of discussions about the need to set up a permanent
court that would contribute to taking up the most serious
crimes committed against the international community
as a whole.
Almost 14 years have passed since the entry
into force of the Rome Statute and, since then, as
demonstrated in the report that the Court has submitted
to the Assembly for consideration, the purpose of that
institution — to prevent heinous crimes from going
unpunished — has been consolidated and strengthened.
Colombia emphatically underscores the importance of
supporting the Rome Statute and believes that the best
way to do so is by strictly complying with its provisions.
Undoubtedly, the universality of this instrument
depends on that approach.
Colombia considers it important that Member
States recognize that every step taken to bring about the
end of armed conflict and reach sustainable and lasting
peace needs receive the continuous support of all.
Accordingly, Colombia will continue to support the ICC
through such tools as the principle of complementarity,
which is evident in our initiatives on transitional justice,
reparation measures and institutional and legal reforms.

A/70/PV.95

In addition, the implementation of the Statute as an
instrument of international justice cannot be seen to be
in opposition to the achievement of peace, because, as
we have argued repeatedly, peace and justice are not
mutually exclusive goals. Colombia, which is currently
experiencing a crucial moment in its history, is closer
than ever to achieving peace, an agreed peace, and one
with justice that puts the rights and needs of victims at
its centre, and is a clear embodiment of this perspective.
Every State has an obligation to ensure peace in
its territory. That obligation is part of its responsibility
to maintain order and unity. We are committed to
peacebuilding as the sole means by which the full
enjoyment of human rights is guaranteed. For us, it is
a basic fact that in a situation like that of Colombia,
the pursuit of peace for its own sake also works in the
interests of justice.
Mr. Horna (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As a sponsor
of resolution 70/264, adopted by consensus today,
I wish to reaffirm Peru’s commitment to the work
undertaken by the International Criminal Court, which
we consider to be the institution in the best position to
prevent the most serious crimes from going unpunished.
However, we reiterate our concern that we were once
again faced with a draft text that showed little or no
progress since the previous iteration, in spite of the
special efforts made by States to hold constructive
and fruitful discussions at the seventieth session with
a view to achieving a robust resolution that clearly
reflected current developments in the context of the
relationship that should exist between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations. My delegation
would like to recall the persistent problems linked to
the financing of the Court, in particular in relation to
referrals by the Security Council, which are financed
solely by States parties to the Rome Statute and not
by all States Members of the Organization, as was
established in the Relationship Agreement.
Peru recognizes that international criminal
justice continues to be an aspiration and that the
International Criminal Court, a young institution in
the international arena, needs more support and a high
level of cooperation. Such support should come not
only from the States parties to the Statute but from all
Member States.
Finally, Peru, which belongs to the informal
ministerial network for the International Criminal
Court, attaches the greatest importance to the

16-1364411/13

A/70/PV.95

universality of the Rome Statute, and therefore wishes
to reiterate on this occasion its special pleasure at the
recent ratification of the Rome Statute by our brother
country El Salvador, which increases the number of
States parties to the Statute to 124, thus bringing us
closer to universality.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): Ukraine co-sponsored
resolution 70/264, on the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), whose establishment we
consider to be one of the most important human
rights achievements in the past century. The ICC is
the inarguable cornerstone of the international justice
system, with its provisions that state that there can be
no impunity for genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes.
Ukraine has demonstrated its support for the
system created by the Rome Statute on numerous
occasions, starting with its active participation in the
1998 Rome Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries
on the Establishment of an International Criminal
Court, followed by the signing of the Rome Statute, on
20 January 2000. Ukraine was among the first non-State
parties to ratify, on 18 October 2006, the Agreement on
the Privileges and Immunities of the ICC, an essential
mechanism for the effective functioning of the Court,
thereby becoming a model for countries that still need
to accede to the Agreement. We realize the importance
of being a party to that universal legal institution,
which combats impunity worldwide.
Ukraine has set the ratification of its own statute
incorporating the Rome Statute into domestic law as
one of its key priorities. To that end, following the
signing of the Rome Statute, Ukraine carefully studied
the approaches that other States had taken in tackling
the complementarity issues and drafted a relevant
amendment to ensure the compatibility of the provisions
of the Ukrainian Constitution with the Statute.
We are attentively observing the developments in
the field of international criminal justice. We consider
the decisions taken at the Kampala Review Conference,
in 2010, on, inter alia, amendments to the Rome Statute
with respect to the definition of the crime of aggression
and to the establishment of a regime of court jurisdiction
over this crime, to be an outstanding example of how
the international community should tackle the most
challenging issues of the modern world — through
intense debate and comprehensive scientific research
12/13

13/05/2016

towards a consensus that could not have been reached
before the Court was established.
Today, Ukraine is in the final stages of the
ratification process of the Rome Statute. In addition,
the related package of documents submitted to the
Parliament of Ukraine foresees the ratification of two
2010 Kampala amendments as well.
In the light of the current challenging situation in
and around Ukraine, we fully recognize the necessity of
ensuring the global jurisdiction and legitimacy of and
support for the International Criminal Court. Ukraine
strictly adheres to the principles of democracy, good
governance, justice and the rule of law, and therefore
strongly supports the activities of the Court in an effort
to ensure universal commitment to fighting impunity.
Starting from 20 February 2014, Ukraine has
been a victim of ongoing armed aggression carried
out by the Russian Federation and Russia-supported
militants and terrorists. As a result, part of its territory,
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, as well as several areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, have been occupied.
Thousands of Ukrainian nationals have been killed or
injured. Infrastructure has been destroyed. Hundreds
of thousands of people have been forcefully displaced
and are seeking refuge. Those acts constitute the most
serious crimes against humanity and war crimes, which
fall within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court.
Accordingly, on 8 September 2015, the Government
of Ukraine launched a declaration pursuant to article
12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, whereby we
accept the exercise of jurisdiction by the ICC in relation
to crimes against humanity and war crimes committed
by senior officials of the Russian Federation and the
leaders of the terrorist organizations DNR and LNR,
which have led to extremely grave consequences and
the mass murder of Ukrainian nationals.
We believe that the ICC can provide one of the best
ways to ensure that the perpetrators of international
crimes are brought to justice. There, mass violations of
human rights are recognized as such, and victims will
receive redress for their suffering.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item.
16-13644

13/05/2016

I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I will be brief. I wish to respond to the
statement made by the Ukrainian delegation, which
again included a host of anti-Russian insinuations
that have nothing to do with the actual situation.
We repudiate them as unjustified and irrelevant to
the subject of today’s meeting. However, since the
Ukrainian representative mentioned the declaration
that was made by his country in 2015, I should like
to draw attention to the fact that it was compiled

A/70/PV.95

laboriously in such a way as to attempt to preclude
the possibility of an investigation by the International
Criminal Court into crimes perpetrated by the Kyiv
Government and radicals loyal to that Government,
the most flagrant of which is doubtless the tragedy that
occurred in Odessa, the second anniversary of which
was recently commemorated.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

16-1364413/13
