A /73/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

88th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 4 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beleffi (San
Marino), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/880)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.89)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.89.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I am standing at this high
rostrum to bring to the General Assembly the voices of
the 400,000 people who have been forcibly displaced
from Georgia. However, I am also standing here to
bring the voices of the displaced from Syria, Venezuela,
Myanmar and elsewhere. I say that because Georgian
voices are no different from those of the 70 million
other people displaced around the globe today. While
the causes of their displacement may differ, their human
suffering does not.
I am therefore standing here to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.89, “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”, under
agenda item 35, “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM
area and their implications for international peace,

security and development”, sponsored by Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Eswatini, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Marshall Islands,
Micronesia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.
I am asking for Assembly members’ support. The
draft resolution before us is based on the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement and constitutes
a collective call for adherence to three fundamental
principles that are securing the rights of the displaced,
including the right to a safe and dignified return
and property rights; the unacceptability of forced
demographic changes; and the need for unimpeded
humanitarian access. The draft resolution underlines
the importance and supports the work of the Geneva
International Discussions, the negotiation format
between Georgia and Russia, mandated by the ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008 and co-chaired by the United
Nations, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Sadly, Georgia’s
unwavering commitment to the Geneva International
Discussions and the constructive actions it has taken
within them remain a one-way street. We therefore have
a decade-old stalemate because of a policy of concerted
disrespect for the issue of return by some of the relevant

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-16230 (E)

*1916230*

A/73/PV.88

participants, despite the Secretary-General’s continued
calls for an end to walkouts during the discussion on
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees within
the Geneva International Discussions.
The security and human rights situations in the
occupied Georgian territories remain extremely
alarming. Year after year, we continue to witness the
installation of razor-wire fences and so-called border
signs that cut through villages and even the backyards
of their residents. Those installations have reached a
shocking 49 kilometres in Abkhazia and more than
52 kilometres in the Tskhinvali region, which the
Secretary-General also condemns in his latest report
(A/73/880). The Human Rights Council, through its
resolutions, has also continued to express its concern
and to call for human rights monitoring mechanisms to
have immediate access to the occupied territories, but
they remain black holes where impunity and lawlessness
reign and grave human rights violations are routine.
People endure kidnapping, arbitrary detention,
property seizures and continued discrimination on the
grounds of ethnic origin, including severe restrictions
on free movement and residence and on access to
education in their native language. It is heartbreaking to
see the reference in the Secretary-General’s report to the
“tragic loss of life” of Georgian IDPs while in detention
under the occupying Power. Such cases unfortunately
occur far too often and are far too numerous. Basharuli,
Otkhozoria, Tatunashvili, Kvaratskhelia — every year
I read out a new victim’s name, hoping that it is the last,
but unfortunately the list never stops growing.
Despite all the impediments on the ground, the
Government of Georgia remains committed to peaceful
reconciliation. Its peace initiative, “A Step to a Better
Future”, aims to enhance the interaction between the
divided societies, facilitate and expand trade across
the occupation line, create additional opportunities
and simplify access to all levels of education and
ease access to various services and benefits. We
firmly believe that reconciliation and reintegration,
along with a commitment to a rules-based order and
a surge in diplomacy, are the only ways to achieve
sustainable peace.
Last year was the twentieth anniversary of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, and 2019
marks 10 years since the adoption of the 2009 African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, the so-called
2/8

04/06/2019

Kampala Convention. It is no coincidence that forced
displacement was the overarching priority theme of the
Africa Dialogue Series, held here at the United Nations
just one week ago, during which Secretary-General
António Guterres urged Member States “to consider
the issue of displacement in the broadest context in
their search for sustainable and durable solutions.”
While the draft resolution before the Assembly
refers to the situation in a single country, the issue at
stake is an integral part of the global challenge that is
forced displacement. To address it we must be principled,
not bound by narrow regional or bilateral scope. In
this Hall we all recognize the utterly humanitarian
nature of the principle of return. We therefore appeal
to the Assembly to apply the same principle to IDPs
from Georgia, because they too are part of our global
endeavour to leave no one behind. It is now time for
us, the General Assembly, to show firm adherence to
those principles and demonstrate our joint commitment
to sustainable peace. We must continue to send that
message of hope to the hundreds of thousands of
victims of forced displacement. I therefore once again
urge the Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.89
and to once again recognize that internally displaced
people do indeed have a right to return.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States — Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway, Sweden
and my own country, Lithuania. Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
Poland, Slovenia and Ukraine align themselves with
this statement.
First of all, we want to take this opportunity to
reaffirm our strong support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. Today, more than a decade after
the first adoption of the resolution on internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees from Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in Georgia
(resolution 62/249), no progress has been achieved on
the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of IDPs and refugees on the basis of international law
and internationally recognized principles. Hundreds of
thousands of IDPs continue to be deprived of their right
to a safe, dignified and voluntary return to their places
of origin and their property rights. We are particularly
concerned about developments in Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia related to demolitions and new
19-16230

04/06/2019

construction projects in places formerly inhabited by
ethnic Georgians who were displaced as a result of
the conflict.
We welcome the comprehensive report submitted
by the Secretary-General (A/73/880), which encourages
further concrete steps to promote greater engagement
among the populations living in Abkhazia and South
Ossetia, in line with recent outreach initiatives by the
Government of Georgia. The draft resolution before
us (A/73/L.89) clearly echoes the Secretary-General’s
goals and commits us all to continuing to work to protect
and assist those who have been forcibly displaced from
the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of
Georgia, and to ensure that they are able to exercise
their fundamental right to a safe and dignified return.
In this context, we commend the continued efforts of
the Georgian Government, in close cooperation with
international organizations, to put in place alternative,
durable solutions providing opportunities for IDPs to
integrate locally or, in other cases, to resettle elsewhere
in the country in the absence of an option to return to
the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions
of Georgia.
The human rights situation in the occupied
regions of Georgia remains a cause of serious concern.
Russia continues to violate the commitments made
in the six-point agreement of 12 August 2008 and
the implementing measures of 8 September 2008, by
maintaining a military presence in both the Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of Georgia. We
are deeply concerned about the impunity surrounding
the grave human rights violations committed in
conflict-affected areas. The ongoing borderization,
kidnappings, arbitrary detentions — some with lethal
outcomes — new restrictions on freedom of movement,
including long-term closures of administrative border
lines, and a lack of access to health care and to education
in their native language have a direct negative impact
on the daily lives of hundreds of thousands of people
affected by this protracted conflict.
The Human Rights Council’s adoption at its fortieth
session of resolution 40/28, on cooperation with Georgia,
clearly demonstrated that the international community
remains seized of the matter, as it emphasizes the need
to address the human rights and humanitarian issues
facing the people who have been forcibly displaced
from Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in
Georgia. In that context, we remain concerned about
the fact that in the past several years no international

A/73/PV.88

human rights monitoring mechanism has been granted
unrestricted access to the regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia. We therefore call for
immediate access to the area to be granted to the Office
of the High Commissioner of Human Rights and other
international and regional human rights mechanisms.
We reiterate our support for the Geneva
International Discussions process and join the
Secretary-General’s call on all relevant stakeholders
to step up their efforts to make tangible progress on
key security and humanitarian issues in order to meet
the pressing humanitarian concerns of the affected
population, including internally displaced persons. We
remain concerned about the continued refusal by Russia
and the participants from Tskhinvali and Sukhumi to
engage on the topic of refugees and displaced persons
in the Geneva International Discussions. We would like
to emphasize that this topic is at the core of the mandate
of the Geneva International Discussions.
The decision of the de facto authorities in the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia to conduct so-called elections later this summer
is a matter of concern. I want to remind the Assembly
that we do not recognize the constitutional and legal
framework within which these illegitimate elections
are scheduled to take place. Such illegal elections
violate Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and greatly undermine the ongoing efforts to arrive at a
peaceful solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, given the lack of progress on the
ground, we call for the continued engagement of the
United Nations on the issue. As in previous years, we
will vote in favour of the draft resolution and call on all
States Members of the United Nations to do the same.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development-GUAM and its member States,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and my
own country, Ukraine.
Millions of people in the GUAM countries have
been forced to leave their homes as a result of armed
conflicts, and forced displacement has led to a range of
humanitarian challenges in the GUAM area. We believe
that the humanitarian concerns of the populations
affected should be a priority. Ensuring the safe and
dignified return of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees in the GUAM area as the principal way

19-162303/8

A/73/PV.88

of achieving durable solutions for forcibly displaced
persons is an overarching goal.
The GUAM member States are once again standing
together to present a united position in support of draft
resolution A/73/L.89, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia,
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
The draft resolution before us addresses the issue of
hundreds of thousands of IDPs and refugees forcibly
displaced from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia as a result of the conflict and of several waves
of ethnic cleansing. The document focuses solely on the
humanitarian aspects of the displacement and calls for
respect for the right of return and property rights, and for
humanitarian access to the affected regions of Georgia.
Given its purely humanitarian objectives, this annual
resolution has been steadily gaining support from the
States Members of the United Nations every year.
The GUAM countries thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/73/880). As it highlights, no major
changes were observed during the reporting period with
regard to the exercise by internally displaced persons
and refugees of their right to return. It is regrettable
that despite the calls of the international community,
hundreds of thousands of ethnically cleansed IDPs and
refugees from the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia continue to be deprived of
their right to a safe and dignified return to their homes.
Moreover, the deteriorating humanitarian and human
rights situation on the ground not only further impedes
IDPs’ return but also poses the imminent threat of a
new wave of forced displacement.
We reiterate our support for the Geneva International
Discussions process, which is a unique platform for
the participants to discuss security and stability and
humanitarian issues, including in relation to the return
of refugees and IDPs. We regret that discussion on
the most essential humanitarian matter within the
Discussions continues to be constantly undermined
by the concerted disrespect of the issue shown by the
relevant participants. We view today’s draft resolution
as an important tool for further encouraging the
participants of the Geneva International Discussions
to redouble their efforts to address the issues within
their respective mandates, including the creation of
conditions conducive to a voluntary return in safety
and dignity.
4/8

04/06/2019

We remain seriously concerned about the
humanitarian and human rights situation in the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia. Illegal detentions and kidnappings
along the occupation line, intensified ethnically
targeted human rights violations, the deprivation of the
right to life, the prohibition of the right to education
in Georgians’ native language, the restriction of the
right to freedom of movement, residence and property,
and illegally erected razor wires and other artificial
obstacles continue to affect the local population’s
everyday life. The situation is particularly alarming
considering that no international mechanisms are
allowed to monitor the situation on the ground. In the
complete absence of basic safeguards to monitor the
situation in the occupied regions, unimpeded access to
those territories for human rights monitoring bodies is
of paramount importance. In that context, we welcome
the Human Rights Council’s adoption of resolutions
34/37, 37/40 and 40/28, on cooperation with Georgia,
which express serious concerns about the human rights
and humanitarian situation within the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of Georgia and call
for immediate access to those territories to be granted
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other international and regional
human rights mechanisms.
The GUAM member States reiterate their unwavering
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
We consider the support for the draft resolution a sign
of solidarity with all forcibly displaced persons around
the world, as well as a reaffirmation of the international
community’s commitment to the fundamental right of
return and the right to property and humanitarian access.
As in previous years, we will therefore vote in favour of
the draft resolution and call on all Member States to do
the same. With that I conclude my statement on behalf
of GUAM, and I would like to add some comments in
my national capacity.
Ukraine reiterates its unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders. Since the
beginning of the Russian aggression and its occupation
of the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, the situation on the ground has
deteriorated dramatically. Ukraine fully condemns
the violations and abuses committed by the occupying
Power, including discrimination on ethnic grounds,
19-16230

04/06/2019

restrictions on education in the native language of the
populations in both Georgian regions and the reported
mass demolitions of ethnic Georgians’ houses in the
Tskhinvali region. We are deeply concerned about the
lack of progress on substantive issues, in particular
internally displaced persons and returnees, the non-use
of force and international security arrangements. We
strongly condemn the fact that a large number of IDPs
have been deprived of the right to return to their homes
in a safe and dignified manner.
I urge the Russian occupying authorities to end
their illegal practices and respect their obligations as
an occupying Power under international humanitarian
law. Ukraine reiterates its demand to the occupying
Power, the Russian Federation, to provide immediate
and unimpeded access to independent international
and regional human rights monitors, particularly the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Ukraine will support the adoption of draft
resolution A/73/L.89 and calls on other delegations to
vote in favour of this important document.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks the Permanent Mission of Georgia
for presenting draft resolution A/73/L.89, on the status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia. We are pleased to be one of its main
co-sponsors.
The United Kingdom deplores the fact that for more
than a decade now it has been necessary to reaffirm
annually, in the Georgian context, the inalienable rights
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to
return to their homes in a safe and dignified manner,
regardless of their ethnic origin. It was for that reason
that the United Kingdom was moved this year to
co-sponsor the draft resolution. We welcome the fact
that our concern is shared by the many other countries
that have been similarly moved to sponsor it. This is a
humanitarian and human rights issue, and it should not
be linked to wider political processes.
There are still more than a quarter of a million
registered IDPs in Georgia, a country of less than
4 million people. Many live in difficult and vulnerable
conditions. It is important to ensure that the General
Assembly sends a message that it has not forgotten
them and that it will continue to call for their return
home. Indeed, it is perhaps more important to do so

A/73/PV.88

with every year that goes by. The United Kingdom
welcomes the Government of Georgia’s work to help
improve the situation of IDPs, along with the regular
reports documenting the human rights situation in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia by both the Government of
Georgia and Georgia’s Ombudsman for human rights. It
is important to see national and international legislation
implemented effectively in support of efforts to help
and protect the lives of IDPs. The United Kingdom
calls on the Russian Federation to stop activities that
act as direct impediments to Georgian IDPs’ return to
their homes. They include intimidation, the destruction
of former houses and the construction of fences and
barriers designed to hinder freedom of movement across
the administrative boundary lines with Abkhazia and
South Ossetia.
The United Kingdom urges all Member States
to vote in favour of this important draft resolution,
which is a simple statement of humanitarian principles
regarding IDP rights of return. Ultimately, it is actions
in the region that will determine progress on this
important issue. We therefore urge all sides to use
the Geneva International Discussions as the forum
for discussing and making progress on humanitarian
issues, including issues related to IDPs.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/73/L.89, which reaffirms the commitment of all
States to ensuring the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of refugees and persons displaced
from the Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions of
Georgia. We join the supporters of the draft resolution
in urging the parties to work towards a comprehensive
and durable peace. We particularly support Georgia’s
further calls on the parties concerned to take immediate
steps to ensure respect for human rights and dignity,
increase humanitarian access and create favourable
security conditions conducive to the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees who fled their
homes as a result of political turmoil.
We note that the first operative paragraph of the
draft resolution, consistent with the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, recognizes only
that no one should be arbitrarily deprived of the right
to enter his or her own country and that in general all
persons lawfully within the territory of a State should
have the right to liberty of movement and freedom
to choose their residences within that territory. The

19-162305/8

A/73/PV.88

Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are
integral parts of Georgian territory.
The United States has consistently supported the
human rights, dignity and humanitarian needs of IDPs,
and we are actively working with the United Nations
and other partners to find avenues to bring support
and attention to them. The United States fully supports
Georgia’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
In the light of the current situation on the ground, it
is essential that the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution on Georgia IDPs that is before us today.
Separately, the United States would like to take a
moment to honour the heroic protest movement of the
Chinese people that ended on 4 June 1989, 30 years ago
today, when the Chinese Communist Party leadership
sent tanks into Tiananmen Square to repress a peaceful
demonstration calling for democracy, human rights and
an end to rampant corruption. We express our deep
sorrow to the families that are still grieving for their
lost ones.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank Georgia for introducing draft
resolution A/73/L.89 today. Canada is proud to be one
of the main sponsors of this annual resolution, which
is an essential reminder of the suffering that people
displaced from their own countries endure. The draft
resolution also shows how important it is for us to work
together to find lasting solutions to assist those affected
and promote global peace and stability.
(spoke in English)
Canada fully supports Georgia’s independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty within its
internationally recognized borders. We call on Russia to
respect its commitments with regard to the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and to end
its interference in Georgia, in accordance with the
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement. We condemn
Syria’s recognition in August 2018 of South Ossetia
and Abkhazia as independent States. We consider the
Russian Federation’s partnership agreements with the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to be
illegal and illegitimate.
Canada is deeply concerned about the protracted
and ongoing displacements in Georgia. We once again
give our full support to draft resolution A/73/L.89,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
6/8

04/06/2019

refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”. We continue to call on
all participants in the Geneva International Discussions
to intensify their efforts to establish a durable peace,
commit to enhanced confidence-building measures, and
create security conditions conducive to the voluntary,
safe and unhindered return of all internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees. We are encouraged by
Georgia’s unilateral efforts to promote socioeconomic
integration and humanitarian access for IDPs in the
region. As the representative of Ukraine said just now
on behalf of the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development, Canada also urges Member
States to express their solidarity with all internally
displaced persons and with Georgia by supporting this
important draft resolution today.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to congratulate Ambassador
Tijjani Muhammad Bande on his election to preside
over the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
My congratulations also go to the Vice-Presidents and
Chairs of the Main Committees elected at this morning’s
meeting of the Assembly (see A/73/PV.87).
Against the background of a productive morning
meeting, we now have to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.89, an extremely politicized document dressed
up with high-flown humanitarian rhetoric. It would
be naive to think that it is dedicated exclusively to
concerns about refugees and displaced persons. Its
aim is to prevent the normalization of the situation in
the region in question and the establishment of goodneighbourly relations between Abkhazia, South Ossetia
and Georgia, and rather than holding a dialogue on an
equal footing, to impose others’ will on their inhabitants
and force them to obey. Such approaches do not work
with the freedom-loving peoples of the Caucasus.
We deplore the fact that year after year Georgian
diplomats and a fixed group of support countries
introduce this draft resolution, to the detriment of
practical steps to solve the existing humanitarian
problems in the region. Their initiative has a serious
negative impact on the Geneva International Discussions
and complicates the already difficult relationship
between our near neighbours, the representatives of the
very varied nationalities living in Georgia, Abkhazia
and South Ossetia. Today we should be talking about
peaceful coexistence in the region and taking the
current geopolitical realities into account. It is time for
Georgia to make a choice in favour of a constructive
19-16230

04/06/2019

discussion of humanitarian issues rather than launching
groundless and senseless attacks on Sukhumi and
Tskhinvali in international forums.
The delegation of the Russian Federation requests
a vote on draft resolution A/73/L.89 and will vote
against it. We urge other delegations that are against
the politicization of the work of the General Assembly
not to support this draft.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.89.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.89, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Belgium,
Eswatini, Greece, Liechtenstein, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands
and Turkey.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.89,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Eswatini,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon

A/73/PV.88

Islands, Spain, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Myanmar,
Nauru,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Argentina,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution A/73/L.89 was adopted by 79 votes
to 15, with 57 abstentions (resolution 73/298).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers for explanations of vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Baror (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps
taken by the Government of Georgia to improve the
status of internally displaced persons in the areas
under its control. We appreciate the work done in the
framework of the Geneva International Discussions
and their mandate of 12 August 2008, which has led
to concrete activities on humanitarian issues, including
those related to the protection of the environment, and
we support the constructive discussion in that context.
Israel also takes a positive view of Georgia’s programme
of engagement through cooperation, which aims to
build trust and confidence among divided communities.
We support the spirit of reconciliation through direct
dialogue promoted by the Georgian Government.

19-162307/8

A/73/PV.88

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for and recognition of Georgia’s territorial
integrity. Our position on this and all other similar
matters is that the way to resolve conflicts is through
negotiation and that any solution must be based on a
mutually agreed approach rather than unilateral actions.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Brazil once
again abstained in the voting on resolution 73/298,
concerning internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as it could prejudge
or influence the consideration of the issue by the
interested parties in negotiations in Geneva.
We reiterate that Brazil recognizes the territorial
integrity of Georgia and hopes that its dispute with the
Russian Federation can be settled through peaceful
negotiations and dialogue in the very near future. Brazil
urges all interested actors to make concrete efforts
to find lasting solutions to the situation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, as well as to make
sure that they can safely and fearlessly return to their
homelands. Brazil also calls on all the parties to enhance
dialogue, cooperate and adopt confidence-building
measures aimed at reaching a final settlement to the
dispute at hand within the framework of the Geneva
International Discussions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Before giving the floor to speakers in exercise
of the right of reply, I would like to remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second, and should be made from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of China,.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China will not accept the statement by the representative

8/8

04/06/2019

of the United States on Georgia, which included
groundless accusations against China.
With regard to the political turmoil of the late
1980s, the Chinese Government long ago came to a
clear conclusion. In the 70 years since the founding
of the People’s Republic of China, we have achieved
great success, which has fully demonstrated that
the development path chosen by China is completely
correct and firmly supported by the Chinese people.
China will continue to progress along the path of
socialism incorporating Chinese characteristics. In his
statement just now, the United States representative
made a groundless attack on China’s political system,
relentlessly discrediting China’s human rights policy.
That constitutes serious interference in China’s internal
affairs, as well as a violation of the basic norms of
international relations. It does damage to the mutual
trust between China and the United States, and we
voice our categorical rejection.
Some people in the United States are always trying
to tell other people what to do and interfering with
the internal affairs of other countries on the pretext of
democracy and human rights. At the same time, they
fail to acknowledge their own internal issues. They have
no right to teach China anything, and their attempts
to interfere in China’s internal affairs and destabilize
the country will always fail. We hope that the United
States will refrain from acting to the detriment of the
mutual trust and good relations between China and
the United States. It should refrain from perpetuating
its mistakes, or it will become a laughingstock of
international society.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

19-16230
