S/PV.9436

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9436th meeting

Friday, 13 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moretti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-30378 (E)
*2330378*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security
legal framework,
Council resolutions.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; and Mr. Garland Nixon, political analyst.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ebo
Mr. Ebo: Since the previous briefing to the Security
Council by the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs on this topic, one month ago (see S/PV.9415),
the provision of military assistance to the Armed
Forces of Ukraine has continued in the context of the
full-scale invasion of that country, launched by the
Russian Federation on 24 February 2022, in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Information from Governments regarding their
transfers of weapons systems and ammunition is largely
accessible through open sources. Those transfers have
reportedly included heavy conventional weapons such
as battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, combat
aircraft, helicopters, large-calibre artillery systems,
missile systems and uncrewed combat aerial vehicles,
as well as remotely operated munitions and small arms
and light weapons and their ammunition. Reported
transfers of arms and ammunition to the Ukrainian
forces have expanded over the past months.
We also take note of reports related to the transfer
of depleted-uranium tank ammunition to the Ukrainian
forces. In addition, there have been reports of States
transferring, or planning to transfer, weapons such as
uncrewed aerial vehicles and ammunition to the Russian
armed forces, including for possible use in Ukraine.
As has been stressed by the High-Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, any transfer of weapons
must take place within the applicable international
2/18

13/10/2023

including

relevant

Security

Reports related to the use of anti-personnel
landmines and the use and transfer of cluster munitions
in Ukraine are deeply concerning. On behalf of the
High Representative, I call for an immediate end
to the use of those inhumane and indiscriminate
weapons, which has severe and lasting humanitarian
impacts. Landmines and explosive remnants of war
have resulted in widespread contamination in Ukraine,
posing a threat to civilian lives, rendering land unsafe
for agricultural use and disrupting transportation and
access to humanitarian aid. The process of mapping
that contamination and clearing the land safely will be
long and will require resources and the support of the
international community.
States that are not yet parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction and to the Convention on Cluster
Munitions should make every effort to accede to those
Conventions. I also reiterate the High Representative’s
call to all relevant parties to abide by their obligations
under the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects, as well as not to transfer or use
any mines prohibited by its Amended Protocol II.
The large-scale influx of weapons and ammunition
into any situation of armed conflict raises significant
concerns for peace, security and stability, including
as a result of diversion and proliferation even after the
conflict has ended. Measures to address the risk of the
diversion of weapons and ammunition to unauthorized
end-users and for unauthorized uses are essential
for preventing further instability and insecurity in
Ukraine, the region and beyond. Such measures
include the enhancement of marking practices,
comprehensive pre-transfer diversion risk assessments,
end-user certificates, including non-transfer clauses,
effective legal and enforcement measures and postshipment verifications.
Preventing the diversion of weapons and
ammunition requires supply chain transparency
and cooperation and information exchange between
importing, transit, and exporting States. Equally
required are concrete measures such as marking and
tracing, effective accounting and comprehensive
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

record-keeping practices, physical safeguarding of arms
and ammunition, customs and border control measures
and diversion-monitoring and analysis. I further note
that the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
remains a key tool in that regard. Transparency in arms
transfers can serve as an important confidence-building
measure, contributing to the prevention and reduction
of misperceptions, tensions and ambiguities among
Member States.
To prevent the diversion of conventional arms and
ammunition and to effectively regulate the international
arms trade, States have established a number of arms
control instruments, such as the Arms Trade Treaty,
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Instrument for the Timely and Reliable Identification
and Tracing of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.
In addition, discussions in the dedicated Open-ended
Working Group recently culminated in the adoption
of its final report (see A/78/111) containing a set of
political commitments as a new global framework for
through-life management of conventional ammunition.
I look forward to the General Assembly’s
endorsement of the global framework and next steps
in its operationalization to counter the diversion of
conventional ammunition. Accordingly, I call upon
all States to join all relevant treaties and agreements,
including multilateral instruments, to fully implement
their legal obligations under these agreements and to
respect their political commitments to minimize the
risk of diversion of arms and ammunition.
The impact on civilians of the intensifying war in
Ukraine continues to be an area of serious concern.
From 24 February 2022 to 8 October 2023, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has recorded 27,768 civilian casualties in
Ukraine, with 9,806 killed and 17,962 injured. The
actual figures are likely to be considerably higher. The
vast majority of civilian casualties are a result of the use
of explosive weapons with wide-area effects, including
by shelling from artillery, tanks and multiple-launch
rocket systems, and cruise and ballistic missiles and
by air strikes. The continued use of large numbers of
armed uncrewed aerial vehicles against civilians and
civilian infrastructure is concerning. Armed uncrewed
aerial vehicles, just like any other weapons or weapons

S/PV.9436

systems, must not be used in a manner inconsistent
with international humanitarian law.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for parties
to conflict to avoid the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas and to take combat out of urban
areas altogether. Such use results in harm to civilians,
including in Ukraine. I therefore urge all Member
States to support and effectively implement the
Political Declaration on Strengthening the Protection
of Civilians from the Humanitarian Consequences
Arising from the Use of Explosive Weapons in
Populated Areas. That Declaration is an important tool
to strengthen the protection of civilians in populated
areas in conflict zones.
On behalf of the High Representative, I condemn
the systematic and relentless attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure and services across Ukraine,
including against health, educational and grain-storage
facilities. International humanitarian law obligates
parties to armed conflict to protect non-combatants
and prohibits attacks targeting civilians and civilian
objects. Furthermore, all feasible precautions must
be taken in the conduct of military operations to
avoid — or at least minimize — incidental loss of
civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian
objects. Attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
must stop immediately. Those responsible for attacks
targeting civilians must be held accountable.
The United Nations will continue working towards
a just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in line with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolutions. I reiterate
the Secretary-General’s call to all States to do their part
to prevent further escalation, to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and to end this senseless war.
The President: I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nixon.
Mr. Nixon: I would like to open by thanking the
honourable representatives of this Organization for
providing me the opportunity to speak with you today.
My name is Garland Nixon, and I am a retired
police official, a journalist and, in my opinion, a
representative of the working-class citizens of the
United States. As a student of history, I recognize that
the location of the United States has, with a few notable
exceptions, shielded our land from the decimation of
war. I also recognize that the proliferation of nuclear

23-303783/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

weapons has eliminated that geographical advantage
and the people of this nation face the same existential
threat as the many nations that were literally flattened
during two World Wars.
In February 2022, Russia elected to enter the
military conflict in Ukraine, and we, average working
-class citizens, were provided by our media with an
assortment of shallow, simplistic and often conflicting
reasons for that action. Fortunately, many of us knew
the truth about the potential for that escalation long
before it flared up. We recall that in 2019, Oleksiy
Arestovych, a close adviser to President Zelenskyy,
was quoted as saying that with a probability of 99.9 per
cent, their price for joining NATO would be a big war
with Russia. We recall Professor John Mearsheimer’s
prophetic prediction that “the West is leading Ukraine
down the primrose path, and the end result is that
Ukraine is going to get wrecked”.
Lastly, we recall the list of security demands,
centred around NATO expansion, that Russia issued
on 17 December 2021. Notwithstanding the ahistorical
claims of Russian expansion or President Putin’s
hostility towards democracy, we find ourselves today in
an extinction-level crisis that can and must be resolved
through diplomacy, in the manner that was initially
proposed in mid-December 2021.
Since the February 2022 entrance of the Russian
military into the battle, the United States Government
has injected over $100 billion in arms and other
forms of assistance into the conflict. A significant
portion of that assistance took the form of small but
powerful armaments. Many of those handheld weapons
possess incredible destructive capabilities. There
are shoulder-fired anti-aircraft weapons, known as
man-portable air defence systems, that can easily
take down a civilian passenger aircraft, and anti-tank
rockets that could be used with devastating effect on a
convoy of civilian vehicles, such as the ones that many
diplomats in this room routinely utilize to traverse their
respective nations.
The injection of those military-grade weapons
into an environment as unstable as Ukraine is beyond
irresponsible. In the instance of the European Union, it
may end up being suicidal for many of its citizens. We
are already confronted with instances of weapons from
this conflict finding their way, via the black market,
to Africa, which means that the nations of Europe are
most likely already inundated with dangerous military
4/18

13/10/2023

hardware. The leaders of Europe must recognize that
this conflict will eventually come to a conclusion,
and, when that happens, the powerful weapons of war
that will have flooded their societies, will not simply
melt away. The most violent and criminal elements in
Europe and beyond will possess the ability to threaten
the internal stability of any nation that they choose.
They will need no army or organized structure. A
lone-wolf attacker with an anti-aircraft or an anti-tank
missile will be able to destabilize an entire nation with
a single act.
Who among us would be comfortable taking a
commercial flight if criminal or terrorist actors shoot
down a civilian plane in Paris, London or Brussels? I can
guarantee that just the mention of that potential tragedy
is eliciting a fear response in those of us who routinely
travel on commercial aircraft in the European region.
I wish only that the inevitable ad hominem attacks
against me as a speaker would change this outcome.
It would be a fair and reasonable burden to accept if
those who would diminish the obvious nature of my
assertions could somehow alter the ghastly inevitability
that the innocent citizens of Europe will be forced to
endure. I implore the members of the Council to push for
a peaceful resolution of this conflict and an expansive
project to locate and gather up the brutal weapons that
will surely threaten the lives and livelihoods of the hardworking citizens of the European continent and beyond.
I need not recite, word for word, the innumerable
recent quotes from Western media outlets implying
that the argument for a Ukrainian victory against the
Russian army is no longer plausible. According to
reliable sources, the Ukrainian military has lost more
personnel in the last few months than the United States
military lost in a decade of fighting in its ill-fated
misadventure in Viet Nam. The highly trained and
powerfully equipped NATO-sponsored military that
opened the conflict has been wiped out and replaced by
conscripts. Those minimally trained troops are being
placed in a hopeless situation. Those who claim to
support Ukraine must recognize that putting civilians
in camouflage fatigues, giving them a few weeks of
training and setting them off against impregnable
defensive positions is an unconscionable act of human
sacrifice. Supporting a nation obviously entails
ensuring that the safety and prosperity of its citizens
are secure.
Recent statements and advertisements by United
States supporters of this conflict makes it clear that
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

they are unconcerned with the human consequences
of their decisions and clearly demonstrate a reckless
disregard for the lives of the Ukrainian people. Recently,
South Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham stated that
“Russians dying is the best money the United States has
ever spent”. In that amoral, but incredibly enlightening
statement, Senator Graham openly exposed that he
viewed the appalling numbers of dead Ukrainian
soldiers as an insignificant and reasonable price to pay
to achieve his ultimate political goal of weakening the
Russian military. With supporters like Senator Graham,
Ukraine is in little need of adversaries.
Additionally, it is critical that we consider the
economic health of the hard-working people of Europe.
As the makers of the aforementioned weapons of war
celebrate outrageous profits, the loss of cost-effective
Russian energy has set in motion a deadly downward
economic spiral. The people of Europe are facing
another cold winter, with unaffordable heating costs
and the very real prospect of industrial collapse. The
potential for such an economic catastrophe has already
sowed the seeds of political and cultural instability.
Governments have begun to fall and, should the current
Middle East crisis metastasize, a winter without Russian
energy would result in the immediate and precipitous
demise of the European economic bloc. I only wish that
this claim were over the top and improbable. It is clear
and obvious that the prosperity of the European region
is facing great peril, and we must ask ourselves whether
it is moral and just to destroy centuries of economic and
cultural advancement for an esoteric ideological battle.
Today we face an incredibly dangerous
situation — one that could, without notice, spiral out
of control and turn our beautiful planet into an icy
uninhabited rock. However, despite the existential
threat that this conflict represents, I am pleased to bring
good news to the Council. Despite the devastation and
loss of life that this war has visited upon the European
continent, there is hope. We have a road map for peace,
and if reasonable diplomatic minded leaders can find
the intellectual and moral wherewithal to act with haste
and determination, a resolution for this conflict can
give birth to a security structure that ensures peace and
stability on the European continent and beyond.
However, the first and most important act required
to set that desired outcome into motion is that the
Western nations immediately cease contributing to the
influx of weapons and secure the lives of the frontline Ukrainian troops by offering a unilateral ceasefire

S/PV.9436

with a guarantee, wherein non-aligned nations such as
those in Africa and Latin America, are authorized to
ensure that the agreement is not compromised. That
is not to be confused with propositions for a ceasefire
that simply allows the Ukrainian military to rearm for
the furtherance of future conflict. Due to the nuclear
potential of this conflict, developing nations have a
stake in the outcome and therefore must be involved in
its resolution.
I call upon the Security Council to live up to its
name. This unity of nations has been called upon to
ensure world security. From the instance that nuclear
weapons were introduced into the military sphere, this
time was inevitable — a time in which irresponsible
leaders would threaten the existence of humankind
was sure to visit itself upon humans. However, we
must also remember that this inevitability was the very
foundation for the creation of the Security Council. I
ask the Council to take action and live up to its calling.
Stop the flow of weapons into the Ukrainian theatre,
push for an end to hostilities and work for a resolution of
European security that takes into account the security
of the European nations, the Russian Federation and the
overall threat that this conflict presents to the existence
of humankind.
I conclude by reminding the Council that, even
as we seek to conclude this conflict with a peaceful
resolution, a second wind of ill fate blows across our
planet. Of the three major nuclear superpowers, the
one in which I reside is pumping billions of dollars of
weapons into the border of one and, literally, into a
province of the other. The reckless act of destabilizing
and weaponizing Ukraine has a loathsome and vile
twin on the Chinese island of Taiwan. Again I remind
the Council of the words of the ever-hawkish Senator
Lindsey Graham, who, when speaking about the
Ukraine conflict, referenced Taiwan by stating that
“they are going to fight to the last man in Taiwan.”
This suicidal march towards nuclear conflict must
be stopped, and I beseech the Council to begin the
process immediately by stopping the flow of weapons
to Ukraine and expediting a peaceful resolution to
the conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Nixon for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

23-303785/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First and foremost, we would like to thank
Mr. Ebo and Mr. Nixon for their substantive briefings.
With astonishing tenacity, which deserves better
use, our Western colleagues convene meetings every
month on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
hypocritically calling for a swift cessation of hostilities,
which, in their understanding, is possible only with the
de facto defeat of Russia.
In fact, de facto, they continue to do the exact
opposite. They are pumping Ukraine with various
types of weapons and are dissuading the Kyiv regime
from realistic scenarios to settle the Ukrainian crisis.
The volume of Western assistance to Ukraine continues
to break all records. If we were to tackle this issue
seriously, we could have our meetings every day, with
new developments at every occasion.
However, there are no sensible substantive proposals
from our former Western partners that would actually
help to find a peaceful solution. We have not heard any
such proposals in any of the previous meetings. Instead,
all we get is baseless accusatory rhetoric against our
country, while the issues that are uncomfortable for our
former Western partners are carefully ignored or swept
under the rug.
Therefore, in this statement, we would like to
touch upon some items that are uncomfortable for our
former Western colleagues, whose cynicism today is
astonishing. Mr. Nixon already quoted Lindsey Graham
today, and I would like to quote the Dutch Defence
Minister Kajsa Ollongren, who, on 4 November
explicitly stated that Ukrainian was a “cheap way”
of countering Russia. Der Spiegel writes that Kyiv
has become the main importer of ammunition and
hardware from Germany. Over the first nine months
of the year, more than a third of Germany’s military
exports went to Ukraine, representing $3.3 billion.
Furthermore, the Kyiv regime has at least 13 foreign
private military companies and nine militarized proxy
formations — almost 1,000 well-armed and -trained
fighters from 35 countries.
I underscore that Russia is countering not the
Armed Forces of Ukraine, whose resources are almost
depleted, but the collective military machine of NATO
countries and all their military-industrial complexes
combined. It has reached the point where, through
their irrepressible fuelling of Kyiv’s ambitions, many
Western European countries have already almost fully
6/18

13/10/2023

depleted their arsenals of ammunition and small arms.
But the sponsors of the Kyiv regime will not rest.
Reserves are now being tapped into and, under the
direction of the United States, pulled from other parts
of the world, such as Israel and South Korea. However,
the military machine of the Kyiv regime continues to
collapse before our very eyes.
At the same time, Zelenskyy continues to haunt
the corridors of Western capitals, persistently begging
for fresh handouts. Washington is stooping to various
machinations in order to deceive public opinion in the
United States and pass the next aid package for Ukraine
through Congress. The United Kingdom has supplied
Ukraine with Terrahawk Paladin anti-aircraft guns
as part of a £100 million aid package, £70 million of
which was allocated for air defence. Upon his visit to
Brussels, Belgium has also decided to gift Zelenskyy
$1.7 billion in assistance for weapons purchases.
Incidentally, those funds are tax deductions from
interest on Russian assets that have been frozen — or in
other words, stolen by the West. Germany announced a
$1 billion military aid package for Ukraine, including
IRIS-T surface-launched missiles. The Head of the
Pentagon, Mr. Lloyd J. Austin III, stated the need to
ensure a constant and uninterrupted flow of weapons
to Ukraine, and also announced the formation of some
sort of coalition of countries that would help Ukraine to
develop its own air force. He is also threatening to start
deliveries of F-16 jet fighters beginning in the spring
of 2024, as if those were capable of changing anything.
Irresponsible statements about the future of
Ukraine in NATO persist, despite it being universally
understood that such a scenario will only worsen the
European security crisis — the military actions in
Ukraine being a direct consequence. Nevertheless, the
Western sponsors of the Kyiv regime are attempting in
any way they can to play down the ever-louder appeals
from civil society in their own countries about how
Ukraine, which is mired in corruption, is dealing with
the gigantic volumes of weapons transferred to it. More
and more evidence is emerging that control over such
arms supplies once they have fallen into Kyiv’s hands
is weak or completely absent, the results of which
are disastrous.
The scale of corruption in military supplies in
Ukraine is simply off the charts. For example, just a
few days ago, Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu said
that weapons that had been transferred from the West
to Ukraine had been located on the borders of Israel as
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

early as in the summer of 2023. The fact that weapons
are reaching the Middle East via Ukraine through
well-known schemes of corruption was essentially
confirmed by a representative of the Kyiv regime
in this Chamber on Monday (see S/PV.9431), as he
proactively yet clumsily tried to shift the blame onto
Russia. As we all know, a guilty conscience gives itself
away. Despite formally denying reports from the Israeli
military about the discovery of ammunition with the
mark of an Armed Forces of Ukraine unit stationed
in the city of Mukachevo, in Transcarpathian region,
the Security Service of Ukraine conducted searches in
Mukachevo the next day and made a series of arrests.
No comment, as they say, is necessary. We would not
be surprised if weapons from Ukraine were to surface
in other hotspots.
Against that backdrop, Western arms manufacturers
are rubbing their hands with glee. Orders and profits in
the American and British military-industrial complex
are skyrocketing. In addition, many Western countries
are cynically using the current situation to rearm their
own militaries, dumping all sorts of hand-me-downs
on the Ukrainians. Ukraine has firmly established
itself as a testing ground for military equipment and
technologies. After watching Leopard tanks burn in
Ukraine, the United States, according to the Asia Times,
decided to abandon the M1 Abrams tank in favour of
lighter and more compact vehicles.
Unlike Ukraine itself, its Western backers are
deriving direct gains from the conflict. The Ukrainians,
who have become pawns in the geopolitical games of
others, are the only losers here. Against that background,
the Armed Forces of Ukraine are experiencing serious
problems with regard to replenishing their ranks, as their
mobilization campaign is stalling. It is no coincidence
that the Verkhovna Rada began discussing a bill to
abolish age restrictions for older soldiers — essentially,
Ukraine’s so-called servants of the people want to
remove the upper conscription bar so that their troops
may serve until death.
Meanwhile, calls in Kyiv for the recruitment of
more young men are growing louder. The former top
adviser of the Kyiv regime, Mr. Oleksiy Arestovych,
who has already been mentioned today, is now
working on a new political project aimed at ensuring
Zelenskyy’s victory in any upcoming elections, and
therefore somehow has the right to some controlled
free-thinking. He admitted that it is already difficult
to motivate 45-year-old Ukrainians, while 25-year-olds

S/PV.9436

are still immature and prideful enough to be ready to
fight. Only now Kyiv is running out of both 25-yearolds and 45-year-olds. Therefore it would appear that it
is the turn of Ukrainian pensioners to become cannon
fodder. It is no coincidence that Ukraine’s 60–70-yearold “fighters” without any training are increasingly
surrendering to Russian troops.
But those who are behind the anti-Russia project in
our friendly country of Ukraine do not care about that
whatsoever. Our Western colleagues continue to pump
Ukraine full of weapons and cash and demand that it
achieve victory on the battlefield at any cost. However,
the funds generously allocated for such purposes could
have been spent with much greater benefit — at the very
least, on investing in pre-war Ukraine and developing
its potential for good-neighbourliness, including with
Russia, on the basis of support for measures and actions
that are normal for any civilized State, in particular
in the context of protecting the rights of national
minorities. At worst, those funds could have been spent
on implementing the Minsk agreements endorsed by
the Security Council as the sole means of resolving the
internal Ukrainian crisis, not to mention development
projects in Ukraine itself, let alone in other countries in
need. Yet Western countries prefer to stuff Ukraine with
weapons and ammunition, including cluster munitions
and depleted uranium.
The volume of financial assistance provided by the
United States and its allies to the countries of the global
South cannot be compared with what the West has
allocated for weapons for the war with Russia in under
two years. Ukraine received more than €80 billion for
that purpose, with the total amount of funds allocated
to it standing at €165 billion. Meanwhile, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are currently 363 million
people in the world in dire need of some kind of
humanitarian assistance. In order to meet the needs of
all country-specific humanitarian plans this year, the
United Nations requires $55.5 billion, of which only
32 per cent had been received at the end of September.
Since February 2022, the European Union (EU) has
allocated $70 billion to Kyiv, including $37.8 billion
in humanitarian and financial assistance. A total of
$15 billion was spent on military supplies to Ukraine,
and $17 billion on the placement of Ukrainian refugees
in the EU. In June 2023, Brussels announced another
aid package to Ukraine for 2023–2027, to the tune of
€50 billion. Meanwhile, the EU has allocated a total

23-303787/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

of €4 billion to operations for the maintenance of
peace and security in Africa over the past 15 years.
Expenditure on food security in the region in 2023–
2024 will amount to €4.5 billion — 11 times less than
what has been promised to Kyiv.
Ukraine also enjoys preferential treatment with
regard to credit support among Western-centric
financial institutions compared to Africa and other
regions of the global South. The average volume of
International Monetary Fund (IMF) programmes for
African countries in 2023 was 237 per cent of the quota,
but thanks to pressure from Western IMF shareholders,
it was 677 per cent of the quota for Ukraine. The
$15.6 billion assistance programme for Kyiv approved
in January exceeds the six-month volume of IMF loans
to all African States. With the approval of the IMF and
the World Bank, the Kyiv authorities have received
financing in the amount of more than $43 billion — more
than half of the total amount agreed by the Bretton
Woods institutions for the poorest countries with high
levels of debt under the so-called Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative, which has been implemented
since 1996 and was intended to provide various debt
relief mechanisms for low-income countries.
The scale of selectivity of Western humanism
has always been astonishing. Against the backdrop
of current challenges in the world, those countries
really have shown their true colours. Of course, such
an imbalance has not gone unnoticed. The President
of Mexico, Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador,
recently said that, instead of sponsoring the conflict in
Ukraine, the United States would do well to pay greater
attention to the problem of eradicating poverty in Latin
America. It is positive to note that certain responsible
representatives of the humanitarian wing of the United
Nations have begun to talk about that issue openly.
Thanks to the efforts of its Western sponsors,
Ukraine is drowning in debt — according to the latest
IMF data, its external debt this year will exceed 88 per
cent. An economy that is based solely on the military
does not lead to growth, hence why the standard of
living in the country is falling. Contrary to the facts,
Zelenskyy’s regime continues to promote its narrative
abroad of exemplary success in combating corruption.
That is despite the fact that the so-called First Lady
of Ukraine, on her visit to New York in September,
spent more than $1 million — that has surely come to
Ukraine from the pockets of American and European
taxpayers — in one of the most expensive jewelry
8/18

13/10/2023

stores in the world in a single evening. Such examples
of the Ukrainian elite throwing money around abroad
regularly appear in the news.
Against the backdrop of the failure of the counteroffensive by the Kyiv regime, which is passively and
at times actively supported by its Western sponsors
in the egregious use of terrorist methods, it is now
attempting to strike civilian objects in Russia. At
the same time, details of the involvement of Western
intelligence agencies in a number of such crimes are
surfacing, and no one has tried to hide the fact that
Ukrainian saboteurs who bombed the Crimean bridge
in October 2022 were trained by the United Kingdom
Special Forces. London is supplying the Ukrainian
army with underwater drones, training saboteurs and
providing them with intelligence, which makes the
United Kingdom, together with the United States,
a direct accomplice in the crimes committed by the
Zelenskyy regime. Such support and impunity will
serve to make the leaders of the Kyiv junta only more
cynical and brazen. For example, the Head of the Main
Directorate of Intelligence of the Ministry of Defence
of Ukraine, Kyrylo Budanov, recently revealed that his
country’s special units had tried three times to seize the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant despite the fact that
the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, Mr. Grossi, admitted that Mr. Zelenskyy had
personally given him assurances that there would be no
action against nuclear power plants.
I have brought all the preceding facts to the
attention of Council members to give them a better
idea of the actual situation in and around Ukraine.
In order to complete the picture, I would like to add
that, over the past few days, Russian troops have been
engaged in active combat operations along almost the
entire front line. Therefore, the so-called Ukrainian
counter-offensive can already be formally considered
finished. Its cost to Ukraine has unfortunately been
the Kyiv regime’s mobilization of tens of thousands
of recruits, most of whom did not want to fight in the
first place — those who were able to surrender and
remain alive have been lucky — and the destruction
of hundreds of units of Western equipment. This is the
only thing that the Kyiv regime can boast of during the
past four months. Instead of ending the massacre, our
Western colleagues continue to provide the Kyiv regime
with weapons, prolonging the agony, in the same way a
drug dealer prolongs the agony of a junkie.
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Their goal is to damage Russia as much as
possible through Ukraine and render the country as
uninhabitable as possible, despite the fact that Ukraine
and Ukrainians — those who live in peace with its
neighbours and respect the rights of all its citizens,
without discrimination — have never actually been
under threat. Such a Ukraine had and has a future,
unlike the criminal neo-Nazi regime of Zelenskyy,
which, according to Mr. Arestovych, has formed an
internal tyranny — the tyranny of a man who came to
power on promises of peace in the Donbas and respect
for the rights of Russian-speaking Ukrainians, but who
did the exact opposite. The sooner the Western sponsors
of the Kyiv regime realize that and draw the necessary
conclusions, the better it will be for the Ukrainians who
have managed to survive, as well as for the Western
countries that are increasingly undermining their
fabled values every day in their blind support of the
Zelenskyy regime.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I thank the
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Ebo, for his briefing today. His continuing
efforts to counter weapons diversion are critical.
Nearly one month to the day since Russia previously
called a meeting on this issue (see S/PV.9415), we
are once again here at Russia’s request. Make no
mistake, addressing security threats from the illicit
proliferation of conventional arms is a long-standing
United States international security priority. We take
exception to Russia’s continued cynical effort to turn
the Security Council into a pulpit for its ever-growing
disinformation campaign. It is the height of hypocrisy
for a member of the Council — a permanent member,
no less — that has invaded another Member State in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations to raise
questions about that very Member State’s inherent
right to self-defence, as reflected in the same Charter.
The Kremlin undermines the Council with continued
irresponsible nuclear rhetoric, the procurement of arms
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
violation of multiple Security Council resolutions on
that country, the procurement of certain armed drones
from Iran in violation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
continued threats to global food security through its
unilateral suspension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and endangering cargo vessels in the Black Sea.
It is farcical that Russia would request a meeting
convening us here today to discuss the implications
for the prospects of the resolution of the conflict

S/PV.9436

around Ukraine, when it is Russia that launched the
full-scale invasion of Ukraine and when it is Russia
that could end the war today by simply withdrawing
its troops. This past Monday, we met in this Chamber
(see S/PV.9431) to discuss Russia’s decimation of the
Ukrainian village of Hroza, as just one example of its
unrelenting attacks, which kill innocent people and
destroy critical infrastructure. Russia’s invasion of
and sustained attacks against Ukraine for more than
18 months are the real threats to international peace
and security. However, Russia would instead have us
believe that it is our provision of aid to Ukraine to assist
in its legitimate self-defence that is prolonging the very
war Russia began.
Meanwhile, Russia is procuring weapons from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
drones from Iran in direct violation of the Council’s
resolutions to further its offensive war. Those are real
threats to international peace and security, to the global
non-proliferation regime and to regional stability
that the Council should be discussing. Just last week,
Beyond Parallel, a project of the Center for Strategic
and International Studies think tank, published satellite
imagery captured on 5 October of approximately 73 rail
cars at the Tumangang rail station in Rasŏn, a city in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on its border
with Russia. That figure represents an unprecedented
level of freight railcar traffic at the station. The report
made the assessment that “the dramatic increase in rail
traffic likely indicates North Korea’s supply of arms
and munitions to Russia”.
As a reminder, Security Council resolutions prohibit
all Member States from procuring arms or related
material from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Any revenue the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea receives from such transfers could be channelled
by Pyongyang to further develop its unlawful weapons
of mass destruction and ballistic-missile programmes.
We once again urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to cease its efforts to transfer arms to Russia.
We again call on Russia to recommit to the maintenance
of peace and security and to its obligations to uphold
the United Nations arms embargo on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which Russia itself voted
to adopt.
However, as we all know too well, Russia continues
to violate resolution 2231 (2015) by procuring certain
attack drones from Iran for use against Ukraine. The
United States has shared extensive documentation

23-303789/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

and information with every member of the Council.
Just yesterday, together with the United Kingdom, we
co-hosted a display of recovered Iranian material at our
Mission here in New York. The unlawfully procured
Iranian unmanned aerial vehicles have been used in
attacks on critical and civilian infrastructure, including
the ports that Ukraine uses to export grain to the rest
of the world. The Kremlin’s single-minded pursuit of
procuring weapons, while flagrantly and repeatedly
violating Security Council resolutions, of which, once
again, Russia itself voted in favour, is the real threat to
international peace and security.
The United States will continue to support
Ukraine’s self-defence, including through the provision
of arms and equipment that enable Ukraine to defend
its territory and protect its people from Russia’s
unprovoked and unjustified war. We will continue
to expose Russia’s illicit efforts to acquire military
equipment from Iran, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea or any other State that is prepared to support
Russia’s war against Ukraine.
We once again renew our calls for Russia to abide
by its Security Council obligations. We once again
call on Russia to recommit to its responsibilities as a
permanent member of the Council. We once again call
on Russia to withdraw its forces from Ukraine, and to
do so immediately.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
briefing. I listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Nixon.
We are very concerned by the intensification in
recent weeks of the bombings and other attacks against
civilian infrastructure, populations and essential
infrastructure, including grain storage units. Whether
offensive or counter-offensive, indiscriminate strikes
do not spare children, women or older persons, as we
saw in the recent attacks in the village of Hroza. The
reconfiguration of alliances and military rapprochement,
as well as the changes made by certain countries to
their arms policies, are worrisome signs of the scale of
the retreat from international commitments in the area
of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
It is of fundamental importance for us to be able to
reconcile ourselves with the vocation of the Security
Council, which is the Security Council and not a
war council. In that regard, the call of the Secretary10/18

13/10/2023

General, supported by the International Committee of
the Red Cross, asking States to apply new international
rules with regard to autonomous weapons systems
must engage all members of the international
community because such weapons strike their targets
indiscriminately and lead to a high number of civilian
victims, including after conflicts. By limiting their use,
we will help to limit their inhumane effects. We call
upon the warring parties to keep to their obligations
under international humanitarian law. It goes without
saying that defining new norms and red lines at
the global level is an absolute priority in the current
context, which is marked by the resurgence of conflict,
particularly in the Middle East. My country calls upon
all parties to redouble their efforts to prevent the effects
of the mass circulation of conventional weapons by
intensifying measures for tracking and marking.
My country is worried to observe the trend towards
normalizing the use of military force with increased
recourse to weapons of mass destruction and massive
rearmament, and to the review by certain countries
of their military doctrine with a clear interest in
nuclear deterrence. Such dangerous backtracking flies
in the face of the efforts in which we have engaged
together that are manifested by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the cornerstone
of the international disarmament architecture. A
genuine leap forward is essential, and we invite every
member of the international community to participate
in order to reconnect our Organization with its primary
vocation, namely, to save current and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
The war in Ukraine must cease as soon as possible.
The suffering and destruction must be brought to a
halt. And that can be done only by activating channels
of diplomacy and through negotiation. We call upon
all parties, including the regional and subregional
organizations of which the warring parties are
members, to create conditions that will enable dialogue
and negotiation in order to silence the guns in Ukraine
and guarantee peaceful coexistence between all parties.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his enlightening insights into the situation in Ukraine.
I also extend my thanks to Mr. Garland Nixon for his
perspective on the situation.
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mozambique has consistently highlighted the
negative effects of the continued arms transfers on the
potential resolution of the conflict in Ukraine. While
we acknowledge every nation’s sovereign right to selfdefence, we also wish to emphasize that it is imperative
that all applicable protocols and international arms
control agreements be respected in order to ensure
global peace and security. That is crucial to preventing
the unregulated transfer of arms, which can lead to
the unintended proliferation and illicit trafficking
of those weapons. There is an inevitable risk of the
unrestricted flow of weapons fuelling violence, being
misdirected and ending up empowering the wrong
entities. Furthermore, the repercussions of careless
arms transfers could extend the duration and intensity
of the conflict, diminish the hopes for peace and have
a cascading negative effect on the broader international
community’s efforts towards the maintenance of peace
and security. It is therefore a shared global responsibility
to seek sustainable solutions.
We have persistently advocated for a diplomatic and
negotiated resolution. We still believe that it is the sole
avenue to resolve the conflict and to lay a foundation
for durable and sustainable peace between the nations
involved. To that end, it is essential that all avenues,
peace initiatives and confidence-building measures
be given a chance. When trust is re-established, the
pathway to peace will naturally emerge. Mozambique
reiterates its steadfast position and urges the relevant
parties, first, to immediately halt hostilities; secondly,
to return to direct negotiation in good faith; and lastly,
to embrace a positive, inclusive and results-driven
strategy concentrating on collaborative advantages
rather than a narrow competitive stance.
In conclusion, the world and the Council need an
end to this conflict to be able to tackle other emerging
and equally pressing challenges.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, and the other briefer for their briefings.
Today we are again hearing the same claims by
Russia. I would like to reiterate the real nature of this
war of aggression. It is clear that Russia is a country
violating the Charter of the United Nations in this war
of aggression. Ukraine is a country exercising its right
to self-defence as stipulated in the Charter. One is the
rule-breaker and the other is a rule-defender, and our
support for Ukraine is also defence of the Charter.

S/PV.9436

Those facts have been the same throughout since
February 2022.
Even now, after so many events and tragedies, they
have not changed. That is why we are calling on Russia
to withdraw immediately and unconditionally and end
this violation of the Charter. No support, including
arms transfers, should be given to Russia. It would
be particularly unacceptable if Russia were to violate
existing Security Council resolutions while receiving
such support.
Russia has self-justified the aggression against
Ukraine by framing it as a conflict pitting itself against
the so-called Kyiv regime and its Western backers.
However, Russia’s attempts to mislead the international
community have failed, as the overwhelming majority
of United Nations States Members have indicated at the
General Assembly their will to uphold the principles
set forth by the Charter, such as sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The international community also
understands the root causes of the negative effects this
conflict has had on the world. They stem entirely from
Russia’s violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
There is no need to complicate things with Russia’s
misrepresentation of the issues.
As the only country to have suffered atomic
bombings during war, Japan is strongly committed to
international efforts towards realizing a world without
nuclear weapons. Bringing the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) into force is exactly one such
important effort, and it must be achieved without further
delay. In that connection, we are deeply concerned by
Russia’s recent announcements about the possibility of
revoking its ratification of the CTBT.
We also remain concerned about the possibility of
military cooperation between Russia and North Korea.
At the recent Russia-North Korea summit, it was
announced that they agreed on strategic and tactical
cooperation. We are closely monitoring whether
that would lead to a violation of Security Council
resolutions — potentially another rule-breaking by
the responsible Council member. No country should
engage in cooperation that would undermine the
non-proliferation regime which we all value.
It is clear from these facts that it is quite natural
to argue that any call for peace should respect and
abide by the Charter of the United Nations and respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

23-3037811/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

Moreover, any call for a ceasefire should be directed at
Russia, the rule-breaker.
Russia should stop making meaningless claims in
this Chamber and respect the Charter of the United
Nations immediately. It should do so now.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Mr. Ebo for his valuable briefing, and I welcome
the participation of the representative of Ukraine in
today’s meeting.
Essential to the right to self-defence that all
Member States possess is the ability to develop defence
capabilities. With such activities comes certain risks
and, with those risks, responsibilities for mitigation. To
that end, we stress the importance of taking measures
to safeguard weapons during their transfer, storage
and deployment.
We once again affirm our support for the efforts
made by the United Nations, in conjunction with Member
States, to develop standards and best practices in the
pursuit of the global enhancement of weapons safety.
That includes the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All its Aspects, as supported by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
Armed conflict and the chaos that so often
accompanies it create a set of conditions that could
lead to unforeseen and unfortunate consequences.
Therefore, the United Arab Emirates urges all parties
to mitigate the risks associated with arms transfers,
storage and deployment, in particular in situations of
armed conflict. Ultimately, the most effective way to
address the risks associated with the transfer, storage
and deployment of weapons in time of war is to bring
the conflict to a definitive end.
As we have done before and will continue to do,
we urge all parties to the conflict in Ukraine to abide
by their obligations under international humanitarian
law. The protection of civilians and civilian objects
is paramount.
Although the numbers of deaths, casualties and
displaced civilians provide a stark reminder of the
cost this war has wrought on the people of Ukraine,
the invisible trauma and long-lasting impacts on the
population will also leave their indelible mark.
12/18

13/10/2023

The United Arab Emirates stands ready to
work with all partners in the pursuit of dialogue and
diplomacy and to pave the way towards a just and
sustainable peace that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
Four days ago, we held an emergency meeting
following a Russian-led strike on a building in the
Ukrainian village of Hroza (see S/PV.9431). The vast
majority of Council members and the Secretary-General
condemned that violation of international humanitarian
law. The attack caused at least 52 civilian casualties.
Russia is once again trying to divert attention from
the crimes it is committing. No one believes that the
support given to Ukraine is at the root of the conflict or
the reason it continues.
It was Russia that took it upon itself to provoke this
war. It was Russia that attacked Ukraine in defiance
of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
It was only in response to that aggression that many
countries, including France, decided to assist Ukraine
in exercising its right to self-defence, under Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.
France, along with its European partners, is
committed to providing political, humanitarian and
military assistance to Ukraine. We are supplying
the country with systems that enable it to defend
itself, in particular against indiscriminate attacks
against its critical infrastructure and against the
civilian population. These arms deliveries are carried
out in strict compliance with our international
commitments, in terms of controlling arms transfers
and preventing diversions.
This war has dragged on for almost 20 months,
leading to increased instability throughout the world
and aggravated food insecurity for the most vulnerable
populations. What is undermining the chances of
resolving this crisis is Russia’s continued illegal
aggression, using weapons, some of which it has
acquired, in violation of Council resolutions, from Iran
and North Korea.
We once again call on Russia to cease its aggression
and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory, as
was requested by the International Court of Justice
on 6 March 2022, and as the overwhelming majority
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of General Assembly members have also repeatedly
requested. This is the condition for a just and lasting
peace, based on the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and on respect for Ukraine’s
territorial integrity.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the two briefers for their briefings.
With the Ukrainian crisis dragging on, the situation
on the ground is still tense and the spillover effect
continues to spread. A large number of weapons and
ammunition continue to flow into the battlefield. The
variety and scope of such weapons are expanding, and
the weapons are also becoming more lethal. That has
exacerbated the cruelty, danger and unpredictability of
ground warfare, making the hope for a ceasefire and an
end to the war even more remote.
In his briefing to the Security Council, the
representative of the Secretariat repeatedly mentioned
that a flood of weapons and ammunition into conflict
areas may lead to a risk of proliferation and that
strict control measures should be adopted. We call
on all relevant parties to the Ukrainian crisis to take
a responsible attitude, pay greater attention and make
every effort to prevent the risk of the proliferation of
weapons and ammunition, especially to prevent them
from falling into the hands of terrorists or non-State
actors and to prevent new unrest in a wider geographical
area which would result in more displacement and the
loss of more innocent lives.
Like many countries that are hoping to see
peace, China has repeatedly stressed that dialogue
and negotiation are the fundamental ways to stop the
fighting and restore peace. China will continue to stand
on the side of peace and dialogue, strengthen dialogue
and exchanges with all parties, build synergy within the
international community aimed at promoting peace and
dialogue and play a positive and constructive role in
working for a political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
Before I conclude, I would like to point out that
the world we live in is witnessing a confluence of
change and chaos accompanied by a great deal of
turbulence and unrest. From Asia to Africa, from
Ukraine to the Middle East, we are seeing growing
numbers of conflicts and skirmishes. The underlying
reasons for that deserve serious reflection. We call on
the international community to adhere to the concept
of common, integrated, cooperative and sustainable
security, advocate for peaceful coexistence, promote

S/PV.9436

dialogue and reconciliation, and take effective measures
so as to fundamentally defuse conflicts and problems
and achieve lasting peace and common security.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the Deputy to the High Representative of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Ebo, for
his briefing. We also took note of Mr. Nixon’s remarks.
This Council meeting on Ukraine follows one
held earlier this week in the wake of the deadly attack
in Hroza (see S/PV.9431). A large majority of the
Council expressed its concern about the devastating
impact of Russia’s military aggression on the civilian
population in Ukraine and pointed out that civilians and
civilian infrastructure are protected by international
humanitarian law. We heard the call for putting an end
to the military aggression loud and clear. Russia can
put an end to it, at any time, and by doing so eliminate
the risks associated with the arms deliveries that it is
concerned about. We once again call on it to de-escalate
the situation, cease all hostilities and withdraw its
troops from Ukrainian territory without delay.
We should never confuse the aggressor with the
aggressed. Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine
violates fundamental principles of international law.
Switzerland rejects any attempt to justify that act
or deflect responsibility for its consequences. The
prohibition of the use of force and territorial expansion
by force are enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Like all States, Ukraine has the right to
ensure its security and defend its territorial integrity
and sovereignty.
As far as arms deliveries are concerned, it is
crucial that States respect their obligations. We are
deeply concerned by the erosion of the arms-control
architecture and the failure to comply with certain rules
in that regard. That includes the violation of Council
resolutions, whether through Iran’s illegal transfer
of drones to Russia or the alleged transfer to Russia
of arms and munitions from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Our common security requires
a broader vision of this concept, and we support the
call made by the Secretary-General in his New Agenda
for Peace, which seeks to reduce the human cost of
weapons, in particular by providing better protection
for civilians in populated areas of conflict zones. In line
with that objective, Switzerland has made humanitarian
demining in civilian areas a priority of its action in
Ukraine. We are committed to the reconstruction of

23-3037813/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

Ukraine and will also pursue our commitment to full
respect for international law and accountability. We
also support efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine in accordance with the
principles of the Charter.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Deputy High
Representative Ebo for his informative briefing, and
Mr. Nixon for sharing his views.
Our position on the dangers and long-term impact
that uncontrolled flows of weapons have on regional
peace is consistent and long-standing. Our position
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
the need to ensure compliance with international
law, including international humanitarian law, is also
unequivocal. However, the objective of this meeting,
called by the Russian Federation, is another attempt to
shift the responsibility for Russia’s war of aggression.
It is cynically attempting to distort reality in a bid to
depict the aggressor as the victim and the victim as
the aggressor.
The Council must not lose sight of the real cause of
this war. On 24 February 2022, the Russian Federation
launched an unjustified and unprovoked full-scale
invasion of its sovereign neighbour Ukraine. In doing
so, it violated the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law while jeopardizing
European security. We must also remember that at
no stage did Ukraine commit, or threaten to commit,
an attack on Russia. We stand firm in our belief that
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders must be safeguarded.
Equally, we underline Ukraine’s right to self-defence
as enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Through its aggression, Russia continues to be
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights. It is deeply concerning that these
outrageous acts of violence against Ukraine’s civilians
and civilian infrastructure have continued unabated.
The recent horrendous missile attacks on innocent
civilians perpetrated by Russia in Hroza just a few days
ago were some of the deadliest since the beginning of
the aggression. They were a grim and stark reminder of
the state of fear that the Ukrainian people have to deal
with on a daily basis, and we cannot treat it as being
part of the new normal.
According to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, since February 2022 there have been at least
9,700 civilian deaths in Ukraine. Almost 18,000 others
14/18

13/10/2023

have suffered injuries, mostly as a result of the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects, including
shelling from artillery, multiple-launch rocket systems,
cruise and ballistic missiles and air strikes. As the
conflict has intensified, so too has the humanitarian
situation on the ground. The war has brought massive
destruction to essential services and infrastructure, not
least in the areas of water, health care and education.
Furthermore, hundreds of security incidents, which
affect humanitarian access, have hampered operations
in 2023, most notably in areas under Russian occupation.
Malta stresses once again the parties’ obligations to
protect civilians, facilitate the flow of humanitarian
assistance and immediately cease targeting civilian
objects that are indispensable for Ukraine’s population.
We are also deeply concerned about the Russian
Federation’s recent announcement regarding a possible
reconsideration of its ratification of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
In conclusion, I reiterate our firm condemnation
in the strongest possible terms of Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine. We once again urge the Russian
Federation to end its hostilities and withdraw its
military forces, equipment and proxies from the entire
internationally recognized territory of Ukraine.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We would like
to thank Mr. Ebo for his very helpful briefing.
Russia has made many excuses in the Council
about what its illegal war of aggression was supposed to
achieve. It claimed its invasion was defensive and born
of a desire to protect rights enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. It claimed that it was about
de-Nazification. But now, almost 600 days into its
three-day special operation, Russia’s real plan for peace
is quite clear. Last week, after relentless Russian strikes
on civilian infrastructure, President Putin said that the
Ukrainian economy and military would collapse within
a week without the assistance of other States. That is
the resolution that Russia is striving for — the complete
submission of a United Nations Member State. Russia
claims that it is Western support that stands in its way.
But much as we are proud to be assisting Ukraine, it is
in fact the courage and unity of the Ukrainian people
that will ensure that Russia fails and that Ukraine will
prevail. The reality is that Russia’s war has already
been a failure — a historically shameful one.
The Ukrainian people know all too well what
Russian conquest would mean for them. There have
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

been more than 100,000 incidents of alleged war crimes
committed during the conflict, including the murder
and torture of civilians, and unlawful attacks on
civilian infrastructure with explosive weapons. There
have been acts of torture and sexual and gender-based
violence committed by Russian forces that the United
Nations and other international bodies have extensively
documented. And the sham referendums have shown
that for Russia, a people’s right to self-determination
is found only at the tip of a Russian bayonet. At the
same time, the callous sacrifice of many thousands of
Russian troops has made clear the value that the Russian
Government places on its own people.
International assistance to Ukraine is not what is
prolonging this war. The fact is that Russia’s military
objectives are unachievable. Ukrainians will rightly
continue to fight fiercely to defend their land for as
long as it takes, and the world is united in supporting
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. That
will not change. International assistance to Russia,
however, is illegal and immoral. That is why Russia
is relying on heavily sanctioned States such as Iran
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for
help with procuring arms. Iranian drones in Russian
hands have killed civilians and caused vast economic
damage across Ukraine. Russia is negotiating deals
for huge quantities of weapons from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to be used against Ukraine.
In turn, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
seeks military technology to bolster its own illegal
weapons programme, further destabilizing the region.
Those deals are a serious risk to international peace and
security and violate multiple Council resolutions that
Russia itself voted in favour of.
The Russian Ambassador said that we had not
proposed any solutions. We have — and I will do it again.
To start with, Russia should end its illegal invasion and
withdraw its troops from Ukraine’s sovereign territory.
It is not complicated. It is what the General Assembly
and the International Court of Justice have demanded.
A just and lasting peace can be achieved through the
broad principles set out by President Zelenskyy and
based on the Charter. International support for his
initiative is growing, and the United Kingdom is proud
to support those efforts.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
informative briefing.

S/PV.9436

I want to reiterate all the points that my delegation
made at the Security Council’s 12 September meeting
on the same topic (see S/PV.9415) and at all the meetings
that preceded it. In particular, I support the observations
and recommendations of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs regarding the risks posed by flows of weapons
and ammunition and the measures needed to mitigate
those risks. Today I would like to make two additional
points that I consider relevant.
My first point concerns the spread of inflammatory
rhetoric, which could threaten international peace and
security far beyond Ukraine. For instance, there has
been a constant increase in harmful nuclear rhetoric
since Russia began its invasion. That rhetoric has also
been accompanied by substantive action, which has
made the situation even more worrisome. In the context,
Ecuador calls on all Member States to strengthen the
international disarmament architecture by ratifying or
acceding to the existing related treaties. Ecuador calls
on the State signatories and parties to those treaties to
refrain from weakening them, including in the case of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, whose
entry into force we also urge for.
My second key point has to do with what was
discussed at the Council’s meeting held on Monday,
9 October, convened at the request of Ukraine in
accordance with Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter of
the United Nations, as a result of the attacks on Hroza
in the Kharkiv region (see S/PV.9431). We reiterate our
condemnation of those attacks and emphasize the role
that anti-aircraft weapon systems can play in protecting
civilian populations. Any transfer of weapons must be
supported by the reasoning that it is for the protection of
the civilian population and in defence of the country’s
territorial integrity.
Finally, my delegation joins others who expressed
their concern this morning about the escalation of
violence and conflicts around the world. In that regard,
we urge the Russian Federation to stop its attacks on
residential and densely populated areas and call on it
to stop its invasion in order to give peaceful solutions,
based on respect for territorial integrity and the other
principles of the Charter, a chance.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to the High
Representative, for his briefing and for reminding
us about the measures needed to address the risk
of proliferation and diversion to unintended users

23-3037815/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

associated with the transfer of conventional weapons.
We share the concern about the matters raised by the
Deputy to the High Representative, and we also thank
the civil-society briefer, Mr. Nixon, for sharing his
views with the Security Council.
In September, when the Council met to deliberate
on this topic, my delegation expressed its deep concern
about the continuing aggression by the Russian
Federation against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine (see S/PV.9415). We noted in
particular the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation and the effects of the war on peace and security
worldwide. As we gather in the Chamber today, our
concerns have only been heightened by the egregious
acts being committed against the people of Ukraine.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure continue to be
attacked despite the clear prohibitions on such attacks
under international humanitarian law. The missile
attack on Hroza on 5 October is on record as being one
of the deadliest attacks on civilians of the entire war,
after it was established that it had wiped out a third
of the village’s population. Other attacks reported in
Kharkiv, among other areas, have resulted in the deaths
of many, including children.
After nearly 600 days of the brutal onslaught on
Ukraine, it is clear to us that the use of force, aside
from being outlawed by international law, is not the
most strategic choice for advancing the individual
or collective interests of States. We are firmly of the
view that the conflict between the two countries can
be resolved only through dialogue, not military means.
Unfortunately, right now a commitment from the
parties to resuming negotiations in good faith seems to
be lacking, and actions such as those I mentioned make
the chances for a peaceful resolution in the immediate
term increasingly distant.
The various conflicts raging across the world have
put our international system and the Security Council,
which is mandated to help promote international peace
and security, under immense pressure. Urgent action
is now required to prevent the conflict from escalating
further and restore the conditions necessary for peaceful
coexistence and mutual cooperation, as envisaged
in the Charter of the United Nations. We urge for
intensifying diplomatic efforts to facilitate a credible
process of dialogue between the parties and all other
relevant stakeholders. In that respect, we encourage
the regional bodies that are key actors of the European
security architecture to reactivate their engagement. We
16/18

13/10/2023

remain firmly of the view that a just and lasting peace
in Ukraine can be attained by placing at the centre of
peace efforts the values and purposes of the Charter
and fundamental principles of international law such as
those relating to the use of force, the sovereign equality
of States, territorial integrity, the non-recognition of
forcibly acquired territory and criminal accountability.
Finally, as we reiterate our call for the cessation of
hostilities and the de-escalation of tensions, we urge the
Russian Federation to immediately and unconditionally
withdraw its troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Mr. Ebo for
the briefing.
Just a few days ago, the Security Council held
an urgent meeting on the horrible attack in Hroza,
Ukraine, which killed at least 52 innocent people.
Today, once more, and in a déjà vu scenario, Russia is
calling for another meeting on the same subject that has
been discussed so many times.
Let us be clear, in the very same way that we have
been in every meeting on this issue. While the issue is
the weapons supply, the core issue is what one does with
the weapons, and the difference could not be starker.
Russia is using its weapons to kill the people of another
country, in disregard of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. Ukraine is using them
for self-defence, on the basis of international law and
the Charter. That is why Russia should be condemned,
and Ukraine should be supported.
Russia has initiated an unprovoked and unjustified
military aggression against Ukraine, threatening
European security, with an economic and humanitarian
impact worldwide. We remain committed to supporting
Ukraine politically, diplomatically, economically and
militarily in its defence of its country, the Charter,
peace and security in Europe and the international
rules-based order.
Article 51 of the Charter constitutes a clear legal
basis for individual States to offer whatever assistance
to a country exercising its inherent right to self-defence
and defence of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterate that the transfer of arms to Ukraine has been
conducted in accordance with national legislation, the
Arms Trade Treaty, the obligations arising from those
instruments and the assessment of the risk of diversion.
Instead — and here is another stark difference — Russia
23-30378

13/10/2023

Threats to international peace and security

has been using Iranian drones, illegally transferred and
in breach of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015).
There are serious allegations that Russia is also being
supplied with weapons and ammunition by another
country under Security Council sanctions — the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Let us not
forget that, while Russia is trying to divert attention
to weapons supply to Ukraine, it is weaponizing food,
energy, media and everything possible.
To conclude, we reiterate our call on Russia to stop
the war, withdraw its troops from Ukraine, respect that
country’s territorial integrity and engage in dialogue in
order to find a solution through negotiations.

S/PV.9436

through the good offices of neutral third parties or
international institutions.
Brazil supports efforts to prevent the diversion of
arms and munitions and to increase the transparency
and accountability of international transfers. We
urge all Member States to adhere to the Arms
Trade Treaty, uphold the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and refrain from any transactions
that may constitute a violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.

Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I recognize the presence of
Putin’s envoy in the permanent seat of the Soviet Union.

I thank Mr. Ebo for his important briefing and
Mr. Nixon for sharing his views today. I welcome the
delegation of Ukraine to this meeting.

On Monday, we drew the Council’s attention to
the fact that he might add another hoax to the list of
those related to weapons supplies, this time concerning
alleged transfers to the Middle East — and we were
not mistaken. With its statement, Russia hit a new low.
Actually, what can we expect from terrorists and liars
who have already fed the Council fairy tales about
biolabs, dirty bombs and war mosquitoes? As always,
there is an absence of any credible evidence that has
been hidden behind plenty of pieces of information
randomly taken from the Internet or produced by
Russian propaganda.

Our position is well known, and it has not changed
since the last Council meeting on the issue, in September
(see S/PV.9424). Brazil supports the inherent right of all
Member States to self-defence in the event of an armed
conflict, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. That obviously applies to Ukraine.
However, massive transfers of arms and munitions
to conflict zones pose serious, long-standing risks to
peace and security. The introduction of increasingly
more destructive weapons into this conflict and the
inadmissible threat of use of nuclear weapons seriously
undermine peace and security well beyond the battlefield
and make peace even more elusive. Moreover, the
extensive mining of land, including in the vicinity of
populated areas, poses an enduring threat for civilians
and has an impact on the use of agricultural land.
Years after the suspension of hostilities, weapons used
in conflicts may still affect civilians or be diverted to
criminal or terrorist organizations, becoming a longterm factor of instability.
We believe that those considerations should
encourage a reflection on the current dynamics
of the war in Ukraine. The continuation of the
conflict comes at a heavy price, paid mostly by the
civilian population — today or for years to come.
It is our responsibility as Council members to
encourage de-escalation and the establishment of
negotiations, either directly between the parties or

It is regrettable and worthy of condemnation that
the Russian delegation continues its puerile practice of
retaliation against the Security Council’s consideration
of the agenda item on the maintenance of international
peace and security of Ukraine by duplicating meetings.
It is a clear misuse of the Security Council toolbox.
At the same time, those pathetic attempts attest to the
catastrophic consequences that Ukraine’s resistance,
underpinned by global solidarity, is having on Putin’s
imperial plans and sentiments. That solidarity is
critical for my country. At the same time, it is solidarity
in defence of the Charter of the United Nations, whose
principles are now being crash-tested in Ukraine.
We reiterate our gratitude to all nations that have
helped Ukraine to defend its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, in full conformity with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, and to save our people
from extermination. Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine, its brutal actions on the ground and statements
by Putin and his accomplices prove those genocidal

23-3037817/18

S/PV.9436

Threats to international peace and security

aspirations quite clearly, and we are appalled that Russia
is using this Chamber as a platform to whitewash them.
For instance, Putin’s envoy did so on Monday,
when he labelled all victims of the mass murder in
the village of Hroza, whose number amounted to
59, as top-ranked nationalists (see S/PV.9431). They
were retirees, medical workers, farmers, teachers and
entrepreneurs — most of them women — and included
even an 8-year-old child. Despite how abhorrent and
morally repugnant that attempt at a justification may
sound to normal people, Putin’s envoy was honest in
his claims. Indeed, all those who identify themselves as
Ukrainians are nationalists in the Kremlin’s eyes and,
as such, are subject to extermination.
We have sufficient grounds to say that the gathering
in Hroza was purposely targeted. That is evidenced by
not only the indirect admission of Putin’s envoy at the
previous meeting, but also by findings of the Security
Service of Ukraine that two brothers with the last name
Momon, once residents of Hroza and collaborators
who fled to Russia, may be responsible for collecting
information about the funeral reception and passing it
along to the Russian military.
Such mass murders completely fit Russia’s genocidal
logic and plans to bring to Ukraine as much destruction
and pain as possible. Even schools are considered by
Russia as legitimate targets. Just this week two tragic
incidents happened. On 10 October Russian terrorists
shelled a school in Krasnopillya, Sumy region, killing
a 13-year-old girl. On the next day, Russian missiles
destroyed a college in Nikopol, Dnipropetrovsk region.
As a result, four people were killed.
By targeting schools and killing children, Russia
tries to deprive us of our future — a future that we

18/18

13/10/2023

build together in the interest of all humankind, a future
that is prosperous, safe, based on multilateralism and
free from wars, poverty and hunger. Ukraine stands in
defence of that vision of the future, and every success
on the ground brings that vision closer to reality.
For instance, strengthening our naval capacities has
not only deterred the Russian Black Sea Fleet from
approaching the Ukrainian shore, but has also enabled
the unblocking of the grain exports by establishing
temporary corridors for civilian vessels from and to
Ukrainian ports.
Putin speaks of his dreams about a Ukraine that has
one week left to live if weapon supplies were terminated.
On Monday my delegation quoted him saying that (see
S/PV.9431). The truth is that he realizes that Ukraine
is no longer his dream; it is his nightmare. He fears his
imminent defeat in Ukraine, and that fear prompts him
to instruct his army to be senselessly cruel and cling to
the stolen lands at any cost.
All nations fighting against terrorists, murderers
and rapists should enjoy the support of the international
community, including by actually providing them with
weaponry rather than simply declare that they have a
right to self-defence.
I would therefore like to conclude my statement
by reiterating our gratitude to all our friends for the
solidarity that brings us closer to the end of the horror
that Ukraine and Ukrainians have lived through — 597
days of a full-fledged war of aggression — and to
ensuring comprehensive, just and lasting peace for
Ukraine and security for the whole world.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-30378
