S/PV.8907

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8907th meeting

Wednesday, 17 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Benaabou
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Hunter
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2021/944)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-34296 (E)
*2134296*

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

encouraging that elections for the House of the People
have commenced, with 2 of the 275 seats having been
completed and elections for an additional eleven seats
announced to begin this week.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2021/944)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia; and Ms. Asha Siyad, Executive
Director, Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/944, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
brief the Council on the situation in Somalia. I am pleased
to do so again together with the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, Ambassador Francisco Madeira. I am
also grateful to brief the Council alongside Ms. Asha
Siyad, co-founder of the Somali Women’s Leadership
Initiative and a member of the Goodwill Ambassadors,
who have tirelessly advocate in support of the 30 per
cent representation of women in the elections.
Progress, albeit slow and uneven progress, has
been made in the electoral process. I welcome the
recent completion of the elections for all the 54 seats
in the Upper House of the Federal Parliament. It is
encouraging that 14 women will soon take office as
Senators, representing 26 per cent of the Upper House.
This is an increase from the previous elections in 2016,
though still short of the 30-per cent target. It is also
2/18

17/11/2021

In addition to the electoral preparations at the national
level, the holding of peaceful, direct local elections in
three districts in Puntland in October demonstrated the
feasibility of holding one-person-one-vote elections
and underscored the desire among Somali people for
political participation on the basis of universal suffrage.
While I acknowledge this progress, it has now been
more than one year since Somalia’s political leaders
signed the 17 September electoral agreement and nearly
six months since the commitments were reaffirmed
through the 27 May agreement.
The elections for the vast majority of seats in the
Federal Parliament are still to commence, electoral
security preparations need to be accelerated and a list
published of the 30 per cent of House of People seats
that will reserved for women. We continue to stress that
women’s full inclusion and representation in political
life, and indeed in all sectors of life, is key for Somalia’s
sustainable peace and development. This message was
underscored by the Deputy Secretary-General and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa on their recent
visits to Somalia.
The United Nations continues to engage with
and support key stakeholders to advance the election
process. This includes diplomatic engagement,
including joint visits with partners to the federal
member state capitals and polling sites and joint
partner statements, as well as technical support to the
Federal Electoral Implementation Team, State Electoral
Implementation Teams and the Office of the Prime
Minister, and coordination and channelling of donor
contributions for the elections.
I urge all stakeholders to move swiftly to conclude
the House of the People elections in the federal member
states to ensure the full Parliament is elected before
the end of this year. I also call for the full respect of
fundamental rights during the campaign and electoral
periods, including peaceful assembly, and the freedom
of movement, association and expression.
With regard to political developments in Somalia,
I am also pleased to note that tensions between the
President and the Prime Minister that emerged in
August and September over two issues, namely,
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8907

the appointment of senior security officials and the
handling of an investigation into the disappearance
of an agent of the National Intelligence and Security
Agency, have now eased. Following mediation efforts
by several senior Somali officials, a broadly welcomed
compromise solution was announced at the end
of October.

to reach agreement on the strategic objectives, size
and composition of a future African Union mission
designed to support the security transition in Somalia
in the most effective way. In that regard, I welcome the
recent African Union Peace and Security Council visit
to Somalia, which provided an important opportunity
for discussions among many stakeholders.

The security situation in Somalia unfortunately
continues to be volatile. I pay tribute to the commitment
and sacrifice of the Somali security forces and those
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which continue to face Al-Shabaab on a daily basis.
Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat to Somalia’s
security, able to maintain a high level of activities,
including through the continued use of improvised
explosive devices and an increase in the use of suicide
bombers. In Mogadishu, the latest vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device attack occurred on
25 September, targeting a checkpoint at Villa Somalia,
resulting in several fatalities, including of a senior
Government adviser. I condemn in the strongest terms
Al-Shabaab’s attacks and express deep condolences
to its victims. To date in 2021, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia has documented 964
civilians killed or injured as a result of armed conflict.
Al-Shabaab remains the largest perpetrator, responsible
for almost two thirds of civilian casualties.

The ongoing delays in the electoral process
continue to stall progress in other critical areas and
hamper the achievement of national priorities beyond
the elections, including reforming the Constitution
and the justice sector and advancing the development
agenda and financial reforms, such as achieving the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative completion
point in 2022.

Regrettably, political tensions also continue to drive
conflict in Somalia. The period from 23 to 26 October
saw intense fighting in the town of Guriel between
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a and the Galmudug security
forces, supported by the federal armed forces. That
armed confrontation resulted in significant casualties,
mass displacement of the civilian population and
severe damage to public facilities and private homes.
Along with partners, the United Nations engaged all
parties on those issues, with strong calls for a cessation
of hostilities and pursuit of dialogue to address
political differences.
The implementation of the Somali transition plan
for the progressive transfer of security responsibilities
from AMISOM to the Somali security forces is
advancing but remains behind schedule. Regarding
the implementation of resolution 2568 (2021) with
respect to post-2021 security arrangements, the
Secretary-General will keep the Council informed
of developments. I will therefore not go into details
on that matter. Suffice to say, further discussions
will be required among key security stakeholders

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire, compounded by conflict, displacement and disease
outbreaks. Somalia is also on the front line of recurrent
climatic shocks, exacerbating the humanitarian
emergency. Humanitarian partners estimate that
7.7 million Somalis will require humanitarian
assistance in 2022. Without immediate treatment, some
1.2 million children under the age of five are likely to
be acutely malnourished in 2022.
Some 2.9 million people are estimated to be
internally displaced throughout the country, which
is one of the highest numbers of internally displaced
persons in the world. In that context, I am gravely
concerned that the 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan
is currently only 51 per cent funded. I thank donors
for their generous contributions to date, but a critical
scale-up in humanitarian action is urgently required.
Let me conclude by stressing that, although progress
is being made, the efforts of Somalia’s political leaders
will need to be redoubled in the coming weeks to bring
the elections for the Federal Parliament to a successful
conclusion so that the presidential elections can be held
as soon as possible. The completion of those elections
is now more important than ever so that all efforts can
return to the key governance, security and development
priorities in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Swan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Let me start by congratulating you

21-342963/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

and your country, Mexico, on assuming the presidency
of the Council for the month of November.
Since my previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.8833) and despite the deeply concerning slow
pace of the process, Somalia has moved away from the
pre-27 May electoral impasse and has recently completed
its Upper House elections — not a minor feat that we have
all welcomed. The country is now in the early stages of
its lower house electoral marathon. It is our ardent hope
and desire that this process will be accomplished and
completed before the end of the year, in line with the
commitment made by the country’s political leadership
at its most recent National Consultative Council
meeting. It was with satisfaction that, after months of
protracted dispute over the composition and leadership
of the “Somaliland” electoral management body, we
witnessed and took note of the start of the lower house
election in the Somaliland constituency in Mogadishu,
the first of its kind in this electoral season.
It is worth noting that, despite persistent differences,
the country’s political stakeholders have kept their
doors open to each other. That is allowing for sustained
interaction and dialogue to continue among them in spite
of the odds, ensuring a platform where differences can
be narrowed and the possibility for consensus around
issues of common concern can be enhanced. That is a
very positive development, which we should continue
to encourage and harness to ensure the swift, peaceful
and credible completion of the remaining stages of the
electoral process, which are pivotal to returning the
country to peace, stability and prosperity.
The 30 per cent quota for women remains a challenge.
While the African Union welcomes the completion of
the Upper House elections, we note with concern that
the results have fallen short of the minimum 30 per
cent quota for women, totalling only 26 per cent. To
strengthen the voice of women in the quest to have their
rights and level of political representation recognized
and upheld, AMISOM has been working closely with
the women goodwill ambassadors and other female
activists. Their focus now is the upcoming House of
the People elections and how to prevail over the elders
and other political leaders to ensure that they live up to
the commitments undertaken and voluntarily enshrined
in the 17 September 2021 and 27 May agreements.
Those commitments include improving the electoral
mechanisms to ensure that the very important
30 per cent minimum quota for women’s representation
is achieved.
4/18

17/11/2021

While attention has rightly been focused on the
completion of national elections, I am encouraged by
the peaceful completion of the first direct one-person
one-vote local council elections that took place in three
districts of Puntland in October. The elections were
free, transparent and peaceful. Voter enthusiasm was
immense, and the turnout was high. It was a unique
experience in many ways, which I am sure will
be emulated.
Recognizing the importance of the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) extending its support
beyond election security, the African Union Peace
and Security Council, through its communiqué 994,
mandated AMISOM to provide technical assistance to
other areas of Somalia’s electoral process.
In that context. I am pleased to report that Somalia
is now the first African Union member State to receive
multipronged intervention support through an African
Union peace support operation. That support now
includes African Union technical experts embedded in
the Federal Electoral Implementation Team, providing
important advisory support on logistics, legal issues
and election security, financial support to the Federal
Electoral Implementation Team to assist in fulfilling
its electoral obligations, conducting capacity-building
workshops on key election themes, including building
support for the enhanced participation of women in
the electoral process and the provision of information
technology equipment for the Federal Electoral
Implementation Team, under the Federal Minister for
Women and Human Rights Development, as part of
operational support to those institutions.
Since my most recent briefing (S/PV.8833),
AMISOM police, together with their Somali
counterparts, have continued to enhance their efforts
to secure the ongoing elections. That has led to
AMISOM police units being deployed beyond their
traditional areas of activity across the federal member
states, particularly Garbaharey, in Jubaland; Jowhar, in
Hirshabelle; and Barawe, in South-West state.
In anticipation of the operationalization of the joint
operation centres across Somalia, AMISOM police
have also focused on election-related training. In that
regard, AMISOM’s election security cell has recently
trained 245 security officials, mostly from the National
Intelligence and Security Agency and the Somali
National Army. The trainings were aimed at providing
Somali security officials with the requisite knowledge
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

and skills to plan, monitor and coordinate the activities
of the joint operation cells before, during and after
the elections.
Insecurity across Somalia remains a source of grave
concern. Apart from continuing to infiltrate its Amniyat
operatives into major cities and towns, extortion and
ground surveillance, Al-Shabaab has increased its
improvised explosive devices attacks, complex attacks,
probing attacks, grenade and mortar attacks, ambushes,
suicide bombings and targeted assassinations of senior
Government officials.
In addition, and of late, Al-Shabaab’s efforts
have been increasingly and deliberately directed at
disrupting the electoral process with attacks on some
election centres, indirect fire attacks against AMISOM
fortified bases and increased public execution of
individuals working with the Somali security forces
and AMISOM personnel.
While Al-Shabaab remains the principal threat to
peace and security, I am concerned by recent incidents
of resorting to armed confrontation in the standoff
between Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a and Government
authorities. Separately and in conjunction with the
other international partners, we have appealed to the
parties to cease fighting and seek to address their
differences through negotiated mechanisms. Armed
clashes have died down. Guriel town and the village of
Bohol are now quiet, but our efforts in the direction of
the peaceful resolution of the standoff must continue.
In the period under review, we have conducted joint
operations with the Somali National Army, disrupting
Al-Shabaab in Lower Shabelle, notably in Basra in
October and in Gambole in September, and frustrating,
through robust air power, the attempt by Al-Shabaab to
reclaim some bridge towns.
With regard to joint planning and coordination,
AMISOM force headquarters and Somali National Army
representatives held a series of meetings to implement
the harmonized AMISOM reconfiguration plan. In
order to facilitate joint planning and the coordination
of operations, joint operations coordination cells have
been opened in all AMISOM sectors. Somali National
Army staff officers have been nominated to lead
those cells.
The African Union cooperation priorities and
objectives at this stage of its history are not only the
preservation and consolidation of its member States’

S/PV. 8907

hard-won political independence and sovereignty,
including that of Somalia, but also the enhancement
of that independence and sovereignty with the
empowerment of every people and State through
economic and social development and prosperity. Those
continental strategic objectives, which are enshrined in
the Constitutive Act of the African Union and are part
and parcel of the African Union’s Agenda 2063, cannot
be achieved in isolation or without peace.
The security threat confronting Somalia today is
a threat not only to the Somali people; it is a regional
threat, a continental and worldwide threat. It slows
down and undermines the development of Somalia
and its neighbours. It will continue to jeopardize
and compromise the attainment of our continental
objectives if it is not contained and removed. For the
sake of the people of Somalia and for our own sake, as
a continent and as a region, we need peace and stability
in Somalia, but that cannot come unless we continue to
work together, and complementarily.
The AMISOM mandate comes to an end on
31 December. There is an absolute need for a new
mission that would take over from AMISOM. To achieve
that, and in full respect of Somalia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, we need, as a matter of urgency,
to continue and conclude, in a detailed and exhaustive
manner, the discussions that we have already started
on the issues that will shape the future mission and are
relevant to its effectiveness and success, markers such
as those related to the enhancement of our coordination
and cooperation, coherence and complementarity in our
approaches, mutual trust and accountability, sustained
information-sharing and funding, inter alia.
Our work in that regard has, to a large extent,
already been facilitated by resolution 2568 (2021),
which called for proposals on the strategic objectives,
size and composition of the new mission. There is also
a request for updating the concept of operations, which
should clearly spell out the end-state, nature, mandate,
tasks, posture, structure, duration, and command and
control of the mission. It is in that context that the
AU Peace and Security Council requested that the
AU Commission immediately resume consultations
with the Federal Government of Somalia and relevant
international partners with a view to reaching a
common approach on the aforementioned issues. The
African Union Commission has already indicated its
readiness to engage in that regard.

21-342965/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Siyad.
Ms. Siyad: I thank you, Mr. President, for your
invitation to provide an update on women’s political
participation, electoral development in Somalia and
what is needed, from a civil society perspective, after
the 2021 election.
My name is Asha Abdulle Siyad, I am an advocate for
women’s rights and empowerment, peace and political
participation. Today I speak in my capacity as the
Executive Director of the Somali Women’s Leadership
Initiative as well as a member of the Goodwill
Ambassadors, the advocacy committee promoting the
30 per cent quota, appointed by the Prime Minister
of the Federal Government of Somalia. Allow me to
convey to the Security Council the warmest greetings
of Somali women peace and political activists as well
as the entire team of the Goodwill Ambassadors. I
am deeply honoured and privileged to be speaking on
behalf of Somali women at this august body.
Women in Somalia have been an integral part of
Somalia’s recovery and stability efforts, playing an
important role to keep the family united and, in effect,
the country together. However, Somalia’s political
history continues to be exclusionary, keeping women
out of leadership and decision-making roles. The
clan-based political system relegates the role and
participation of women in politics and in public spheres
to a limited and insignificant level.
The 2016 federal election resulted in 24 per cent
of women being elected to the tenth parliament. The
experience of the 2016 election taught us that achieving
a minimum of 30 per cent representation of women
through the electoral process and its outcome in the
context of a clan-based 4.5-formula elections model
is not only challenging but it is also detrimental to
women’s struggle for equality and justice.
In the absence of a concrete mechanism to
implement the 30 per cent quota, in the ongoing indirect
elections in 2021, we are witnessing a repeat of the 2016
process. The outcome of the Upper House elections,
which delivered only 26 per cent representation
of women, confirms our fear and doubts about the
potential of indirect elections to support a 30 per cent
quota for women.
6/18

17/11/2021

Since the announcement of the appointment of the
Goodwill Ambassadors in July this year, we have been
advocating concrete measures to deliver the 30 per cent
quota. We have also offered suggestions as to what the
National Consultative Council (NCC) could consider to
be minimum measures to secure the 30 per cent quota.
However, there has been no decision by the NCC, and
the consequences of that were visible in the outcome of
the Upper House elections.
We are now headed for the Somali House of the
People elections. We, as women leaders and Goodwill
Ambassadors, have been asking ourselves what we
could have done differently or that we did not try to
do during the Upper House elections that could help
to achieve the 30 per cent quota in this election. The
unfortunate truth is that within the present indirect
electoral model, the views and voices of the masses,
including women, do not matter in electing our
representatives. According to the 22 August 2021 NCC
communiqué, the Presidents of the federal member
states and the state elections implementation teams are
primarily responsible for identifying seats for women.
We demand that they fulfil their responsibility and
commitment to the nation and particularly to women.
We are deeply concerned at the delays and the lack
of concrete measures and schedules for the completion
of the House of the People elections. Further delay in
the elections is likely to negatively affect women’s
quota, as the attention of all concerned, including the
international community, will be focused on the urgent
completion of the elections, regardless of its outcome.
Beyond the political agreements, it has become
abundantly clear in our engagement with women
leaders and advocates and other stakeholders, including
political leaders, clan elders in the federal members
states, and in Mogadishu, that the achievement of
the 30 per cent quota is in the hands of the National
Consultative Council and the federal and state elections
implementation committees. That is particularly so since
the release of the 22 August 2021 communiqué. The
NCC and the federal and state elections implementation
committees must identify and reserve 30 per cent of
seats in the House of the People for women and ensure
that only women are candidates for the reserved seats.
We have done the clan mapping, which makes the
identification of seats for women much easier, and we
are on standby to provide any amount of support to the
NCC and the elections committees in their efforts to
deliver on the 30 per cent quota requirement.
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

As we all have started contemplating a post-2021elections Somalia, we all must be resolute in rescuing
the country from this trap of indirect elections. If
we truly believe in inclusive politics and a Somali
federation with people at its centre, then we must
work towards implementing one-person, one-vote
elections in 2025-2026. Not only do indirect elections
disenfranchise most of the entire adult population of
Somalia — be they women, men, youth, minorities or
people with disabilities — but they also disempower
an entire nation, embolden political elites and help
perpetuate exclusionary political practices.
An inclusive Somali governance must reflect the
diversity of Somalia, and women must have a say in
setting national priorities and in determining public
policies and public expenditures. The current political
structure and electoral process do not allow that to
occur, and that must change. The new Government and
the new Parliament must take that into account as they
set their priorities. In particular, they must focus on
several tasks.
First, the constitutional review must be completed.
The Federal Constitution must guarantee a minimum
of 30 per cent representation of women in the Federal
Parliament, the Cabinet and civil service. The political
participation of women and many others, including
youth and marginalized communities, must not be
dependent on the will of a certain privileged group or
clan elders. Participation is our right and it must be
safeguarded in the Constitution. Constitutional review
is the only way to safeguard women’s rights to equal
participation in, and contribution to, the country’s
peace, politics and governance.
Secondly, the new Government must prioritize
the one-person-one-vote principle in 2025, and all
necessary measures must be put in place from the
outset in order to guarantee that no political crisis
can overturn that principle in 2025. Only in that way
can we put an end to women’s misery and struggle to
participate in elections.
Thirdly, the protection and the political participation
of women are interlinked. The new Government must
prioritize the protection of women in order to promote
their participation in politics and public life. The
endorsement and implementation of the sexual offences
bill must therefore be completed as a matter of priority.
Finally, the new Government and the new
Parliament must work hand in hand to amend Federal

S/PV. 8907

electoral law and laws concerning political parties and
must enact clear and explicit provisions in order to
ensure that women can participate fully. In addition,
constitutional review must provide clear provisions
on women’s participation in politics and public office.
Resources must be provided to enhance the protection
of women and promote their leadership role, and newly
elected women Members of Parliament and Senators
must be supported so that they can be effective in their
legislative role.
The international community, including the United
Nations and particularly the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, must extend its full support and
cooperation to the new Government in its efforts
to implement this long-overdue agenda of national
interests. The international community must ensure that
its support is dependent on the Government adopting a
gender-inclusive approach, with women at the centre.
In conclusion, in post-2021 elections Somalia, we
demand concrete measures and full accountability for
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. On behalf my fellow Somali women and on
my own behalf, I would like to extend to the Security
Council, the representative of the Federal Government
of Somalia, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral James Swan and Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia Francisco Madeira our sincere thanks and
appreciation for this opportunity and for their continued
support to Somalia and Somali women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Siyad
for her invaluable briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
May I start by thanking the briefers — Special
Representative Swan, Special Representative Madeira
and Executive Director Siyad — for their briefings.
I will focus my remarks today on two issues:
elections and the future of international security
support to Somalia.
The Security Council has closely followed the
electoral process in Somalia, and the United Kingdom
welcomes the completion of the Upper House process,
which represents an important milestone, as does the
election of women to constitute 26 per cent of the Upper
House. However, that achievement was eloquently

21-342967/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

qualified by Executive Director Siyad’s challenge to
meet the 30 per cent quota in the lower house elections
and to see the full inclusion of women in the political,
social and economic decision-making in Somalia.
Turning back to elections, we remain deeply
concerned by the very slow electoral progress
overall. Somalia has committed to starting the lower
house elections immediately and to conclude them
by 24 December. It is vital that the elections are not
delayed beyond that date, as that would only continue
to undermine progress on Somalia’s national priorities,
increase political uncertainty, provide Al-Shabaab with
the opportunity to regain ground and boost its political
influence and, as Ms. Siyad said, disadvantage women.
We have a collective interest in protecting against
any deterioration of security in Somalia. That leads me
to my second point — international support. With the
expiry of the current African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) mandate fast approaching, we need to
make urgent progress on the security transition in order
to ensure continuity of international security support to
Somalia in a manner that reflects the evolving situation
on the ground.
It is clear that there is a broad range of views
about what such support should look like. In our view,
that support must be both realistic and affordable and
should support the progressive transition to Somali-led
security, as set out in the Somali transition plan. Our
view is that the African Union (AU)-United Nations
multidimensional stabilization mission model endorsed
by the African Union Peace and Security Council will
not achieve that. In our view, it would run counter
to the idea of progressive transition to full Somali
security responsibility.
Reaching agreement on a joint United Nations-AU
proposal, in consultation with the Federal Government
of Somalia and donors, as requested by the Council,
will mean moving past the current impasse and finding
consensus on the way forward. Such a joint proposal
should reflect our common objectives of preserving
AMISOM’s hard-won achievements but beginning the
transition away from external support to full Somali
responsibility for security, as the Council set out
unanimously in resolution 2568 (2021). The United
Kingdom will continue engaging with all stakeholders,
including the Federal Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, African Union, troop-contributing
8/18

17/11/2021

countries and donors in order to identify areas of
common ground and help stakeholders reach consensus.
Somalia faces important electoral and security
transitions in the months ahead. Successful completion
of those processes will form a crucial part of enabling
Somalia’s security and prosperity for the long term. We
hope that Somalia’s leaders, the United Nations, the
AU and donors will come together and collaborate to
achieve lasting peace and security in Somalia, and we
encourage them to do so.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. James Swan, for updating us on the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Somalia (S/2021/944) and the implementation of the
mandates of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). I also thank the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of AMISOM,
Ambassador Madeira, for his briefing. I thank Ms. Asha
Siyad, Executive Director of the Somali Women’s
Leadership Initiative, for sharing her insights with us. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia
at today’s meeting.
The recent progress related to elections has
been reassuring. After months of delay and political
brinksmanship, the electoral cycle has moved forward.
Elections to the Upper House were successfully
concluded last weekend. That is an encouraging
development, particularly the fact that 13 out of 54
senators are women. The next step is elections to the
lower house, for which the process has commenced.
We hope that the Somali leadership and institutions
will continue to move forward with the same level of
commitment and complete the electoral process within
the agreed timelines. The peaceful conduct of elections,
in accordance with the agreements, is important for the
democratic future of Somalia.
A successful security transition towards stability
in Somalia cannot be envisaged without the ownership
of its representative democracy. As we draw closer to
the deadline for finalizing discussions on the security
transition in Somalia, we underscore the importance
of the completion of the elections and the peaceful
transition of power. To that end, we encourage UNSOM
to continue to work closely with the Federal Government
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

of Somalia and the federal member states in providing
the requisite electoral support.
The security situation in Somalia continues
to remain critical. The Secretary-General’s report
indicates a monthly average of 273 incidents, most
of them perpetrated by Al-Shabaab. The persistent
improvised explosive device attacks and suicide
bombings documented during the reporting period
are a cause for concern. Those acts of terrorism by
Al-Shabaab must be condemned in the strongest terms.
Al-Shabaab remains largely responsible for numerous
civilian casualties and human rights violations,
including against women and children. We express our
full support for the operations conducted by the Somali
security forces and AMISOM against Al-Shabaab.
As we discuss the important security transition, the
Somali people will need the international community’s
support and attention in dealing with a terrorist group
such as Al-Shabaab. We therefore welcome the recently
adopted Somalia sanctions resolution 2607 (2021), with
a greater focus on sanctions against Al-Shabaab. It is
important that we all summon our collective political
will in dealing with terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
Preventing Al-Shabaab from accessing financial
resources is crucial to countering the threat of terrorism,
while linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime must be recognized and addressed.
We welcome the recent meeting held in Mogadishu
between Somalia and the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the future of AMISOM. We are
hopeful that there will be a positive outcome and
a consensus on the way forward. A stable security
transition in Somalia demands the strong leadership
and collaboration of the Somali Government and the
African Union. We support a phased handover of
security responsibilities to the Somali security forces,
with a view to transferring full responsibility by 2023.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation remains
dire. Somalia continues to suffer the effects of multiple
factors, such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and desert locusts. The international
community must do more to bridge the funding gap and
meet the humanitarian needs.
India and Somalia share two millenniums of
civilizational exchanges across the seas. India continues
to support Somalia through development assistance and
capacity-building programmes. Despite the COVID‐19
restrictions, India continued its assistance to Somalia

S/PV. 8907

through capacity-building on a virtual platform, which
has seen the participation of 34 Somali candidates up
to now. Seventeen Somali students have been offered
scholarships through the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations for the 2021‐2022 period. The Government
of India also gifted 27 minibuses to Somalia early
this year.
Somalia is at an important juncture on its
development path, and the next few months will
be critical to the democratic future of Somalia. We
believe that the people of Somalia and its leadership
will continue to show determination and resolve by
making the right choices. India will continue to support
Somalia and its people as they strive for a stable, secure
and peaceful future.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, and Ms. Asha
Siyad, Executive Director of the Somali Women’s
Leadership Initiative, for their briefings. We would also
like to recognize and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia at this meeting.
The A3+1 welcomes the completion last Saturday
of the Upper House elections, with all 54 seats selected,
as well as the start of the House of the People elections.
We again underline the importance of completing
the electoral process, including the election of the
President of Somalia, in a timely manner to realize
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Somalia
for security, stability, democracy, good governance
and development. We once more reiterate that a
prolonged delay in completing the electoral process
could divert resources and attention away from critical
national priorities.
While we regret the missed target of 30 per cent
women elected to the Upper House, we note that
26 per cent of persons elected in that phase were indeed
women. We hope that the upcoming elections for the
House of the People will bridge the existing gap. We
also reiterate our support for one person/one vote

21-342969/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

elections and encourage the continuation of efforts to
achieve that objective during the next election cycle.
The A3+1 remains concerned by the major threat
to peace, security and stability in Somalia posed by
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, which is responsible
for the majority of attacks in the country and whose
terrorist and other activities have a destabilizing
impact on State-building in Somalia. In particular,
we strongly condemn the numerous suicide attacks
that they perpetrated in Mogadishu in the past three
months, and we express our sincere condolences to the
families of the victims and the Government and the
people of Somalia.
We reiterate our call for continued international
support for the Government of Somalia in its fight
against Al-Shabaab and other groups active in the
country, as well as to enable it to take full security
responsibility, in line with the Somali transition plan.
We pay tribute to the role played in that regard
by AMISOM during the past years. We also take
note of the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council communiqué adopted on 7 October, circulated
in the Security Council as document S/2021/922.
The communiqué endorsed the report of the AUled independent assessment on the African Union’s
engagement in and with Somalia post-2021 and its
option 1, namely, to establish an AU-United Nations
multidimensional stabilization mission in Somalia,
deployed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which would ensure predictable and
sustainable multi-year financing for the future mission
through United Nations assessed contributions.
The A3+1 underlines the importance of taking
due consideration of the needs, priorities and views of
the host country in defining the nature and objective
of any future mission in Somalia and encourages all
the relevant parties to further engage constructively in
order to reach a mutually acceptable agreement.
The A3+1 also shares the view that there is a
need to thoroughly address the financing challenges
of any African Union engagement in Somalia post2021 through the provision of adequate, sustainable
and predictable financing, including access to United
Nations assessed contributions.
The A3+1 reiterates its deep concern over the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, with an estimated
7 million people at crisis-level food insecurity due
10/18

17/11/2021

to the combined effect of conflict, environmental
crises, including droughts, floods and locusts, and the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We call for unhindered
humanitarian access to all those in need. We also
reiterate our call on all international partners to scale up
funding for humanitarian response plans for Somalia.
To conclude, we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, unity, political
independence and territorial integrity of Somalia, as
well as our support for all efforts to secure its peace,
political stability and socioeconomic progress.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Special
Representatives Swan and Madeira for their briefings.
I also welcome my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia. I wish to thank Ms. Siyad
in particular for her powerful and very frank remarks
to us this morning.
The finalization of elections to the Upper House of
Parliament in Somalia is welcome and gives momentum
for the next and, admittedly, more complex phase of
elections for the lower house. The quicker that process
is completed, the sooner Somalia’s leaders will be
able to refocus on the expectations of their own
people for a peaceful, prosperous and stable Somalia.
The collaboration we have recently seen between the
President and Prime Minister is encouraging and we
call for that to continue.
There is an opportunity now to aim for the
completion of all elections, including the Presidential
elections, by the end of January. It is clear that
technically and financially and from a security
perspective, Somalia’s leaders can achieve that. Any
further delays risk cost over-runs, interference from
Al-Shabaab and upsetting the delicate political balance
that now exists. Those are risks we do not need to face.
We urge the Federal Government and member states’
leaders to reconcile their differences and give renewed
impetus to the crucial State-building work that will
ensure a brighter future for Somalia.
As Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohamed
said during her visit to Somalia and again to the Council
(see S/PV.8867), women’s participation in political,
social and economic life is a game changer. Their
participation and representation are preconditions for
lasting peace. While recognizing efforts made thus far,
Ireland still regrets that Somalia missed the 30 per cent
target for the Upper House elections. However, as we
know, there is now an opportunity, with the elections to
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

the House of the People, where the overall target could
be met. We join the call for Somalia’s leaders to now
identify which 85 seats will be reserved exclusively for
women candidates.
Ms. Siyad’s remarks this morning underlined the
critical nature of acting urgently on that issue. Her own
reference to “limited and insignificant” progress is
really concerning. I think we have to do better and end
what she described as women’s misery and struggle in
trying to ensure political participation.
The threat of terrorism, armed conflict and violence
continues to loom over the Somali people, as well as
over the country’s institutions. I deeply regret that the
most vulnerable are suffering the most, as incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence and grave violations
against the most vulnerable — children — are on
the rise. I echo the Secretary-General’s call for
accountability for those violations, whoever carries
them out. Somalia’s leaders at the local and national
levels must do all they can to end that unacceptable
scourge. It is their duty.
As elections and the struggle for power continue, it
is vital that the Government prevent killings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, as well as other actions to repress
freedom of expression and political participation. The
Government should also ensure that those who commit
violations are held to account. We look forward, in that
regard, to the outcome of the impartial investigations
into the killing of Ms. Ikran Tahlil.
Ireland reiterates its condemnation of Al-Shabaab’s
heinous attacks, which are exerting a considerable
human toll. Their threat extends beyond Somalia’s
borders and throughout the region and is only
heightened by recent instability. It makes it all the more
urgent that the Government of Somalia, the African
Union and the United Nations find a path forward
together on the future configuration of the African
Union Mission to Somalia and the eventual handover to
Somali security forces.
The European Union stands ready to assist. It
has long been a strong and committed partner of
Somalia. But there must be agreement reached on the
way forward.
It is clear that the already dire humanitarian situation
is being exacerbated by climate change. In that context,
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia on climate and security is more important than

S/PV. 8907

ever. We look forward to further tangible outcomes of
that work, which we are following with interest and
expectation. Meanwhile, as we have heard in others’
remarks this morning, extended drought conditions
are causing displacement and raising the spectre of
worsening food insecurity. The fact that 7.7 million
people are expected to be in need of humanitarian
assistance in 2022 is simply shocking, yet it is the grave
reality we face today.
It is therefore vital, in that context, that Somalia’s
leaders keep the interests of the Somali people at the
fore now, moving as rapidly as possible to end this
period of political uncertainty and create the space to
fully focus on tackling the fundamental issues facing
the Somali people.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, Mr. James
Swan, as well as the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their
traditionally informative briefings. We also listened
to the briefing by the representative of Somali civil
society and Executive Director of the Somali Women’s
Leadership Initiative, Ms. Asha Siyad. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations,
Mr. Abukar Dahir Osman.
We have carefully studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/944). We note that, since the
previous quarterly Council briefing (see S/PV.8833),
the Federal Government of Somalia has been able to
demonstrate new successes in shaping a sustainable
model of federalism in the country. The conclusion of
the Upper House elections was an important milestone
in that process. We welcome the Somali people’s
achievement of a 26 per cent quota of women in the
Upper House. We also note the start of voting in the
lower chamber of the Somali Parliament.
We are grateful to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and to Mr. Swan personally for his
contribution to resolving differences within the Federal
Government. We hope that, in the time remaining the
country will be able to complete its electoral process,
in accordance with its updated election timetable and

21-3429611/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

the Somali agreements of 17 September 2020 and
27 May 2021.
The security situation in Somalia remains tense.
We call on the Somali Government and African
peacekeepers to remain steadfast in the fight against
Al-Shabaab and to continue to pay special attention to
the security of the electoral process. The situations in
Jubaland, Galmudug and Hirshabelle require particular
focus, given that other extremist groups in addition
to Al-Shabaab are becoming increasingly active and
intercommunal confrontation is growing.
Against that backdrop, we commend the work
of the African peacekeeping mission in the country,
which remains a key element of security in Somalia.
We welcome the ongoing Mogadishu talks with all
key international actors on the configuration of the
future mission and the parameters for the transfer
of responsibility for security in the country from
AMISOM to the Somali National Army.
We have taken due note of the reformatted version
of the Mission approved last month by the African
Union, transforming it into a hybrid United NationsAfrican Union operation. We expect that all participants
in these discussions will manage to reach mutually
acceptable decisions. In any case, we are convinced
that any decisions on African Union peacekeeping
missions must be taken with due account of the view of
Mogadishu and with the objectives of making progress
in training the Somali National Army and in building a
single national security architecture. It is also important
to avoid a security vacuum.
Taking into account the complex humanitarian
situation in Somalia, Russia will continue to provide
assistance to the country and to Somali refugees in
neighbouring countries through targeted contributions
to earmarked funds of the United Nations World Food
Programme. We also intend to continue to train Somali
civilian professionals in this area.
In conclusion, allow me to assure Council members
of the readiness of our delegation to continue to focus
on the topic of Somalia on the Security Council agenda
while strictly respecting its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the briefers for their insightful briefings. I would also
like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Somalia to today’s discussion.
12/18

17/11/2021

As this is the Security Council’s last quarterly
meeting on Somalia in which Estonia will participate
as a member of the Council, I would like to share the
following messages that will not only reflect the last
quarter, but also entail observations we have made
during the last almost two years of our membership in
the Council.
First, in order to achieve political stability and
progress in State-building goals, there is no substitute
for holding timely, inclusive and credible elections. That
is why it is regrettable that there have been significant
delays to Somalia’s election timelines. Nevertheless,
Estonia welcomes the recent conclusion of the Upper
House elections and hopes that the elections of the
lower house will conclude by the end of the year. We
also urge the Somali leaders to ensure the minimum of a
30 per cent representation quota for women members of
Parliament through a clear mechanism. Since elections
lay the foundation for the next chapter for the country,
the importance of women’s participation in this next
chapter cannot be overemphasized.
Secondly, throughout Estonia’s membership in the
Council, Al-Shabaab’s ability to conduct attacks across
Somalia has unfortunately remained unchanged. We
condemn the attacks by Al-Shabaab in the strongest
terms and express our condolences to the victims and
their families.
Estonia has repeatedly emphasized that the
security situation can improve only if all stakeholders
work closely together towards this important goal.
Therefore, in the planning for the post-2021 mission,
we call on all key players to work together for a
common vision. Additionally, we call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to redouble its efforts for the
timely implementation of the transition plan. As a
member of the European Union (EU), Estonia would
like to reiterate that the EU remains ready to assist
Somalia in the next chapter. However, the EU hopes
that its concerns will also be taken into account.
Thirdly, we saw the dire humanitarian situation
unfortunately deteriorate during our membership
in the Council. That is also due to Somalia’s severe
vulnerability to climate change. The Security Council
must stand firmly behind helping Somalia address the
climate threat, including through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). Estonia
encourages strategic and comprehensive efforts that
will proactively address the humanitarian challenges.
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

Somalia has come a great distance. However,
there is still a long way to go until Somalis can live
as a peaceful, stable and prosperous society. The
foundations for that will be laid, inter alia, through
rule of law, democratization, respect for human rights
and effective accountability mechanisms for anyone
violating such rights. Estonia hopes to have contributed
to these foundations by upholding the aforementioned
elements throughout our Council membership.
Finally, I would like to thank the personnel of
UNSOM, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia for their
commitment and sacrifice.
To conclude, allow me to reiterate Estonia’s full
support for Somalia and its people with a view to
making a better future for the country a reality.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan
and Special Representative Madeira for their briefings
today. The United States also thanks the civilian and
uniformed personnel of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) as they implement the Security Council’s
important mandates in an extremely dangerous and
challenging environment. I also wish to thank Executive
Director Siyad for her message to the Council today
and for the brave and the vital work that she and her
colleagues do every day.
The United States is deeply concerned about the
slow pace of progress towards completion of Somalia’s
national elections. Next month will mark one year since
the mandate of the Federal Parliament expired, and more
than five months have passed since Somalia’s national
and federal member state leaders agreed on a process
for completing the elections. While we welcome the
completion over the weekend of the selection process
for the Upper House, only two of the 275 members have
been chosen for the lower house.
We welcome Prime Minister Roble’s call for
completion of the lower house elections by the end of
the year, and it is vital that Somalia’s leadership and
political aspirants follow through with their repeated
commitments to inclusive, transparent and timely
elections. That includes ensuring voting can take
place in a safe and secure environment and finalizing
arrangements for meeting the agreed 30 per cent

S/PV. 8907

female representation quota in Parliament that has been
mentioned so many times today.
We are also concerned about the conflict in
Galmudug between the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a militia
and Federal Government forces. The violence has
resulted in numerous casualties, displaced thousands
of innocent civilians and needlessly distracted the
Government from the fight against Al-Shabaab
terrorists. We urge both sides to refrain from further
violence and engage in negotiations to peacefully
resolve the issues at the root of the conflict.
Finally, as was highlighted by Special Representative
Madeira earlier, we note that AMISOM’s mandate
expires at the end of this year, but there remains no
agreement among the African Union (AU), Somalia and
international stakeholders on a post-2021 international
stabilization mission. The United States believes that
a restructured AU-led mission focused on increasing
pressure on Al-Shabaab and gradually transferring
security responsibility to Somali security forces is the
best way forward. We urge renewed discussions among
all stakeholders to reach an agreement and effectively
advance peace and stability in Somalia.
We again commend the work of Special
Representative Swan and his team, and the United States
also urges the Somali Government and stakeholders to
conclude the national elections as soon as possible. This
will enable renewed focus on the work that needs to be
done to make a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Somalia a reality.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan, Ambassador Madeira and Ms. Siyad
for their very insightful briefings. I would also like to
welcome Ambassador Osman to our meeting today.
With regard to the political process, we note with
concern the various reports that the implementation of
the Somalia transition plan, including the conduct of
important elections, remains behind schedule. However,
we also heard from our briefer about recent positive
developments in Somalia, particularly elections for the
54 seats of the Upper House. In addition, several local
elections have eased tensions between the President
and the Prime Minister of Somalia.
Given that late 2021 and early 2022 will be decisive
for Somalia, especially in terms of parliamentary and
presidential elections, political consensus among the

21-3429613/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

relevant parties is crucial and urgently needed for the
elections to be implemented in a secure and peaceful
manner, based on the agreed timetable.
Furthermore, the implementation of a Somaliowned and -led political process should take into
account the legitimate aspirations and concerns of
all Somali stakeholders and other related parties. An
adequate representation of women, minorities and
young people should also be ensured.
In that process, we call on the United Nations and
the international community to urgently prioritize
resources for supporting the holding of those elections
in a peaceful environment. Long-term peace and
prosperity in Somalia depend on the success of
those elections.
Turning to the security situation, a number of longstanding threats and violence remain. Terrorist groups,
including Al-Shabaab, continue to demonstrate their
capability to conduct attacks, including those using
improvised explosive devices and suicide bombings.
We strongly condemn the violence and terrorist
attacks, especially those against civilians, Government
officials, Somali security forces and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We reiterate that such
violence is unacceptable, and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
We support the operations carried out by the Somali
security forces, AMISOM and international partners
against Al-Shabaab. Measures should also be taken to
stop violence and to better protect vulnerable groups,
particularly women and children. While commending
their ongoing efforts to address criminality, we urge
the Somali Government, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and AMISOM to strengthen
law enforcement and uphold their responsibilities in
dismantling terrorist groups. We call upon international
and regional partners to maintain their support for
Somali security forces through training, the provision
of equipment, capacity-building and operations
against Al-Shabaab.
The Secretary-General warns that our resources
are at historically low levels, while humanitarian
needs in Somalia are growing rapidly. Furthermore,
the coronavirus disease pandemic, extreme flooding
and locust infestation are long-standing challenges that
exacerbate the situation.
14/18

17/11/2021

In that connection, we call on international
partners to assist the Federal Government of Somalia in
alleviating the socioeconomic impacts of those threats.
We also support predictable and comprehensive funding
for the future security of Somalia. Only through a
comprehensive approach can the Government and the
people of Somalia overcome long-term challenges and
achieve sustained stability and development.
Before I conclude, I would like to commend the
unceasing work and tireless efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, AMISOM and
the United Nations country team. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate the importance of upholding the
principles of the political independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Somalia.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
Madeira and Ms. Asha Siyad for their insightful briefings.
Somalia is still at a political impasse — one that
has absorbed too much energy for too long. There is a
high risk of power and governance vacuums in several
areas, which could be filled by Al-Shabaab and severely
set back the peace and State-building processes.
While we recognize some progress, there is an urgent
need to finalize the electoral process and to address
fundamental security and development challenges
in Somalia.
Recurrent humanitarian crises, which are
compounded by the effects of climate change and
insufficient economic growth, continue to affect the
lives of vulnerable Somalis. A life-saving humanitarian
response is critical, but long-term solutions can only
be found through economic development, reforms,
stabilization and reconciliation. At all levels, the
Government needs to strengthen service delivery,
implement sustainable mitigation strategies and focus
on implementing the national stabilization strategy.
I again thank Ms. Siyad for her account of the
remaining challenges that must be overcome to achieve
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in all parts of Somali society. Although there has been
some progress, as compared to 2016, it is disappointing,
as so many others have expressed, that the 30 per cent
quota was not met in the Upper House elections. We
strongly urge those responsible — at all levels — to
redouble their efforts and ensure a clear mechanism for
implementing the 30 per cent quota in the lower house
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

of Parliament. Somalia’s ambition should be to move
well beyond what was already achieved almost five
years ago.
The call for the inclusion of women in political
processes is not one imposed from the outside. As
we heard again today, Somali women are expressing
themselves loudly and clearly, including through
the Somali Women’s Charter. We appreciate that the
renewed mandate of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) is strengthened on the issue of
women and peace and security and look forward to its
implementation and reflection in future reports.
Norway remains deeply concerned about the high
levels of grave violations against children in Somalia.
While Al-Shabaab remains the main perpetrator, we
are particularly concerned about the recent return of
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a to Galmudug state, due to the
group’s documented recruitment and use of children.
We urge all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian and international
human rights law. In that regard, we call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to engage with the United
Nations to strengthen its commitment to ending and
preventing rape and other forms of sexual violence,
including against children.
Finally, we are concerned about the lack of progress
in the talks between the African Union and the Federal
Government of Somalia on the nature of the new
African Union Mission in Somalia for the transition,
as well as the concept of operations. The timelines
in resolution 2568 (2021) are clear. We urgently need
to see progress in developing the joint proposal on
the strategic objectives, size and composition of
a reconfigured African Union Mission. A new or
reconfigured AMISOM should contribute to ensuring
that obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law are upheld and
should ensure the accountability of AMISOM itself.
Our common goal is for Somalia to be responsible
for its own security. To that end, we need a Mission that
more effectively builds the capacity of Somali security
forces, in line with the Somali transition plan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representatives Swan and Madeira for their
briefings and listened carefully to Ms. Siyad. I welcome
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of
Somalia, to today’s meeting.

S/PV. 8907

At present, the reconstruction of Somalia is at a
critical juncture. The country has many pending tasks
with regard to elections, counter-terrorism and the
security transition, even as it faces pressure related
to the pandemic, the humanitarian situation and
development challenges.
In connection with the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/944) and the briefings today, I would like to
emphasize the following points.
First, it is essential to focus on advancing the
elections. The successful holding of elections will
help to maintain political stability in Somalia and lay
the political foundation for the people of Somalia to
continue to promote national reconstruction. China
welcomes the efforts of the leaders of Somalia to focus
on national interests, reach reconciliation through
dialogue and consultation and actively commit to
accelerating the electoral process. All parties in Somalia
have overcome numerous difficulties to hold the
elections. Currently, the elections for the Upper House
of the Somali Parliament have just been completed and
the elections for the lower house have begun. We hope
that all parties will continue the positive momentum,
earnestly implement the 17 September 2000 and 27 May
election agreements and work together for continuous
progress in the electoral process. China appreciates the
technical, logistical and security assistance provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and calls on the international community to continue
to provide the necessary political and financial support
for the elections in Somalia.
Secondly, we must jointly maintain security and
stability in the country. China strongly condemns the
recent bomb attacks in Mogadishu and expresses its
condolences to the victims. Helping Somalia to combat
terrorism is the common goal of the international
community. AMISOM has made tremendous efforts and
sacrifices to that end. China pays tribute to AMISOM
peacekeepers. At present, Somalia, the African
Union, the United Nations and other major parties are
negotiating on the post-2021 AMISOM configuration.
We hope that all parties can reach a solution acceptable
to all based on fully respecting the views of the host
country. Before the Security Council takes a decision on
this issue, the funds needed for AMISOM’s operations
must be guaranteed to avoid a security vacuum due to
funding gaps. China has been doing all it can to support

21-3429615/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

AMISOM, and we have decided to provide annual cash
assistance to AMISOM.
The security and stability of the country are
ultimately the responsibility of Somalia itself. In that
regard, no external help can replace Somalia’s own
efforts. China calls on the international community to
heed the voice of the Somali Government, help Somalia
to strengthen its security capabilities and take positive
actions with regard to lifting the Security Council’s
arms embargo on Somalia. China expects the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a technical assessment of the
management of arms and ammunition, in accordance
with the Security Council resolution, and set clear,
realistic and measurable assessment criteria for lifting
the embargo on arms and ammunition.
Thirdly, we must increase humanitarian and
development assistance. Affected by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, violent conflict and extreme
weather, nearly half of Somalia’s population is in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. At the same
time, the Somali Government faces huge financial
pressures and a severe lack of humanitarian assistance
and vaccines, forcing it to slow down its national
development plan. The international community should
attach great importance to that issue and take positive
actions to support Somalia in meeting its humanitarian
and development needs. Suspending aid to Somalia for
political reasons is not a constructive approach, and it
is the Somali people who will ultimately suffer. China
sympathizes with Somalia’s current difficulties, and we
delivered aid worth $4 million to Somalia last month.
We will provide Somalia with another 500,000 doses of
vaccine to fully support Somalia’s pandemic response.
China will continue to work with the international
community to provide practical assistance for peace
and reconstruction in Somalia.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Ms. Asha
Siyad for their briefings.
I will focus on two points: the elections and the
security transition.
France welcomes the completion of the elections for
the Upper House, which is the result of several months
of dialogue and cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states.
France calls for those efforts to continue so that the
16/18

17/11/2021

lower house and presidential elections can take place as
soon as possible and in compliance with the 30 per cent
quota for women provided for by the Somali legislation.
Somalis need a fully legitimate Government that
can meet the challenges that the country is facing.
The first of those challenges is security. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/944) highlights the
human tragedy resulting from Al-Shabaab’s attacks
both on civilians, particularly women, children and
humanitarian and medical personnel, and on Somali
and AMISOM forces. Deadly attacks, targeted
killings, abductions and forced displacements are
unacceptable. The perpetrators of those terrorist acts
must be relentlessly confronted and prosecuted for the
crimes committed.
We must pursue our efforts to combat the
Al-Shabaab group, which controls areas in central and
southern Somalia and brings the terrorist threat to the
heart of the capital. The renewal of the sanctions regime
is an important step that allows us to further stem the
flow of arms and financing to the group, which poses a
threat to the region.
At the same time, we must not lose sight of the fact
that Somalia must be able to ensure its own security.
That requires the full implementation of the Somali
transition plan, with the support of all regional and
international partners and, in particular, a reconfigured
African Union mission, which is to take over from
AMISOM as of 2022. France regrets that the joint report
on the future of AMISOM could not be submitted within
the time frame prescribed by resolution 2568 (2021).
France reiterates its willingness to participate in
talks with the Somalis, the members of the Council
and all other stakeholders. It is our responsibility to
take a decision as soon as possible to ensure that the
international community’s efforts to fight against
Al-Shabaab have not been in vain. At the same time,
we must draw lessons from the current model and
its shortcomings in terms of strategic direction and
effectiveness. It is becoming urgent to find an effective,
collective and sustainable solution in terms of funding,
to which the European Union is currently contributing
a particularly large share compared to the contributions
of Somalia’s other partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
21-34296

17/11/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8907

I thank Special Representatives Swan and Madeira
for their briefings, and I welcome to the Council
Ms. Asha Siyad, who is doing important work to make
the inclusion of women in positions of responsibility a
reality in Somalia. I also welcome the representative
of Somalia.

of Somalia to work on a new national action plan
on preventing and responding to sexual violence in
conflict, in line with the 2013 joint communiqué on
the prevention of sexual violence. We also call on all
parties to end the recruitment and use of children in
the conflict.

Mexico recognizes that, despite the many delays
and difficulties that the process faced, Somali political
actors achieved the necessary agreements to complete
the Upper House elections and progress towards the
formation of the House of the People. In that regard,
we welcome the agreement reached between President
Farmajo and Prime Minister Roble at the end of
October. We also welcome the fact that the first direct
vote elections were held in three districts of Puntland,
showing that it is possible to move towards universal
suffrage when the political will prevails.

I conclude by reiterating that, for my country, it is
simply unacceptable that only 2 per cent of the Somali
population has so far received a dose of the coronavirus
disease vaccine. Those who still maintain that the
pandemic has nothing to do with international peace
and security can hardly comprehend how serious and
complex the reality in Somalia is.

As Ms. Siyad rightly pointed out, at this electoral
juncture, concrete steps must be taken to ensure that
women can participate safely as candidates and voters
in the elections. We regret that the 30 per cent quota for
women was not reached in the Upper House. We call for
the mobilization of all available means to ensure that
the women who have been elected can exercise their
mandate effectively and on an equal footing with their
male counterparts.
It is crucial to conclude the elections so that the
authorities can focus on pending reforms. The timely
implementation of the transition plan, including
security sector reform, the integration of regional forces
and force generation, is essential for the transfer of
security responsibilities to the Somalis themselves. In
that connection, we also call on the Somali authorities,
the African Union and other actors involved in the
functioning of the African Union Mission to Somalia to
engage in a dialogue on the appropriate reconfiguration
for the Mission. We are aware that it will not be an easy
conversation, but it is necessary to take into account
the different points of view when making decisions that
will allow Somalia to achieve peace and stability.
Mexico also hopes that the strategic review of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
provided for in resolution 2592 (2021) will contribute
to establishing clear goals to facilitate the transfer of
responsibilities to the national Government.
We strongly condemn the increase in conflictrelated sexual violence and grave violations against
children. We therefore call on the Federal Government

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like
to acknowledge the presence of Ms. Asha Siyad of
the Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative; Mr. James
Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and thank them for their
detailed briefings.
With regard to political developments, I am happy
to state that the Upper House elections have been
completed successfully, with 26 per cent of seats
allocated to our capable women. As planned, the lower
house elections have already begun, with two members
of Parliament from the Somaliland constituency elected
and additional nine members of Parliament to be elected
by 22 November.
The Federal Electoral Implementation Team, as
well as the State Electoral Implementation Team, will
ensure the 30 per cent quota is observed in accordance
with the 17 September agreement, where at least 82 of
the 275 lower house seats will be reserved for women.
That successful start will undoubtedly encourage the
rest of the federal member states to begin elections for
the lower house as soon as possible in order to ensure
that the elections are completed before the end of
the year.
Holding free and credible parliamentary and
presidential elections has always been the stated policy
of the Federal Government of Somalia and, in many
respects, the delay in the elections has been a result
of the need to ensure that all stakeholders are not only

21-3429617/18

S/PV.8907

The situation in Somalia

informed of the process but also accept it in order to
ensure the legitimacy of the Administration postelection.
On the security arrangements for Somalia post2021, the Somali transition plan remains the Federal
Government of Somalia’s only foundation and strategic
vision for a phased, multi-year, conditions-based
configuration of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and for a sustainable approach to countering
Al-Shabaab while building the core security functions
of Somalia and sustainably recovering strategic
locations. In that regard, the Federal Government of
Somalia made it very clear in many instances that it
will not accept any African Union (AU)-United Nations
hybrid multidimensional mission in Somalia.

18/18

17/11/2021

The Federal Government of Somalia continues
to engage with the AU Commission and AMISOM in
order to finalize the concept operations, as required
by the Security Council mandate. Regrettably, despite
some progress, that process has been stalled, but it will
hopefully resume before the end of the year to enable
the Federal Government of Somalia and the African
Union to make significant progress and to report back
to the Council before the end of AMISOM’s mandate
on 31 December.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-34296
