UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

.,
(~\
~~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FIFTEENTH YEAR

867

th MEETING: 23 JUNE 1960
~me SEANCE: 23 JUIN 1960

QUINZIEME ..4 NNEE

CONSEIL DE IECURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIBLS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/867) •••••••••••••••••• "...

1

Adoption of the agenda • • " • • • • • • • • • • • • • " • • • • • • • • • • • • .. •

1

Letter dated 15 June 1960 from the representative of Argentina
addressed to the President of the Security Council (Si4336). • • •

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (SiAgenda/867) •••••.' ••••••••••. "

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour ...... " • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Lettre, en date du 15 juin 1960, adress~e au Pr~sident du Conseil
de s~curit~ par le repr~sentant de l' Argentine (Si4336) ••••••

1

( 16 p. )

i

s/pv.867

,'.
-~,

EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIXTY -SEVENTH MEETING
Held In New York, on Thursday, 23 June 1960, at 10.30 a.m.
HUIT CENT SOIXANTE-SEPTIEME SEANCE
Tenue ci New York, le jeudl 23 juln 1960, ci 10 h 30.
Pr6sident: M. T. F. TSIANG (Chine).

President: Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).
Presept: The representatives of the following StateEl:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nonhern Ireland,
United States of America.

Pr~sents: Les repr~sentants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, France, ItaUe, Pologne, Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie,
Union des R~publ1ques socialistes sovletiques.

Provisional agenda (SI Agenda/867)

Ordre du jour proviso ire (SI Agenda/867)

J

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de 1'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 15 June 1960 from the representative
of Argentina addressed to the President of the
Security Council (8/4336).

2. Lettre, en date du 15 juin 1960, adress~ au
President du Consell de s~curite par le repr~­
sentant de l'Argentme (8/4336).

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordTe du jour est adopt6.

Letter dated lS June 1960 from the representative of
Argentina addressed to !he President of the Secur ity
Council (S/4336)

Lettre. en date du lS juin 1960, adressee au President
du Conseil de securite par le representant de I'Argentine
(S/4336)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the deciBion
taken at the 865th meeting, I now innte, with the COll'"'
sent of the Council, the representative of Israel to
take a seat at the Council table.

1. Le PRE8IDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Conformement 1la decision prise illa 85~me s6ance, je vaiB,
avec 1'assentIment du Consen, inviter la repr6sentante
d'Isra!l 1 prendre place 1 la table du Conseil.

At the inritation of the President. Mrs. Meir. repre.etJtative of Israel. took a place at t1Je SecurIty Council
table.

Sur l'invitation du Pdsldent. Mme Melr, repdsetJtante d'[sraiil, pretJd place
la table du Conseil
de skurit6.

a

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue
its consideration of the item placed on the agenda at
the request of Argentina. In this connexion the Council has before it a draft resolution of Argentina
[S/43451 and amendments submitted by the United
States [8/4M6].

2. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le Conseil
maintenant poursuivre l'examen du point inscrit il
son ordre du jour 1 la demande de l'Argentine. Le
Conseil est saisi l ce sujet d'un projct de resolution
de l'Argentine [8/4345] et d'amendements propos6s
par leB Etats-Unis [8/4346].

1[
1".,.
,.

Ta

3. The representative of the United States has asked
me for the floor to offer a feH remarks of clarification.

3. Le repr6sentant des Etat-Unis a demandela parole
pour quelquec 6cla1rcissements.

4. Mr. LODGE (United ~jtates of America): In her
speech yesterday the Foreign Minister of Israel drew
attention to the phrase "appropriate reparation" in
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, and inquired as
to its precise meaning. She made the thoroughly reasonable contention that if the Council was to accept
the phrase "appropriate reparation", the Council
should know beforehand what "approprlatereparation"
was intended to mean. Accordingly, the United States
now wishes to state its new ofwhat this phrase means.

4. M. LOOOE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglaiB]: DaDs le discours qu'elle a prononce hier,
Mme Meir, ministre des affaires Atran~resd'IsraiH,
a attirA 1'attention du Consell sur les mots "rAparation
a~uate" figurant au paragraphe 2 du proJet de
resolution et elle a demandt§ ce quIlls sign1fiaient
exactement. Elle a soutenu f.l.VSC beaucoup de raison
qu'avant d'adopter la form'lle "reparation a~uate"
le Conse!! devrait savoir quelle signification exacts
y attacher. crest pourquoi ma cMl~gation dAsire
indiquer quel est, selon elle, le sene de C'3S mots.

5. The United States considers that appropriate reparation will have been made by the expression of news
by the Security Council in the pending resolution taken

5. La delegation des Etats-Unis consid~re qu'il y
aura eu reparation ad6quate du fait que, daDs la resolution qu'il adoptera, le Consell aura exprim6 ses
1

•

together with the statement of the Foreign Minister
of Israel making apology on behalf of the Government
of Israel. We therefore think that when we have adopted
the pending resolution, appropriate reparation will
have been .made, and that the incident will then be
closed•.Normal, friendly relations between the two
Governments can then progress.

vues et du fait que, dans sa d6claration, le Ministre
des affaires 6trang~res d'IsralU a pr~sent6 les
excuses de son gouvernement. Nous pensons donc que
lorsque la r6s01ution en discussion aura 6t~ adopt6e,
i1 y aura, par II meme, r6paration adequate et que
l'incident sera, d~fi lo'~, cl06. Des relations normales, amicales pourrout alors se poursuivre entre les
de IX gouvernements.
6. C'est ccmpte tenu de cett'" interpr6tationduprojet
de r~solution que la d~l~g&u_~;ll des Etats-Unis a formul6 sa position l la derni~re 8~ance.

6. It is on this understanding of the meaning of this
resolution that the United States stated its position at
the last meeting.
7. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): We have listened
to the statements made by the representative of Argentina [865th meeting] and the Foreign Minister of Israel
[866th meeting] concerning the dispute between their
two Governments which arose from the seizure and
transportation of the war criminal Adolf Eichmann
from Argentina to Israel. where he is to be tried for
his crimes committed during his years as a high official of Nazi Germany. I wish to assure the authors
of both these statements that I followed their arguments with the greatest attention; even more so since,
as far as I am aware, the Security Council has never
before dealt with a problem similar to the one we
have on our agenda at present.

7. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne)[traduit de l'anglals]:
Nous avons entendu les d~clarations du representant
de I'Argentine [865~me s~ance) et du Ministre des
affaires 6trang~res d'Isral!I' [866~me s~ance] au
sujet du litige qui s'est ~leve entre leurs deux gouvernements 1 la suite de la capture du criminel de
guerre Adolf Eichmann et de son transfert d'Argentine en IsralU, oi\ 11 sera jug6 pour les crimes qu'il
a commis pendant les ann~es au cours desquelles il
a exerc~ de hautes fonctions dans l'Allemagne nazie.
Je tiens l assurer les auteurs de ces deux d6clarations que j 'al suin leurs arguments avec la plus
grande attention, d'autant que le ConseU de sOOurit~
n'a jamais encore, ~ ma connalssance, 6t~ salsi
d'une question analogue 1 celle qui figure actuellement
l notre ordre de jour.
8. Adolf Eichmann est un criminEll de guerre fort
connu et recherche depuis tr~s longtemps, directement responsable du meurtre de millions d'etres
humains. En sa qualit~ de haut fonctionnaire de
l'Allemagne nazie, il a organise l'assassinat enmasse
de ressortissants d'origine Juive de tous les pays
d'Europe afin d'achever ce qu'il appelait cyniquement ·la solution finale de la question juive", qui
devait etre suivie de ·solutions finales" analogues
pour d'autres· peuples. Les documents existants, aussi
hien que les Tictimes el1es-m~mes qui ont surv6cu,
prouvent sans le moindre doute que nombre des
atrocit6s commises par les nazis dans les camps de
concentration, des ex6cutions en masse dans les
chambres 1 gaz, des tortures et des meurtres peuvent 8tre directement imput~s 1 Eichmann, qui 6tait
personnellement charge de diriger et de surveiller
l'ex6cution des plans nazis d'an6antissement de tOllS
lea &tres humains "inf~rieurslla race des seigneurs il •

8. Adolf Eichmann, a well-known war criminal who
was sought after for many years, was directly responsible f~r the murder of millions of human beings.
As a high official of Nazi Germany, he organized the
mass idtiings of citizens of all European countries
w.l1c were of Jewish origin, in order to bring about
ft· hat he cynically called ·the final solution of the J ewish questionIt, to be followed by similar "final solutions" for other nationalities. The existing documents,
as well as the living victims, prove beyond any doubt
that many atrocities committed by Nazis in concentration camps, mass executions in gas chambers, tortures and shootings can be linked directly to Eichmann,
who personally attended and supervised the implementation of Nazi plans to annihilate all human beings
·inferior to the master race·.

9. We in Poland lived through those horrible years
of Nazi contempt for humanity. Our soll is soaked
with the blood of 6 million Tictims of Nazi cruelty.
On our land Eichmapn and his associates organized
numerous factories of death, to mention only the concentration camps of Auschwitz and MajdaD.ek as best
known for their gruesome efficiency.

•

J

.'

,.

15. This
Just a few
explosion of
Republic. Th
once again 01
hatred and ~
there. At the
organized nee
late into act
fascist sym
manns rising
be a warning

16. In the W
count on leni
Thosewhow
very few of
at all. This
culminated r
by bringing

L

z

12. We rec
versial legal
developed
Israel. Som
respect for
to be upheld
kind of bre
however, W
used in suc
will be dra
who are stil
come-back t

•

9. En Pologne, nous aTons veen ces honibles ann6es
du mepris nazi pour l'humanit6. Notre sol est encore
impregn6 du sang de 6 millions des Tictimes de la
cruaut6 nazie. Sur notre territoire, Eichmann et ses
associes avaient organise de nombreuses usines de
mort, parmi lesquelles les camps de concentration
d'Auschwitz et de Majdanek, pour ne mentionner que
les plus connus pour leur macabre rendement.
10. Aussi, quand II s'agit du sort d'Eichmann, nous
attendons-nOUB l ce qu'11 soit traite avant toute chose
en criminel de guerre et rec;oive la juste chltiment
de ses crimes. La dAolarationrelative aux atrocit6s
al1emandes que ies trois puissances· ont signee 1
Moscou en octobre 1943, contenait un avertissement
qu'll ne me semble pasinutilederappeleraujoUrd'hui:
·Que ceux qui n'ont pas encore souill6 leurs
mains du sang innocent prennent garde de ne pas
rejoindre lea rangs des coupables, car 11 est
absolument certain que les trois puissances alli6es
les poursuivront jusqu'au bout de la terre, et les
Uvreron 1 leurs acousateurs, afin que justice
soit faite.·

10. Therefore, when we are confrontedwiththequestion of Eichmann's future, we expect that he should
be dealt with first of all as a war criminal and that
he should be justly punished for his crimes. In the
three-Power Declaration on German atrocities adopted
in Moscow in NOTember 1943, there appeared a warning which seems to me worth recalling now. It reads:
"Let those who have hitherto not imbrued their
hands with innocent blood beware lest they join the
ranks of the guilty, for most assur.edly the three
allied Powers will pursue them to the uttermost
ends of the earth and will deliver them to their accusers in order that justice may be done."

11. At the
Security C
have wide'
this discuss
the main is
be punished.

l

~~~,~ed:=~~~~~~;~l;~-'

I

.'

11. At the request of the Argentine Government, the
Security Council has begun a discussion which might
have wide implications. We are deeply concerned that
this discussion involving Eichmann should not cloud
the main issue at stake: that war criminals have to
be punished.
12. We recognize the existence of various controversiallegal aspects of the dispute which has recently
developed between the Governments of Argentina and
Israel. Some of them-for example, the principle of
respect for sovereignty-we fully support and expect
to be upheld by every State. Nothing can justify any
kind of breach of this principl~. At the same time,
however J we hope that this controversy will not be
used in such a manner that the only benefit from it
will be drawn by Eichmann and other war criminals
who are still in hiding or who openly prepare a full
come-back to political life and power.

13. Since the problem we are dealing with has been
bro1lght before the Security Council, which is a polii:ical
body, I think it is our duty to consider all its aspects.
We cannot limit ourselves to considering only the particular events which brought about this discussion. We
should look at the very roots of the problem and endeavour to examine its causes.
14. While saying this I cannot pass over in silence the
fact that were it not for the attitude taken by certain
States towards Nazi war criminals, we most certainly
would have no dispute today on Eichmann. Those States,
by giving them shelter, tolerating their impunity and
hampering their prosecution, have acted contrary to
the decisions taken during the Second World War. It
is no secret now that there are many known war
criminals enjoying exemption from justice not only
on the territory of Argentina or of other Western
countries which gaYe them haven immediately sIter
the war, but also, and mostly, in the German Federal
Republic. In recent years these criminals, together
with a large number of former Nazis and Hitler's
military men, became one of the major political forces
in that country, exerting its influence on both internal
and external policies of the German Federal Republic.

f.'
K

12. NOU8 reconnals8ons que le d1ff6rendqui a r6cemment surgl. entre les Gouvernements argentin et
isra611en comporte divers aspects jurid1ques pretant a.
controverse. Nous appuyons sans r6serve certains des
principes en jeu, par exemple celui du respect de
la souveramet6, et nous attendons de chaque Etat
qu'il s'y conformeD Rien ne peut justifier aucune
atteinte Il ce principe. Mais, d'autre part, nous
souhaitons que cette controverse ne soit pas utilis6e
de telle sorte que les seuls beneficiaires en soient
Eichmann et les autres criminels de guerre qui se
cachent encore ou qui preparent ouvertement leur
retour A la ..,ie politiq-ue et au pouvoir.
13. Puisque le differend a et6 porte devant le
Conseil de securite, qui est un organe politique, je
croia qu 'u est de notre devoir de l'envisager sous
tous ses aspects. Nous ne pouvons pas limiter notre
examen aux 6Y~nements particuliers qui ont donn6
lieu an present debate Nous devons remonter aux
sources m&nes du problf!Jme et tenter dten examiner
les causes.
14. Je ne saurais ~ ce sujet passer sous silence le
fait que, si ce n'6tait l'attitude de certains Etats a.
1'6gard des criminels de guerre nazis, il nry aurait
certainement pas aujourd'hui de differend au sujet
d'Eichmann. Ces Etats, en donnant uile a. ces
criminels, en tolerant qu'ila demeurent impunis et en
em~chant qu'on ne lea poursuive, ont ag1 en contravention des d6cisions prises pendant la seconde guerre
mondiale. Ce u?est plus un secret maintenant que de
nombreux criminels de guerre notoires jouissent
actuellement de l'impunite, non seule:n~ent sur le
te:rritoire de l'Argentine ou d'autres pays occidentaux
qui leur ont donne asile aussitOt apr~s la guerre, mais
aussi et surtout dans la R6publ1que f6d6rale d'Aliemagne. Au cours des derni~res ann~s. cas criminels,
de meme qu'un grand nombre d'anciens nazis et
d'anciens officiers dtHitler, sont devenus l'une des
principales forces politiques de la R6publique f6d6rale
d'Allemagne et exercent leur influence sur la politique
int6rieure et sur la pol1tique ext6rieure de ce pays.

r'

15. Cette influence se fait de plus en plus aentir.

15. This influence becomes more and more eYident.
Just a few months ago the world was shocked by the
explosion of Nazi activity in the German Federal
Republic. The ominous signs of the swastika appear
once again on the walls of West German towns, race
hatred and anti-semitism are again voiced openly
there. At the same time, there is evidence that well
organized neo-Nazi centres are endeavOllringto stimulate into action surnYing remnants of fascism and
fascist sympathizers elsewhere. There are new Eichmanns rising to power in West Germany and that should
be a warning sign for everyone.

n y a quelques mois soolement, l'opinion mondiale
a ete scandalisee par una explosion dtaotbite nazie
dans la R6publique f6derale d'Allemagne. L'embll)me

sinistre de la croix gamm~ est apparu una fois de
plus sur les murs des villes de ItAllemagne occidentale et la haine raciale et l'antis6mitisme s'y sont
encore une fois exprimes ouvertement. Dtautre part,
on constate que des centres neo-nazis bien organis6s
tentent actuellement de pousser 1 Paction les 616ments fascistes et les sympathisants du fascisme
qui subsistent dans drautres pays. De nouveaux
Eichmann sont en voie d'acc6der au pouvoir en
Allemagne occidentale et ceci devrait donner 1'alarmeD

16. In the West Germany of today war criminals can
count on leniency or even impunity for their crimes.
Those who were brought to trial-and there have been
very few of them-received negligible sentences, if any
at all. This policy of making a mockery of justice
culminated recently in the German Federal Republic
by bringing into effect on 8 May 1960 the statute of

1

incidences poovent Mre tr~s vastes. Nous sommes
particuli~rement soucieux que la discussion du cas
d'Eichmann n'obscurcisse pas la principale question
en joo: les criminels de guerre doivent etre chAties.

16. Dans l'Allemagne occidentale d'aujourd'hui,les
criminels de guerre pauTent compter sur la clemence
ou mAma sur l'impuni~ pour leurs crimes. Ceux qui
ont 6t6 traduits en juatice - et 11 y en a eu fort peu se 130nt vu 1nfliger des condamnations n6g11geables, si
tant est qu'ils aient ~e condamnes. Cette politique
de deft 1 la justice a recemment atteint son point

3

if

p.

.,
,~:

"~:_:"
iJ

,J

I
limitations on Nazi crimes, including crimes of manslaughter.

culminant dans la Republique fMerale d'Allemagne,
oft, le 8 mai 1960, la prescription a ete etendue aux
crimes nazis, y compris le meurtre.

24. For
this un
in the bes

17. Such a state of affairs would have been impossible had it not been for the reluctance of the German
Federal Republic authorities to bring Nazi criminals
to court and to punish them as they deserved. This reluctance is understandable, althwgh not acceptable to
any honest man, in a situation where manJ' high governmental posts in the German Federal Republic are
held by war criminals and individuals with a long and
active Nazi record. It should suffice to mention that
in the judicial system alone there are still 1,500 judges
who dispensed so-called justice during Hitle!"s years
in Germany. This has come as no surprise to us in
Poland. For many years we have been anxiously watchthe course of events in the German Federal Republic.
We saw with clear eyes the danger of revanchism and
neo-Nazism mounting in that country, a danger which
is threatening not only Poland.

17. Un tel etat de choses n'aurait pas ete possible
si les autorites de la Republique fMerale n'ament
pas repugne A traduire les criminels nazis en jUstice et A leur infliger le ch4timent merite. Cette
r6pugnance, bien qu'inadmissible pour un hOJln~te
homme, est comprehensible dans un pays comme
la Republique fMerale d'Allemagne oh nombre de
postes officiels eleves sont occupes par des criminels de guerre ou des individus ayant derri~re ewe
une longue et active carri~re dans le parti nazi.
Qu'il me suffise d'indiquer que la magistrature A
elle soole compte 1.500 juges qui administraient
dejA une pr6tendue justice en Allemagne soua le
regime hitlerien. Nous n'en avons pas ete surpris,
nous Polonais, car, depuis bien des ann~es, nOus
surveillons anxieusement le cours des evenements
dans la Republique federale d'Allemagne. Nous avons
vu avec lucidite s'affirmer dans ce pays le danger
de l'esprit revanchard et du neo-nazisme, danger
qui ne menace pas seulement la Pologne.

25. Mr.
been conv
by the Pe
letter of 1
cil to co
of the Ar
and clan
Argentine
Israel. T
Argentine
e!gn Affai
of the cas
26. Let
gratified
countries
of friends
tion of pu

18. On many occasions in international forums the
Polish Government has warned internationt'l opinion
and has expressed its concern at this situation in
Western Germany. We shall continue to do so until
~his dangerous course of events in that country has
been arrested.

18. A maintes reprises, le Gouvernement polonais
a, devant des assembl~s lnternatlonales, exprim~
son inquietude et mis l'opinion en garde contre
1'6tat de choses qui dgne en Allemagne occidentale. Nous continuerons A le faire jusqu'l ce que cette
dangereuse evolution ait ete arr~ee.

19. The Security Council, as a body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
cannot remain indifferent to these events. To ignore
those signs after the experience of the years 1933
to 1945 would be imprudent, to say the least. Some
of the most dangerous remnants of those times still
exist and they should be destroyed.

19. Le Conseil de securite, organe responsable du
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales,
ne peut rester indifferent Aces 6Yenements. n
serait A tout le moins imprudent, apr~s l'experience
des annees 1933 A 1945, dtignorer ces symptOmes.
Quelques-uns des Yestiges les plus dangereux de
cette epoque subsistent encore et ils doivent etre
detruits.
20. Si nOus revenons sur ces questions, ce n'est
pas dans un esprit de revanche. Ce n'eBt pas simplement pour rappeler le' passe, bien que nous ntayons
pas oublie un seul des crimes nazis, mals c'est
pour 6Yiter que ce passe ne revive jamais.

20. If we touch on these problems again, it is not
because we are seeking revenge. If we haYe not forgotten a single Nazi crime, it is not just for the sake
of recalling the past, but so that the past should never
recur.
21. The controversy in't'olving the war criminal Eichmann Jready has gained international publicity and if
everybody concerned does not act wisely and judiciously, it might become a heart-warming symbol to all
unpunished war criminals.

21. La controverse ft. laquelle donne lieu le cas
du criminel de guerre Eichmann est d~sormais
connue dans le monde entler et, si chacun des in~­
resses ntagit pas prudemment et judicieusement,
tous les criminels de guerre encore impunis pourraient y yoir un signe dtencouragement.

22. We have noted with satisfaction the statement of
8 June, addressed to the Embassy of Israel at Buenos
Aires, in which the Argentine Government expresses
"its most emphatic condemnation of the mass crimes
committed by the agents of Hitlerism, crimes which
cost the lives of millions of innocent beings belonging
to the Jewish people and many other peoples of Europe"
[S/4334].

22. C'est ayec satisfaction que nous ayons pm note
de la declaration adressee le 8 juin A 1'ambassade
d'Israel II Buenos Aires, dans laquelIe le Gouvernement argentin indique qutil ne peut que "condamner
de la fac;on la plus cat6gorique les actes de genocide
commis par les agents hitleriens, qui ont coOte la
ne ft. des millions dtinnocents panni le poople juif
et de nombreux autres peuples dtEuropew [S/4334].

23. This, and similar declarations, when implemented
and applied to all still unpunished war criminals living
now in Argentina or elsewhere, might be for all of us
a new source of hope that justice will be fulfilled and
at the same time be a warning to all who conceive
new and perhaps even more dangerous plans directed
against humanity.

23. De telles d6clarations ou des declarations analogues, si elIes soot suivies d'effet et si elles sont
appliquees ft. tOIlS les criminels de guerre encore
impunis, en Argentlne ou ailleurs, pourraient nous
permettre A tOllS dtesperer ft. nouveau que justice
sera faite, en meme temps qutelles serviraient
d'aYertissement l tous ceux qui echafaudent contre
1'bumanite des plans nouveaux et peut-Mre plus
dangereux encore.
4

"
)

28. Befo
like to e
with the
tional
which
confirmat
President
dwelling

to follow

29. Italy
the actioI
because i
suffering
periors.
or a rela
cause of]

)

30. No 0
ever co
which Ei
was not
and perse
and viole
large
certain i
fore us
abduction
under a f

I

le
'1-

te
te

le
le
lIX

i.

a-

I1t
le
'I,
l8
;6
IS

ls
16
~e

1-

:e

'I,

n

'I.

le
'e
'.
)

B

It

.s

s

~,

:e

le

.-It

e

B

e

e

8

qu'elles la r~glent d'un commun accord au mieux
des int~rets de la justice.
25. M. ORTONA (Italie) [traduit de l'anglais]: Le
Consell de securite a ete convoque pour examinerune
question dont il a ete saisi par le repr~sentant permanent de l'Argentine. par lettre en date du 15 juin
LS/4336]. Cette lettre demande du Conseil d'examiner
la violation des droits de souverainete de la R~publique
Argentine par le transfert illicite et clandestin
d'Adolf Eichmann du territoire argentin en territoire
d'IsraiH. Les ~clarations du representant de l'Argentine et du Ministre des affaires ~rang~res d'IsraiH
temoignent de 1'importance du cas qui nous est
soumis.
26. Qu'il me soit permis de dire d~s maintenant
que le Conseil a ~e heureux d'entendre les repr&sentants des deux -pays intereBs~s exprinller des
sentiments profonds d'amitie r~ciproque, et reaffirmer leur intention de maintenir des relations
empreintes de confiance.

25. Mr. ORTONA (Italy): The Security Council has
been convened to examine a question brought before it
by the Permanent Representative of Argentina by his
letter of 15 Junf' tS/4336], in which he asked the Council to consider the violation of the sovereign rights
of the Argentine Republic resulting from the illicit
and clandestine transfer of Adolf Eichmann from
Argentine territory to the territory of the State of
Israel. The statements which have been made by the
Argentine representative and by the MinistArfor Foreign Affairs of Israel bear witness to the importance
of the case before us.
26. Let me say at the outset that the Council has been
gratified to hear from the representatives of both
countries their expressions of deep-rooted feelings
of friendship and reassuring utterances of their intention of pursuing a course of confident relations.

nt

It

~p~,:'e: ~,:U:ai~~~':""":"':'~ns.;:

24. For these reasons, we appeal to both sides in
this untimely controversy to solve it by mutual effort
in the best interests of justice.

e,
:IX

)

27. To deal with the problem before us, I should like
to point out right away that what is at stake here is a
disagreement between Israel and Argentina on a question which-as we see it-on the one hand reaches the
heart of the great wave of moral indignation at the
cold-blooded massacre of unpreceden.ted magnitude,
which has been so forcefully descrjbedbythe Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Israel, and which could not but
arcuse again our emotioIlB. On the other hand, it is
undeniable that the case so effectively presented by
the Argentine representative touches upon issues bearing on the need to preserve the orderly structure of
the international community.

27. Pour ce qui est du probl~me dont nous sommes
saisis, je voudrais relever tout d'abord qu'il s'agit
ici d'un desaccord entre Isra~l et l'ArgfJ'.ltine sur une
question qui, ! notre avis. presente un ~ouble aspect;
tout d'abord, elle touche au cceur meme de la grande
Tague d'indignation morale qu'asoulev~ele massacre,
perp6tre de sang-froid et d'une amplitude sans
precedent, qui nous a ~t~ decrit avec tant de force
par le Ministre des affaires etrang~res d'IsraiH
et qui ne peut qu'~eiller encore en nous un€ ~motion
profonde. D'autre part, on ne saurait nier que cette
question, telle que le repdsentant de I'Argentine nous
l'a si judicieusement deerite, soul~ve des probl~meB
qui touchent d1rectement A. la necessite de pl'~server
la structure ordonn§e de la communaut~ internationale.

28. Before dealing with the case before us, I should
like to emphasize that Italy is on the best of terms
with the young State of Israel, and has close traditional ethnical ties with the Argentine nation, ties
which last week found once more the most eloquent
confirmation in the manifestations of affection towards
President Frondizi during his State visit in Italy. In
dwelling upon the problem beforeus,Iintendtherefore
to follow a line of logic and fairness.

28. • ~..,ant de traiter plU& longuement de cette affaire,
je tiens ! souligner que l'Italie entretient d'excellentes relations RTec le jeune Etat israelien et a, par
tradition, des liens ethniques €:troits avec la nation
argentine; d'ailleurs. ces liens ont encore une fois
troUTe la plus 6loquente des confirmations, la semaine
derni~re, dans les manifestations de sympathie dont
le president Frondizi a ~te l'objet pendant sa visite
officielle en Italie. Je m'efforcerai donc, en examinant le probl~me dont nous sommes saisis, de me
conformer l ia fois Ala logique et Al'~te.

29. Italy is in full sympathy with the motives behind
the action undertaken by a group of Israel Tolunteers
because it realizes that the people of Israel are still
suffering from the atrocities of Eichmann and his superiors. Probably in every Israel family a member
or a relative or a close friend has been mourned because of Eichmann.

29. L'Italie comprend parfaitement les motifs qui
ont inspire l'action entreprise par un gr01.l.-pe de
Yolontaires israeliens, car elle n'ignore pas que le
peuple d'IsraiH souffre enoore des atrocites commises par Eichmann et ses chefs. n n'est probablement pas en Isralll une seule famille qui, A cause
d'Eichmann, ne pleure un parent OIl un ami cher.

30. No one could be insensitive to the gravest sins
ever committed against humanity in our times, in
which Eiohmann, according to irrefutable witnesses.
was not only a participant but an inspirer: torture
and persecution of great masses ofpeople, intolerance
and Yiolence, oppression and murder imposed on very
large numbers of innocent people. On another side,
certain factual elements, which make the picture before us more complex, should be borne in mind. The
abduction of Eichmann who was residing in Argentina
under a false identity was accomplishedbyvolllnteers,

30. Nul ne &i1.urait demeurer insensible deTant les
crimes les plus graves qui aient ~e commis 1 notre
~poque contre 1'humanit~ et, selon des temoignages
irr~futables. Eichmann n'a pas seulement participe
lees crimes, il les a inspires. Des multitudes de
personnes ant ete tortur6es et pers~cut~s, d'innombrables innocents ant et~ victimes de 1'into16rance
et de Ill. nolence. de 1'oppression et du meurtre.
D'autre part, on ne saurait faire abstraction de
certains elements positifs qui rendent encore plus
complexe le probl~me qui nOllS occupe. L'enl~ement

f
L

1:
~.
~;

j'

5

•

,
who were operating apparently on the spur of their
own moral pressures, and with the purpose of securing
a criminal who had defied Argentine law after having
defied, indeed, the fundamental laws of humanity.

31. I certainly concur in what was said in this room
about the necessity that the outcome of our proceedings
should be in line with the persisting cry of moral indignation which has pervaded the world ever since such
mass murders were committed.
32. What I have outlined above, however, must not
make us lose sight of the main purpose of our endeavours, which is the consideration of the claim by
the Argentine Goyernment to obtain r~cognition of the
violation of its national sovereignty and of the circumstances which entitle Argentine to appropriate reparation. Let us observe in this coni;ext that the "note
verbale" of 3 June from the Embassy of Israel in
Buenos Aires to the Ministry of Foreign Mfairs of
the Argentine Republic [S/4342, sec. I] bears witness
to the strong feelings of solidarity of the Government
of Israel with the action of the volunteer group. inasmuch as regret was expressed if it should be found
that the group had "violated Argentine law or interfered with matters within the sovereignty of Argentina". Those feelings of the Government of Israel haye
in fact gone beyond the realm of ties of sentiment or
moral approval, and have found concrete expression
in the further steps taken or envisaged by the Goyern,ment of Israel in the whole matter. This is, I think,
the focal point of the contention, and this is where the
claim of violation of sovereign rights made by the
Argentine Government finds itself substantiated. And
that is where, notwithstanding all the sympathy and
understanding for the moral motivations of any move
by Israelis in the matter, be it on the part of volunteers or on the part of the Government of Israel, some
considerations of a different nature become imperative.

32. Ces considerations, toutefois, ne doivent pas
nous faire perdre de vue le but principal de nOB
deliberations, qui est d'examiner la plainte que le
Gouvernement argentin a pr6sent6 afin de faire
constater la violation de sa souverainete nationale
et les circonstances qui font que l'Argentine a droit
~ une reparation adequate. Observons ~ cet egard que
la note verbale remise par I'ambassade d'Israi:H 11
Buenos Aires au Minist~re des relations exterieures
et du culte de la Republique argentine, en date du 3 juin
[8/4342, sect. Il, montre les sentiments profonds de
solidarite du Gouvernement d'IsralH vis-~-vis de l'action du groupe de Tolontaires; ce gouvernement, en
effet, a exprime ses regrets pour le cas oil le groupe
de volontaires "aurait enfreint les lois argentines ou
porte atteinte ~ la souyerainete argentine". De la part
du Gouvernement d'Isral!l, ces sentiments vont en
fait bien au-delA. du simple domaine de liens sentimentaux ou de l'approbation morale; ils ont trOUye
leur expression concr~te dans les mesures que le
Gouvernement d'IsraiH a prises ou envisage de prendre
en la mati~re. C'est Ill, a. mon sens, le nceud de I'affah'e, c'est la. oil la plainte en violation de sa souverainete deposee par le Gouvernement argentin trouye
sa confirmation. Et c'est lA,malgretoutelasympathie
et la comprehension dont nous pouvone faire preuve
quant aux motifs d'ordre moral qui peuvent, en la
mati~re, animer les Israeliens - qu'il s'agisse des
volontaires ou du gouvernement - que nous sommeEl
obliges de tenir compte de considerations de nature
differente.

33. Actually, by shaping its collective destiny in the
form of a State and by becoming a member of the
United Nations, the nation of Israel has accepted the
existing rules of international law. Sometimes the
implementation of these rules might entail sacrifices
and renunciations. For many centuriesprominentjurists have tried to steer the right course between ethics
and law. Gradually, awareness has come about that
the advantages deriving to the individual States from
the implementation of principles acknowledged by the
whole of international society are greater than those
which might derive from a merely unilateral pursuit
of national aims. The salient points in this picture
are respect for national sovereignty and recourse to
the normal procedures, the ways and means that the
international community has deYised for the prote.ction
of all. This is where I think the argument brought to
the fore by the Argentine Government finds its strongest foundation and justification.

33. En effet, lorsqu'elle a fa90nn6 sa destin6e
collective s.u sein d'un Etat souverain et lorsqu'elle
est devenue Membre de I'ONU, la nation lsra6llenna a accept6 d'observer leB r~gles en vigueur
du droit international. n se peut que l'application de
ces r~gles entrarhe parfois des sacrifices et des
renonciations. Pendant des si~cles des juristes eminents ont essaye de faire la juste part de la morale
et du droit. Et l'on a progressivement reconnu que
chaque Etat retire des aYantages plus grands en
mettant en ceuvre des prlncipes acceptes par l'ensemble de la societe internationale qu'en poursuivant une
politique unilaterale ayant 1'inter@t national pour but
exclusif. Ainsi, les elements dominants de la situation
dont nous ayons A. nOUB occuper sont les suivants: le
respect de la souverainete nationale et le recours a.
des ryrocedures normales et aux moyens que la
communaute internationale a etablis pour la protection
de tous. C'est lA., ~ monsens,quel'argument presente
par le Gouvernement argentin trouve ses bases les
plus solides et sa justification.
34. J e ne yeux pas me livrer iei aun examen d€ltaill~
des procedures ou des methodes par lesquelles le
peuple israelien aurait pu, en l'occurrence, Batisfaire
Bon besoin criant de justice, sans pour cela recourir

34. I do not wish to engage in a detailed examination
of the procedures or the methods through which the
crying need for justice of the people of Israel could
have found in this case its adequate satisfaction on a

..

normal b
tion was
vention 0
of Genoci
of the p
for secur
maintain
cide Con
law coul
position
mains t
group,
by whic
was prec
of the 8ta
of the 8ta
been imp
In other
the wron

d'Eiclunann qui residait en Argentine ElOUS une fausse
indentite a ete accompli par des volontaires qui,
semble-t-il, ont agi sous l'aiguillon de leur propre
consc.ience, et en vue de s'assurerdelapersonne d'un
criminel qui defiait la loi argentine apr~s avoir, en
fait, defie les le ~ fondamentales de 1'humanite.
31. J'approuve done enti~rement la mise en garde qui
nous a ete adrcBsee ici m~me afin que le resultat de
nos travaux n'aille pas ~ l'encontre du sentiment
d'indignation morale qui n'a cesse de soulever le
monde entier depuis que ces massacres ont ete
commis.

6

35. I do
are deba
This was
by the M
but we a
80phocle
applied t
and law:
of the h
dividual,
the re
state and
a proble
because
not clear

",
'I

37. Ma
by the r
an additi
already
one side
harboure
Eichm
pression
both the
the rela1
be impaiJ

38. Two
our deba
in this
legal int
this role
have re
line the
and mig
useful re
by its ve
this see
law.

,
un
en
[Ui

de
Int

le
ite

as
08

le
re
le
lit

l1e
ll.
BS

in
ie

en

le
lU

rt
en
i-

re

le
re

f-

~fe

le
re

la

~

le

s-

11'

[e

lS

l-

le

Le

In

l-

le
1t

In

.e

A
.a

§

e
e

r

•de. moyensem.or:::e•.Non.avens opprl~qU~ .

normal basis. We have heard that a treaty of extradition was being prepared. We all know about the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide, which could provide at least an indication
of the possibilities to which recourse could be h..d
for securing justice in a case of this kind. It has been
maintained by high authorities in Israel that the Genocide Convention has retroactive force, while Israel's
law could fill the gap and, therefore, would be in a
position to serve the purpose of justice. The fact remains that, because of the action of the volunteer
group, any exploration of the normal ways and means
by which justice could normally have been attained
was precluded and that, with or without the knowledge
of the State ofIsrael, a violation of the sovereign rights
of the State of Argentina was committed, as indeed has
been implied indirectly by the Government of Israel.
In other words, the cause for the complaint exists and
the wrong should be appropriately repaired.

se
l1i,
re

..
"

traite d'extradition etait en cours de preparation. Nous
connaissons tous la Convention pour la prevention
et la repression du crime de genocide a laquelle on
aurait pu se reporter pour obtenir au moins une indication des possibilites qui s'offraient d'assurer la
justice dans un cas de ce genre. EnIsraEH, d'eminentes
autorites ont soutenu que la Convention sur le genocide
a un effet retroactif et qu 'en m~me temps la Io!
i~raelienne pouvait permettre de remedier a toute
lacune juridique, et de ce fait, assurer que justice soit
faite. n n'en demeure pas moins que l'actiondu groupe
de Yolontaires a eUmine toute possibilite d'avoir
recours A des procedures juridiques normales et que,
A la connaissance ou ~ l'insu de l'Etat d'IeraEH, les
droits souverains de l'Etat argentin on ete violes,
ce que d'ailleurs le Gouvernement is:raelien a implicitement admis. En d'autres termes, la plainte dont
nous sommes saisis a toute raison d'~tre, et le tort
cause dolt ~tre repare de mani~re appropriee.

35. I do know that a case such as the one which we
are debating today has features of a unique character.
This was expressed with able and persuasive words
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel yesterday,
but we all know also that, since ancient times, from
Sophocles to Plato and on, the greatest minds have
applied themselves to the problem of reconciling ethics
and law: of reconciling, on the one side, the reasons
of the heart, the inner voices which speak to the individual, and, on the other side, the needs of the law,
the requirements of the community as organized in a
state and in an international context. This is certainly
a problem which lends itself to constant soul-searching
because the questions and the answers involved are
not clear-cut.

35. Je sais pertinemment que le cas qUi nous occupe
aujourd'h1.i.i presente certains aspects exceptionnels.
C'est ce que Mme Meir, ministre des affaires etrang~reB d'Isralil, a fait ressortir hier avec beaucoup de
persuasion et d'habilete. Mais nous savons tous aussi
que, depuis l'antiquite, deputs Sophocle et Platon,
les plus grands esprits se sont efforces de concilier
la morale et le droit, de concilier, d'une part, les
raisons du caeur, les vobr interieures qui s'adressent
~ chacun et, d'2.utre part, les necessites de la loi, les
exigences de la communaute organisee, que ce soit au
sein de l'Etat ou sur le plan international. Certes, il
s'agit la d'un probl~me qui noUB incite 1\ interroger
constamment notre conscience, car les questions et
les reponses qu'il implique n6 se preseni.::!'t pas Si!
terrnes simplee.

36. I do think, however, that, as regards the case
before us, the draft resolution presented by the Argentine delegation provides the Council with a moderate
and sensible document which embodies in an acceptable
way the answers to the dilemmas whichmakethe case
of the Eichmann abduction so pregnant with emotional
elements and legal intricacies.

36. Dans le cas qui nous occupe, toutefois, je crois
sine: ~rement que le projet de resolution presente au
ConueU par la delegation de l'Argentine est un document modere et raisonnable; il apporte, en effet, des
reponses acceptables awe questions difficiles qui font
de l'enl~vement a'Eichmann un probl~me gros de
facteurs emotifs et de complications juridiques.

37. May I say further that the amendments proposed
by the representative of the United States constitute
an additional contribution in the direction which I have
already outlined. These amendments reflect, on the
one side, those feelings of condemnation which are
harboured by all of us "vis-A-vis" the crimes of Adolf
Eichmann. On the other side, they underline the expression of a hope which, I think, is deeply felt by
both the Argentine and the Israel Governments, that
the relationship between the two countries may not
be impaired but advanced.

37. Qu'il me soit permis d'ajouter que les amendements proposes par le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique contribuent egalement h engager ce probl~me dans la voie que je viens de defiP.1r. D'un
certain cate, en effet, ces amendements refl~tent la
volonte qui nous anime tous C:e condamner sans
reserve les crimes d'Adolf Eichmann. D'un autre
cOte, Us soulignent l'expression de l'espoir profond,
ressenti A. la fois j'en suis silr par le Gouvernement
argentin et par le Gouvernement israelien, que lea
relations d'amitie entre les deux pays interesses ne
seront pas compromises mais bien plutOt renforc6es.

'=1
i
~.

N
EL

~.

':.
'
;',-

38. Au cours du debat nous avons pu entendre deux

38. Two opposite theses have been expressed during
our debate concerning the role of the SecurityCouncU
in this matter. I shall abstain from delving int) the
legal interpretations of what the Charter provides for
this rola, because I think that at the point whf ch we
have reached it might be more appropriate to underline the fact that our proceedings have already shown,
and might further show, that our work might achieve
useful results. Indeed, this body, theSecurityCouncU,
by its very nature can help and is helping to overcome
this seemingly insoluble antithesis between ethics and
law.

th~ses opposees quant au rale du Conseil de securite
en la mati~re. J'eviterai de me lancerdans des inter-

pretations juridiques des dispositions pertinentes de
la Charte, car, au point ou nous en sommes, il me
para1't plus utile de souligner ce que nos debats ant
dejh montre et montreront sans doute encore, Asavoir
que les travaux du Conseil pourraient bien avoir des
resultats fructueux. En fait, le Conseil de securite, par
sa nature m~me, peut contribuer, et contribue enfait,
A r6soudre l' antitMse apparemment insoluble entre la
morale et le droit.
7

•

39. The evolution of the international community has
in fact brought us to a state in which it is to be hoped
that the Security Council can act, in case of conflicts
of this kind, with such authority as to transcend them,
on the basiS' of the strength lent to the Council itself
by the Charter.

39. En realite, 1'6volution de la communaute internationale nous a conduits 1 un stade oil il est A. esp6rer que le Conseil de securite peut, grdce il. la force
que lui conf~re la Charte, agir avec une autorite
suffisante pour regler les desaccords du genre de
celui qui nous occupe.

40. In this particular case, the draft resolution and
amendments which we ha'lfe before us take into consideration all the aspects and the background of the
case. It is to be hoped that through the adoption of this
resolution appropriate reparation of the breach of
international law will be found, on the basis of the
aclmowledgement of the Council of the right of Argentina to protect its national sovereignty. By obtaining
a consensus of opinion in the matter, the prevailing
features of the case in question, which are, as I stated
before, of a political nature and involve the necessity
of steering a course between ethics and law, the Council will have served a useful purpose in strengthening
the structure of the international community.

40. En l'esp~ce, le projet de resolution et les
amendements dont le Conseil est saisi tiennent compte
de tous les aspects de l'affaire et du cadre dans
lequel elle se presente. Nous devons esperer que, du
fait m~me que le Conseil de securite a reconnu le
droit de l'Argentine de proteger sa souverainete
nationale, 1'adoption de cette resolution constituera
une reparation adequate il. la violation du droit international qui a eta commise. En parvenant il. un accord
unanime sur une question dont les caract~res essentiels sont - comme je l'ai dejA. souligne - de nature
politique et impliquent la necessite de faire la part
A. la fois de la morale et du droit, le Conseil de securite aura accompli la ta.che meritoire de renforcer la
structure de la communaute internationale.

41. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanisl\):
We listened attentively to the statements made yesterday by the representatives of the two parties to the
dispute which has been brought to the attention of the
Security Council by Argentina, and we have also closely
studied the relevant documents.

M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de l'espagnol]:
Nous avons ecoute mer avec la plus grande attention
les representants des deux parties au conflit dont la
R6publique Argentine a saisi le Conseil; nous avons
egalement etudie avec le plus grand soin lea documents
relatifs A. cette affaire.

42. The specific incident which gave rise to the dispute is the removal of Adolf EichmannfromArgentine
territory to the State of Israel. Full details of the incident have not yet been revealed. The parties are in
disagreement concerning the juridical implications and
the alleged justification of that action. In fact, while
the Argentine Government is protesting against the
violation of the laws, territory and sovereign rights
of Argentina which the seizure of Eichmann implies
and is demanding appropriate reparation-specifically
the return of Eichmann and the punishment of those
who seized him-the Government of Israel, although
it regrets any violation of Argentine laws and ri~hts
which may have been committed by those responsible
for the capture of Eichmann, invokes as its supreme
moral justification, outweighing, in its opinion, all
other considerations, the fact that it will now be possible to bring to trial the man responsible for the
murder of millions of the Jewish people.

42. Un fait concret se trouve U 'origine du conflit: on
a enleve Adolf Eichmann du territoire argentin pour
l'emmener en territoire israelien. Nous ne connaissons que partiellement les details de l'affaire et les
parties sont en desaccord sur ses repercussions juridiques et sur les justifications qu'on pretend lui trouver. En effet, le Gouvernement argentin protestepour
sa part contre la violation de la loi argentine, du
territoire argentin et des droits de souverainete de
l' Argentine il. 1'occasion de la capture d'Eichmann:
il exige une reparation adequate: qu'Ei~hmann lui
soit rendu et que lea auteurs de l'enl~vement soient
punis. De aon cOte, le Gouvernement israelien, tout
en deplorant que les auteurs de 1'enl~vement aient pu
violer la loi et les droits de l'Argentine, estime que
pouvoir traduire en justice le responsable de 1'assassinat de plusieurs millions de membres du peuple
juif est un fait d'une importance incommensurable, qui
est pour lui une justification morale supr@me et prime,
il. son avis, toute autre consideration.
43. Qu'il me soit permis tout d'abord de parlerde la
position israelienne. Le Gouvernement israelien attache une importance exceptionnelle au jugement et au
chitiment eventuel de ceux qui,pendantl'atrocedomination nazie, se sont rendus coupables de crimes
envers le peuple juif. Cette importance, A. notre avis,
est tndeniable. Les gouvernements et les peuples du
monde entier partagent profond6ment et 8inc~rement
avec Israel la volonte de ne paslaisser impunis de tels
crimes. Le gouvernement et le peuple que je represente
sont solidaires dans cette lutte pour la defense de la
justice.

45.
adopt
inst
pres
the
46.
crus
altho
pIe,
Peop
andt
law t
able
the
natio
inst
not g

41.

43. If I may be allowed to deal first with the position
of Israel I would say that in our view there is no gainsaying the extraordinary importance which the Government of Israel attaches to the trial and ultimate
punishment of those responsible, during the abominable
Nazi regime, for crimes committedagainsttheJewish
people. The desire of Israel that such crimes should
not go unpunished is deeply and sincerely shared by
Governments and peoples throughout the world, and
the Government and people I represent firmly support
such a defence of justice.

44. The punishment of crimes perpetratedbyNazism
is of special importance to the United Natio!1B which
was created at the very time that the Nazi movement
was destroyed and which in various General A~tlembly
resolutions has condemned Nazi crimes, and confirmed the principles of international law recognized
by the Charter of the NUrnbergTribunal and the judgements of that court. It has, moreover, recommended
Member States to take all the necessary measures for

..

the
crim
those
tried

44. La punition deB crimes perpetres par lenazisme
reY~ una signification toute particuli~re dans notre
organisation, dont les origines colhcident avec la
deroute du nazisme; l'Assemblee generale a, dans
diverses resolutions, condamne les crimes des nazis,
confirme les principes de droit international reconnus
dans le statut du Tribunal militaire international de
Nuremberg et clans les arr~s de ce tribunal et recommande aux Etats Membres de prendre toutes lee
8

47.

of w
view
the c
opini
pref
Arge
amo
cann
defe
48.

"

myd
its s
base
in in
relat
be s
to th
we t
as
tion
behi
can

49.

betwl
reac]

ernm

that·
perm
to be
at t
disa
con
of in
all 0
belie
the f
rule
50.

can

interespeferce
ltoritli
Ire de
3t les
ompte
3 dans
ue, du
nnu le
ainete
ituera
interLccord
Issenlature
apart
secucer la
.gnol]:
ention
iont la
avons
ments

~isme

notre
ec la

dans
lazis,
ooous
lal de
IcomB lee

45. It was also the United Nations which drew up and
adopted the Convention on Genocide, a revolutionary
instrument in modern international law which is at
present in force in more than sixty States including
the two parties to the present dispute.

45. C'est egalement aux Nations Unies que revient
le merite d'avoir redige et approuve la Convention
sur le genocide, instrument revolutionnaire dans le
droit international contemporain, qui est actuellement
en vigueur dans plus de 60 Etats et notamment "1ez les
parties au conflit dont nous nous occupons aUjourd'hui.

46. The State of Israel is not, therefore, alone in its
crusade for the punishment of Nazi war crimes which,
although principally directed against the Jewish people, were also directed against mankind as a whole.
People and Governments are united in that crusade
and there exist clearly rules of positive international
law to assist them in their purpose. It is understandable that there may be legal technicalities which delay
the handling of certain cases but fortunately the international community ie reasonably well equipped with
instruments which ensure that war criminals shall
not go unpunished.

46. Ce n'est donc pas un combat solitaire qu'IsralH
m~ne contre les crimes de guerre des nazis, ces
crimes qui, s'ils ont principalement eprouvlHepeuple
juif, n 'en ont pas moins frappe l'humanite tout enti~re.
Les gouvernements et les peuples du monde sont solidaires dans cette lutte a laquelle s'appliquent des
r~gles bien precises de droit international concreto
Sans doute, des difficultes de technique juridique
viennent parfois retarder le r~glement de certaines
affaires, mais la communaute internationale se trouve
par bonheur amplement dotee d'instruments qui exeluent la possibilite de laisser impullis lee crimes de
guerre.
47. Dans le cas d'Eichmann, on ne peut pas supposer,
a notre avis, vu la gravite des crimes dont il est
accuse, que la communaute internationale le laissera
aller sans chfttiment. C'ast pourquoi non gouvernement
deplore qu'Israin ait prefere recourir 11 un procede
dont la Republique Argentine s'est trouvee d~s I' shord
offens6e, et qui a, par surcrort, indispos6 les gouvernements et l'opinion de pays qui. ne peuvent que se
sentir strictement solidaires de l'Argentine dans la
lutte qu 'eUe m~ne pour prot~ger ses droits de
souverainete.
48. Je passerai maintenant Ala position de l'Argentine. Quand l'Argentine se plaint de la violation de ses droits de souverainete, sa plainte est si
legitimement fondee, si bien etayee par des arguments
issus des principes imprescriptibles qui r~gissent les
rapports internationaux, qu'elle se passe de tout
commentaire. On pourrait discuter de details de
technique juridique, du degre de responsabilite qui
revient A. IsraiH dans I' affaire, mais on ne peut pas
nier, a notre avis, qu'IsraEH a sa part de responsabilite, A. tout le moins comme complice, et doit par
consequent une reparation adequate au Gouvernement
argentine Si leB motifs affectifs de cet acte peuvent
attenuer en quelque sorte la gravite de l'offense, Hs
ne eauraient en aucun cas la justifier.
49. Plus deplorable encore que le conflit qui oppose
l'Argentine et Isra!!l et qui, nous l'esperons, sera
promptement resolu, est la tMse enoncee par leGouvernement israelien: th~se politique apparemment,
et qui Youdrait qu'il soit legitime de suspendre unilateralement les r~gles du droit international quand
cette suspension se justifie par des considerations
morales definiea par l'Etat m~me qui en decide. C'est
lA. que nOllS sommes en desaccord total avec le Gouvernement israelien: pour noUB, nous croyons sans
r~seI'Te ! la suprematie du droit international et
!ugeons que le respect de la souverainet6 des Etats doit
l'emporter sur toute autre consideration. Pour ma
delegation, les deliMrations du ConseH de securite
doivent ouvrir la yoie au triomphe absolu du droit
dans les relations internationales.
50. Le principe que seul le respect mutuel de leur
souverainete peut garantir la coexistence pacifique

48. If I may now pass on to the position of Argentina,

IlDlui

~de la
latta,et au
domirimes
avis,
les du
3ment
e tels
lsente
de la

mesures necessaires pour que ceux qui sont responsables de ces crimes de guerre, ou qui y ont pris
une part active, soient arr~tes et remenes dans les
pays oil ont ete perpetres leurs forfaits afin d'y ~tre
juges et punis conformement aux lois de ces pays.

47. In the case of Eichmann the gravity ofthe crimes
of which he is accused makes it impossible, in our
view, for the international community to let him escape
the consequences. It is therefore regrettable, in the
opinion of my Government, that Israel should have
preferred a "fait accompli" procedure that offended
Argentina at the outset and has caused resentment
among Governments and peoples of countries which
cannot do other than support Argentina entirely in the
defence of its sovereign rights.

lit: on
lpour
maiset les
I juritrooepoor
[le, du
3te de
mann;

30ient
I, tout
3nt pu
le que
ssasleuple
le, qui
rime,

the arrest of those who committed or condoned war
crimes and for their surrender to the countries where
those crimes were committed so that they may be
tried and punished according to the laws in force there.

"

my delegation believes that Argentina's complaintthat
its sovereign rights have been Yiolated is so solidly
based in law and justified by reasons so deeply rooted
in incontestable principles which govern international
relations that it admits of no argument. There may
be some discussion on legal technicalities with regard
to the degree of Israel's responsibility but it cannot,
we think, be denied that Israel is responsible at least
as an accomplice and should make appropriate reparation to the Argentine GoYernment. The emotional forces
behind Israel's action may extenuate the offence but
can in no way justify it.

49. What is perhaps more regrettable than the dispute
between Argentina and Israel, which we hope will soon
reach a settlement, is the pronouncement by the Government of Israel, presumably as a political doctrine,
that the unilateral suspension of international law is
permissible when justified by moral considerations
to be defined by the State suspending that law. It is
at this point that we are bound to express our profound
disagreement with Israel's position and reaffirm our
conviction with regard to the unqualified observance
of international law and the need for respecting, above
all other considerations, the soyereigaty of States. We
believe that the Security Council must continue to lay
the foundations in its deliberations for the absolute
rule of law in international relations.
50. The axiom that peaceful relations among States
can only be guaranteed on the basis of respect for
9

.-....

-:-~"

each other's sovereignty is more important than ever
in the modern world in which the interdependence of
States has become such a striking phenomenon. Such
in~erdependence brings with it rights and duties which
members of the international community must strictly
observe. It is impossible for States to claim the rights
and protection which they are fortunate enough to enjoy within an organized international community and
at the same time to subject to conditions their own
duty to observe the rights of others.

entre les Etats est d'autant plus important que leur
interdependance est la caracteristique essentielle
du monde moderne. Cette interdependance suppose
l'existence de droits et de devoirs, auxquels les
membres de la communaute internationalE: doivent
strictement se conformer. n est inadmissible que
certains Etats pretendent benoficier des droits et de
la protection' qu'ils ont la chance de se voir offrir par
une communaute internationale organisee, tout en
mettant des conditions au respect qu'ils doivent aux
droits des autres.

51. The United Nations constitutes in fact a supreme
effort to eliminate the use of force in any degree whatsoever in international relations and to guarantee respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States. The United Nations Charter leaves no doubt on
the matter and we have no right to admit any exceptions in regard to observance of the fundamental rights
of States.

51. L'Organisation des Nations Unies concretise
precisement l'effort supr~me qui vise it eliminer
radicalement des relations internationales 1'usage de
la force et it garantir le respect de la Bouverainete
et de l'integrite territoriale des Etats. La Charte
des Nations Unies ne laisse aucun doute A cet egard
et rien ne nous autorise a. admettre qu'il soit fait
en aucun cas exception au respect des droits fondamentaux des Etats.
52. n y a moins d'un mois, l~ Conseil de securite
adoptait une resolution [S/4328] on il proclamait
l'autorite du droit international et faisait appel a. tous
les Etats pour qu'ils s'abstiennent de recourir a. la
force dans leurs relations internationales et respectent
mutuellement leur souverainete, leur integrite territoriale et leui' independance politique.

..

;"

"~

52. Less than a month ago the Security Council adopted
a resolution [S/4328] in which it proclaimed the force
of international law and appealed to all States to refrain
from the use of force in their international relations
and to respect each other's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence.

vo
of
ro
of
le
pa
if

th
th
ti

53. Aujourd'hui precisemeut, un Etat en appelle a.
nous de la violation de ses droits Bouverains. Le
Conseil de securite n'a pas le choix: il doit appliquer
strictement a. ce cas precis sa resolution du 27 mal
1960. Je me permettrai encore d'exprimer l'espoir
que cette decision constituera un precedent et que,
dans l'avenir, quand un Etat Membre demandera au
Conseil de securite de defendre sa souverainete, le
Conseil s'en tiendra strictement a. cette r~gle fondamentale et absolue.
54. M. BERARD (France): n y aura 15 ans le 26 juin
que les membres fondateurs de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, en signant la Charte, affirmaient,
dans le preambule, leur resolution de "preserver les
~n~rations futu,res du fleau de la guerre qui deu.."l: fois
en l'espace d'une vie humaine a inllige III 'humanit6
d'indicibles souffrances".

53. Today we have before us a specific case of a
State complaining of the violation of its sovereign
rights, and the Security Council has no other alternative than to apply strictly its resolution of 27 May tu
this C8,se. I should like in conclusion to voice my
delegation's hope that this may constitute a precedent
and that whenever in future a Member State comes
before the Security Council to defend its sovereignty
the Council will maintain this clear-cut line of fundamental conduct.
54. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
On 26 June fifteen years will have passed since the
founder Members of the United Nations signed the
Charter and affirmed in the preamble their determination "to save succedding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind".
55. The horrors which Europe, in particular, had been
suffering for UTe years were present in the minds of
all. If the name of Eichmann had been mentioned then
in this Assembly, there is no doubt that the attention
of all Member States without exception would have been
directed towards arrangements for bringing him to
trial. Assuredly, amid such a universal feeling of outrage, no retribution would have appeared too swiftfor
him.

55. Les horreurs dont notamment l'Europe venait,
pendant cinq ans, d'@tre le 'llie4tre, restaient presentes h tous les esprits. Si le nom d'Eichmann avg~t
ete alors prononc6 ici, nul doute que l'attention des
Etats Membres ne se ft1t unanimement portee sur les
conditions de sa mise en jugement. Nul doute non plus
que son ch4timent n'eQt ete trouve par aucun assez
prompt. Telle etait alors la rt3Yolte des consciences.

56. From what viewpoint does the Eichmann case,
now before us, merit our attention? Is it mainly a
question of elucidating the circumstances of his capture and of considering the violation of Argentine laws
involved? Must we not show an equal concern for the
reasons which have aroused and continue to arouse
legitimate and univP:~'sal indignation?

56. Sous quel aspect l'affaire Eichmann, dont nous
sommes aUjourd'hui aaisis, merite-t-elle de retenir
le plus notre inter~t? S'agit-il avant tout de tirer au
clair les conditions de sa capture et de juger la violation des lois argentines qui en decoule? Ne devons~
nous pas accorder autant de place aux raisons qui ont
suscite et qui suscitent encore une legitime etuniverselle indignation?

57. The statements we heard yesterday by the representative of Argentina and the Foreign Minister of
Israel, in our opinion, typify the issues involved in
the present debate. With his usual knowledge and
authority, Mr. Amadeo developed the legal argument

57. Les discours que nous avons entendus hier du
representant de 1'Argentine et du Ministre des affaires
~tran~res d'Israelsont caract6ristiques, lnotre avis,
du present debat. Avec la science et l'autorite dont il
est coutumier, M. Amadeo a developpe 1'argumentation
10

59
b

of
ta
)-

n

-~~,:, .

[Ue leur
entielle
suppose
els les
doivent
ble que
ts et de
'rir par
tout en
'ent aux
lcretise
Iiminer
sage de
irainete
Charte
It egard
loit fait
: fonda:ecurite
clamait
Lh tous
~ir a la
pectent
i terriIpelle h
Lns. Le
pliquer
27 mai

,'espoir
et que,
:iera au
Ilete. le
fonda-

26 juin
lon des

naient,
ver les
IIL"t fois
manit6

venalt,
1t pr6-

upon which his Government's case rests. Mrs. Meir
challenged his reasoning on certain points with arguments which merit consideration; then-and this was
the crux of her speech-she described what the name
"Eichmann" means to millions of men who have suffered Nazi persecution throughout the whole of Europe.
On behalf df the living as well as of the dead, s~e
voiced the determination of those men to see the author
of so many crimes brought to judgeIUent. Who, in this
room, was not profoundly moved by the recollection
of those horrors and of the long martyrdom of countless victims, so many of them Jews? Let me say in
passing that my Soviet colleague will not be surprised
if I express disagreement with his condemnation of
the leaders of the Federal Republic of Germany and
the senior German officers serving in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

juridique sur laquelle rt;~ose la th~se de son gouvernement. Mme Meir Gll a conteste, sur certains points, le
bien-fond~ it l'aide d'arguments qui meritent d'~tre
examines; puis - et ce fut la partie principale de son
discours - elle a evoque ce que signifie le nom
d'Eichmann pour des millions d'hommes qui ont eu ~
conn'l.!'tre la persecution nazie 11. travers 1'Europe
enti~re. Au nom des vivants, comme aunomdes morts,
elle a dit la voloute de ces hommes de voir passer en
jugement le responsable de tant de crimes. Qui, dans
cette salle, n'a pas ete emujusqu'aufondde lui-m~me
par le rappel de ces horreurs et du long calvaire de
tant de Yictimes, parmi lesquelles les Juifs figuraient
si nombreux. Mon coll~gue sovietique, soit ditenpassant, ne s'~tonnera pas cependant que je m'inscrive
contre le jugement qu'il a porte sur les dirigeants de
la Republique federale d'Allemagne et les officiers
superieurs allemands participants l1 1'Organisation
du Traite de l'Atlantique nord.

58. France, I would emphasize, fully understands the
reasons which have prompted the ArgeJ;ltine Government's action. The facts concerning the capture of
Eichmann have not been challenged by the Israel Minister of Foreign Affairs. Neither Mrs. Meir nor her
Government nor her Prime Minister have denied that
the actions resulting in the transfer of Eichmann to
Israel might have infringed Argentine law. It was
normal and proper for the Argentine Government to
protest against such actions. Argentina has been concerned to dispel all possible uncertainty about the
firmness with which it intends to uphold its soyereignty. We can but applaud its action for France too is
deeply attached to the principle that the national sovereignty of every State must be respected. Argentina
has also tried to dispel any doubts in the minds of
those who have always considered Argentina as a land
of refuge and asylum and who have appreciated the
generosity with which it has welcomed all those unfortunate exiles who have sought out its hospitable
soil. These are considerations worthy of the closest
attention and my delegation hopes that any anxieties
which the Argentine Government may entertain on
this score may be properly allayed. It has therefore
taken note with satisfactioL of the regrets and apologies conyeyed on several occasions-and repeated yesterday by the Foreign Minister-by the highest Israel
authorities to the Argentine Government.

58. La France, je tiens A le souligner, comprend
parfaitement les motifs qui ont inspire 1'action du
Gouvernement argentine Aussi bien, la realite des
faits qui ont abouti h la capture dIEichmannn'a-t-elle
pas ete cOI:.testee par le Ministre des affaires etrang~
res d'Israel. Ni Mme Meir, ni son geuvernement, ni son
!Jresident n'ont nie que les activites qui ont eu pour
resultat le transfert d'Eichmann en Israel aient pu
porter atteinte aux lois de l'Argentine. 1i. etait normal,
il etait bon que le Gouvernement argt.mtin protest~t
contre de tels agisserneuts. L'Argent ine a rnanifeste
le souci que ne St~bsiste aucune in certitude sur la
fermete avec laquelle elIe entend hire respecter sa
souverainete. Nous ne pouvons que i. 'approuver, car la
France. elle aussi, est profondement attachee au
respect de la souverainete nationale de chaque Etat.
L'Argentine n'a pas voulu, non plus, qu'un doute
penetrlit l'esprit de ceux qui, de tout temps, 1'ont
consideree comme une terre d'asil~ et de refuge et
qui ont apprecie la generosite avec laquelle ella a
accueilIi tous les exiles, tous les malheureux qui recherchaient soo sol hospitalier. Ce sont If! des considerations dignes de la plus vigilante attention et ma
delegation souhaite que puissent ~tre legitimement
apaisees les inquietudes que le Gouvernement argentfn
a pu ressentir fl cet egard. Aussi a-t-elle pris note
avec satisfactio~ des regrets et des excuses qu'lI.
plusieurs reprises et hier de nouveaupar labooche de
leur Ministre des ar.faires etrang~res. les plus hautes
autorites israaliennes ont exprimes au Gouvernement
argentine

59. But the case before us cannot be circumscribed
by legal argumentation. Mr. Amadeo has himself
yoiced the disgust of the Argentine Government and
people at the crimes of which Adolf Eichmannis guilty. In countries which, like my own, have had to suffer
the atrocities of such an individual, the indignation is
incomparably greater as is the demand that his activities be rapidly and fully disclosed as well as judged
in all fairness. The NUrnberg archives and all the
data in our possession are unanimous in portraying
Eichmann as one of the principal agents of the Nazi
extermination policy. Many of my compatriots are
among his Yictims. Far from being merely the tool
of his superiors, Eichmann accomplished his hOl"rible
task with a zeal and an ardour which seem to leave
no doubt about his responsibility.

59. Mais l'affaire dont nolts deliberons ne peut se
limiter 11. une argun:.:::~!:ationjuridique. M. Amadeo a dit
lui-mame la r~p4obat1on du peupleetdugouvernement
argentins pour les crimes dont Adolf Eichmann s'eat
rendu coupable. L'indignation est incomparablement
plus Yive encore dans des pays qui, comme le mien, ont
eu h souffrir des atrocites d'un tel personnage, et
incomparablement plus pressante la demande que,
sans dalai, toute la lumi~re soit faite sur ses activites
et que jugement sott porte sur elIes en toute 6qutte. Les
archives de Nuremberg et tOllS les renseignements en
notre possession s'accordent pour faire apparaftre
Eichmann comme 1'un des principaux agents de la
politique nazie d'extermination. Beaucoup de mes
compatriotes comptent parmi ces victimes. Bien loin
d'~tre sculement l'instrument docile de ses chefs,
Eichmann a accompli son horrible besogne &vec un
zMe et une ardeur qui ne paraissent laisser aUCilll
doute sur sa responsabilite.

D. aYe.~t

lon des
Bur les
on plus
assez
lences.

1t noUB
retenir
Lrer au
la vio-

,evons~

qui ont
miver-

lier du
ffaires

~eav1s,

>

dont 11
ntation
11

-

I
60. 11 a ~t~ rappel~ dans cetteenceintequemon pays,
avec plusieurs autres, avait demande qu'il lui soit
liYre. Pendant 15 ans, il fut recherche par tout~s les
polices. Pendant 15 ans, il re1Jssit ~ loor echapper.
Comment ceux qui sont parvenus l le d~couvrir
n'auraient-ils pas eprouv~ la crainte qu'~ la moindrEi
alerte cet homme ne disparQt l nouveau?
61. 11 ne s'agit pas, pour la France, de marquer sa
solidarite avec telle ou telle puissance. Aux deux
parties ~ ce dabat, mon pays eat lie de longue date
par une amitie qui lui est egalement cMre. Il s'agit
ici de la reaction de la conscience franQaise qui est,
je crois, en cette mati~re, un reflet de la conscience
universelle.
62. C'est souvent Il la suite de l'examen du fond de
l'affaire qui lui est soumise et 1l1'issuede ses d~bats
que le C, ~"lil de securite est ~ m~me de mesurer
l'uti1it~ et ie senS de son intervention, l'opportunite
de son action. Nous avons, d~s la requ~te exprimee
par l'Argentine, eprouve de s~rieuse8 hesitations
quant Il l'opportunite d'abord, ~ la possibilite ensuite,
pour le Conseil, d'intervenir dans le moment present.

60. It has been recalled in this Council that my country, together with several others, had requested his
extradition. For fifteen years he was hunted by all
police forces. For fifteen years, he succeeded in escaping them. How could those who finally discovered
, n avoid the fear that at the slightest a.larm he might
n"t disappear again?
61. For France it is not a question of siding with one
Power or another. With the two parties to this dispute
my country has long been bound by tics of friendship
which are equlll!~, dear to us. The real issue is the
reaction of ,he French conscience which, I believe, in
this matter reflects the conscience of the world.
62. Often, when it has considered the substance of

a case and concluded its discussions the Security
Council can gauge the usefulness and import as well
as the appropriateness of any action it might take. As
soon as Argentina brought up this question, we had
serious doubts whether the Council could or should
intervene at the present stage.

made yeflterd
the Security C
has been viola
67. I should II
tion with reg
representative
ment yesterda
tones that mi
calm in which
between natio
68. There c

of the sovere
prompted by t
ment a man w
cious crimes

69. I need
Tunisia, which
hood of peopl
resisted rads
Only some
clearly expres
disastrous eff
communities
people did not
ence and the e
State to dem
racial oppres
1940 to 1942
power to save
low Tuni.sians
tion which was

63. Tout en rendamt hommage 1l la comp~tence si
grande en mati~re juridique de notre coll~gue argentin,
je dirai que ce sentiment ressenti par nous a ete
renforc~ par la conviction qu'il n'existe pas actuellement a. proprement parler une menace ilIa paix ou
1l la securite internationales, condition n~cessaire,allx
termes du Chapitre VI de la Charte, a. pareille intervention. Si fondes que soient les griefs de l'Argentine,
nous ne pouvons cependant oublier qu'll s'agit en
1'esp~ce d'un criminel de guerre coupable de genocide.
QueUe que soit enfin 1'0pinion, sur ce point, du
representant de 1'Argentine , noUB ne pensons pas
qu'aient ete epuises toutes les possibilit~s de negociations amiables, ni tous les moyens de r~glement
pacifique que I'Article 33 de la Charte recommande
aux parties avant de saisir le Conseil.
84. M. Amadeo nous a expose les efforts deployes
sur ce terrain par son gouvernement et nous a dit
leur echec. S'agissant d'une affaire si delicate,
comment nous etonner qu'en un laps et;,) temps relativement si bref une solution n'ait pas encore pu
~tre trouvee? La paix, l'harmonie entre les nations
demandent d'inlassables et persev~rants efforts.

63. While paying a tribute to the outstanding legal
skill of our Argentine colleague, I may say that our
view has been strengthened by the conviction that there
does not, strictly speaking, now exist a threatto peace
or international security which, under the terms of
Chapter VI of the Charter, is a necessary condition
for such intervention. However valid Argentina's
grievances may be, we cannot forget that we are dealing with a war criminal guilty of genocide. Whatever
the Argentine representative's opinion on that point,
we do not feel that all the possibilities of friendly
negotiation or all the means of peaceful settlement
recommended to the parties by Article 33 of the
Charter before they consult the Council have been
exhausted.
64. Mr. Amadeo has described to us his Government's
efforts in this respect and has told UB that they have
failed. This being so delicate a matter, how can we
be surprised that in such a relatively short time a
solution has not yet been found? Peace and harmony
between nations require tireless and persevering efforts.
65. This brings me back to my earlier remarks. The
case cannot be viewed either from a strictly legal or
a strictly ethical viewpoint but these two vital considerations must be given equal weight. Given the aincere desire expressed here by both parties to find a
solution which may dispel the shadow which this case
has thrown upon their friendship, we have no doubt
that a settlement can be found in the spirit of understanding and I;oodwill which inspires both Governments. Without this spirit, we do not think that the
adoption of a resolution can tring about the desired
result. Even if we were at peace with the law, would
we really be at peace with our own consciences? Even
with the mos~ scrupulously prepared text, would we
'Je certain vI apI'U'ing worthy of the world of peace,
justice, freed(,.n and reconciliation for which millions
of men, women and children died at the hand of Adolf
Eichmann?

65. Me voici revenu aux considerations que j'ai
exprimees plus haut. Cette affaire ne saurait ~tre
placee ni sur un plan strictement juridique, ni sur
un plan strictement moral. Une conciliation doit ~tre
trouvee entre ces deux preoccupations, entre ces
deux imperatifs. En presence du desir sincllre qu'ont
exprime ici-m~me l'une et l'autre partie de trouver
une solution qui puisse dissiper 1'0mbre que cette
affaire a jetee sur leur amitie, noUB ne doutons pas
qu'un rllglement ne puisse Mre trouve dans l'esprit
de comprehension et avec la volonte d'aboutir qui
animent les deux gouvernements. Sans cet esprit,
nous ne pensons pas que l'adoption d'une resolution
puisse apporter la solution soubalt6e. Meme si nous
etions en paix avec le droit, sarions-nous vraiment
en paix avec notre conscience? Aurions-nous, par le
texte le plus soigneusement prepare, la certitude
de nOllS montrer dignes du monde de paix, de justice,
de liberte, de reconciliation pour lequel sont morts
ces millions d'hommes, de femmes et d'enfants quIa
fait disparaftre Adolf Eichmann?
66. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Nous avons sutvi avec toute
l'attention necessaire les exposes qui ont ete faits

66. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French~: We
followed with the greatest attention the statements
12

70. Ii follows
Eichmann sho
for his crime
done in accor
cedures. The
appositely dr
sentative of th
conviction on t

71. We are g
the delegation
in bringing th
no way be inte
of which Eic

72. But that i
to the Council,
rights of the ,
illicit and clan
Argentine ter]
Israel, contr81
the Purposes
United Nations

)

73. The doe
to the presen
violation by Is
tine Republic.
fact. But Isra
demanded by
makes it inc
equivocal pos
sovereignty•

74. Tunisia's
of sovereign

I

)

i

l

made yeflterd.y concernim~ \-He . (nAp .ult lald before
the Security Council by ArC.-!:·lth~ ~h\l.t its sovereignty
has been violated by Israel.

hier au sUjet de la plainte pour nolation de sa souveralnete par Israel dont l'Argentine a salsi le Conseil.

67. I should like to state briefly my delegation's position with regard to the question before us, which the
representative of Argentina in his introductory statement yesterday presented without any emotional overtones that might have disturbed the atmosphere of
calm in which the Council should consider all disputes
between nations that are brought before it.

67. Je voudrais preciser bri~vement la position de
ma dEilegation ~ l'~gard de la question qui nous est
soum1se et que le representant .de l'Argentine, dans
son expose introductif d'hier, a degagee de tout ele..
ment affectif qui risquait de troubler la serenite aTec
laquelle le Consell doit se pencher sur tous les differends entre nations qui lui sont soumis.

68. There can be no question that Israel's violation
of the sovereignty of the Argentine Republic was
prompted by the legitimate desire to bring to punishment a man who has committed one of the most atrocious crimes against humauity.

68. Il 8st ideniable que la violation par Israin de la
souverainet~ de la ~publique Argentine prend sa
source daI'..B le desir legitime de voir cMtier un
homme qui a commis un des crimes les plus abominables contre 1'humanite.

69. I need hardl! point out on this occasion that
Tunisia, which wholeheartedly believes in the brotherhood of peoples and the dignity of man, has always
resisted radsm wherever and however it has appeared.
Only some two months ago, in this very room, we
clearly expressed our opposition to all racism andits
disastrous effects on relations between individuals,
communities and nations. What is more, the Tunisian
people did not awalt the restoration of their independence and the exercise of the powers of an independent
State to demonstrate their deep-seated hostility to
racial oppression in all its forms. During the years
1940 to 1942 our people uaed every means in their
power to save all Jews living in Tunisia-whetherfellow Tunisians or foreigners-from the Nazi persecution which was threatening them in our country.

69. Devral-je rappeler II cette occasion que la
Tunisie, profondement attachee ~ la fraternite des
peuples et l la dignite des hommes, a toujours
combattu le racisme sous quelque forme et quelque
couleur qu'll se presente? n y a seulement deux
mois enmon nous avons, ici m~me, exprime nettement notre position contre tout racisme et ses
effets desastreux sur les rapports entre individus,
collectivites ou nations. Bien plus, le peuple tunisien
n'a pas attendu de recouvrer son independance et
d'exercer les pouvoirs qui sly attachent pour manifester son aversion profonde l l'egard de toute
repression 1 caract~re l'aciste. Dans les annees 1940
l 1942, notre peuple s'est evertue, par tous les
moyens ~ sa disposition, ft. soustraire ll. la repression
nazie qui essayalt de les poursuivre dans notre pays
tous lee Juifs - compatriotes ou etrange~s - vivant
en Tunisie.

70. If follows that we are firmly convinced that Adolf
Eichmann should receive just and lawful punishment
for his crimes against humanity, but that it should be
done in accordance with the normal and proper procedures. The quotations to which our attention was
appositely drawn at the last meeting by the representative of the Soviet Union merely strengthened our
conviction on the subject.

70. C'est dire avec quelle conviction nous estimons
qu'Adolf Eich:ro.ann doit recevoir un juste et legitim,e
ch!timent, mals dans lea formes reguli~rement admises, pour les forfalts qu'il a commis contre
l'humanite. Les citations pertinentes que le representant de 1'Union sovietique a si judicieusement
faites ~ ce propos ~ la derni~re seance ne font que
renforcer notre conviction A ce sujet.

71. We are glad to note that in its draft resolution
the delegation of Argentina clearly states that its action
in bringing the matter before the Council -should in
no way be interpreted as condoning the odious crimes
of which Eichmann is accused-.

71. Il nOllS plaft d'ail1eurs de constater que, daDs
Bon proje'l; d 'esolution, la delegation de l'Argentine
a tenu ~ sO"~
,,:r nettement que son action devant
le Conseil ne ";"ait ~tre "enaucunefa90ninterpr~tee
comma tendam. ft. excuser les crimes adieux dont
Eichmann est accuse".

72. But that is not at issue in the question submitted
to the Council, w~ch is -the violation of the sovereign
rights of the Argentine Republic resulting from the
illicit and clandestine transfer of Adolf Eichmann from
Argentine territory to the territory of the State of
Israel, contrary to the rules of international law and
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations" [S/4336].

72. Mals il ne s'agit nullement de cela dans la
question dont le Conseil est salsi. n s 'agit -de la
violation des droits de souverainete de la Republique
Argentine par le· transfert illicite et clandestin
d'Adolf Eichmann du territoire argentin en territoire
d'IsraiH, au mepris des r~gles du droit international
et des buts et principep de la Charte des Natio~.B
Unies" [S/4336].

73. The documents submitted by both parties relating
to the present difference show that there has been a
violation by Israel of the sovereign rights of the Argentine Republic. The Israel case frankly recognizes that
fact. But Israel's refusal to agree to the reparation
demanded by Argentina in accordance with precerlent
makes it incumbent on the Council to take an unequivocal position with regard to such a violation of
sovereignty.

73. n r6sulte def,'l documents qut! les deux parties
en cause ont presentee au Conoell qu'll y a eu violation
des droits de souverainet6 de la R6publlque Argentine
de la part d'Isra8l. La th~se israelienne le reconnaft
d'ailleurs indeniablement. Mals le refus d'Isra!1 de
consentir ll. la reparation reclamee par l'Argentine,
conformement aux precedents en la mati~re, fait
obligation au Conseil de se prononcer Bans ambiguftll
sur une te11e violation de souverainete.

74. Tunisia's consistent opposition to any violation
of sovereignty, whatever its reason, has been re-

74. La Tunisie s'est invariablement elevee contre
toote violation de souverainet~. quel que soit le motif
13

.
"

:,;"1

,

..

-,

peatedly affirmed in this very room before the Security
Council.

qui 1'ait provoquee; cette position a 6t6 Do maintes
reprises affirmee iei meme devant le Conseil de
securite.

,75. In the case which is now before us, we view with
particular concern the argument that is being used to
explain anri justify that violation, even though with
regret.

75. Ce qui nous paraft grave dans le cas que nous
examinons actuellement, crest la th~se meme selon
laquelle on semble vouloir motiver cette violation et
la consacrer - en exprimant certes des regrets.

76. It may be pertinent to recall that Eichmann's
odious crimes were committed in Germany, Poland
and in other European countries at a time when Israel
had not come into existence. But this criminal is captured and clandestinely removed from Argentina to
Israel in order that his well-deserved punishment may
be inflicted on him there!

76. n serait peut-@tre utile de rappeler que lea
crimes adieux commis par Eichmann 1'ont ete en
Allemagne, en Pologne et dans d'autres territoires
europeens ! une epoque oil Isra~l n'existait meme
pas encore. Or ce criminel est capture et transfere
clandestinement Od'Argentine en Israel pour y recevoir
le cMtiment merite!

77. When the understandable emotional and dramatic
elements are put aSide, Israel's argument is thus seen
to involve a disquieting conception of the extension of
the exercise of sovereignty both in space and in time.

77. Ainsi degagee des elements aIfectifs et passionnels, aisement comprehensibles t!'ailleurs, la th~se
israelienne apparaft comme relevl ntclairementd'une
conception troublante d'extension de 1'exercice de la
souverainete tant dans l'espace que dans le temps.

78. In our view such a conception, which is justified
by racial solidarity or the desire to obtain the legitimate reparation due to the families of the unhappy
victims of heinous crimes and disregards the ways
and means normally available under international law ,
bears in itself the seeds of discord and conflict in
international relations. It must be recognized that such
a notion could have serious consequences that cannot
be foreseen at the present time. The precedent created
by this case may become a source of serious difficulties in relations between nations. It cannot be denied
that the violation of sovereignty with which the present
debate is concerned creates an atmosphere of insecurity and mistrust that is inconsistent with the preservation of international peace.

78. Se prevalant de la solidarite raciale ou de la
legitime reparation due aux parents des malheureuses
Tictimes de crimes adieux, et evitant les voies et
moyens normalement admis par le droit des gens,
une telle conc£_,ptfon, ! "lwtre avis, porteenelle-meme
les germes de discorties et de confUts dans lea
relations internatirJnales. On est oblige de reconnaftre
qu'une telle notion peut avoir des consequences graves,
et certainement imprevisibles ! 1'heure actuelle et
que ce precedent peut devenir une source de troubles
serieux dans les relations entre nations. On ne peut
nier que la violation de souverainct6, objet dupresent
debat, crea un climat d'insecurite et de mefiance
incompatible avec la preservation de la paix internationale.

79. These are the observations which we wi~~ed to
make, in all objectivity, conscious of our responsibilities in the Security Council, in order to define our
position with regard to the Argentine complaint.

79. Telles sont les observations que, conscients de
nos responsabilites au sein du Conseil de securite,
nous avons toou ! faire, en toote objectivite, pour
definir notre position au sujet de la plainte de
I'Argentine.

80. The delegation of Argentina has submitted a
moderate draft resolution which we think might. having
rega.~d to all the circumstances, provide a fitting conclusiln to the debate. My delegation will vote in its
favour.

80. La d616gation de la R6publlque Argentine a
presente un projet de resolution modere qui nous
paraft, compte tenu. des eirconstances actuelles,
pouvoir eonclure nos depats. Ma delegation votera
en sa faveur.

81. The United States of America submitted two
amerldments to the draft resolution. The delegation of
Tunisia will wholeheartedly and unreservedly support
the first of those amendments. It will, however, while
recognizing the praiseworthy motive which inspired
its sponsor, be regretfully unable to vote in favour
of the second in its present form and reserves its
position in that connexion.

81. La delegation des Etats-Unis d'Am~rique a
presente deux amendements ! ce projet. La delegation
tunisienne approove totalement et sans resene le
premier de ces amendements. Mais tout en reeonnaissant les motifs louables qui ont inspire la presentation desdits amendements, ma delegation regrette de
ne poovoir voter en faveur du second, dans sa forme
actuelle, et elle tient Do exprimer des resenes II son
sUjet.
La s~ance est le~

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

a 12 b 40.

14
Litho In U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or eqUivalent 1n other currencies)

25401-Decilmber 1960-1,675
