Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

appropriate efforts to co-operate in accelerating the
economic development of the developing an:d underdeveloped countries,
Considering that a faster ra~e of economic growt~ is
in the interest of all countries and that the Umted
Nations together with other international bodies,. as
appropriate, should provide ways and mean~ o~ findm_g
and furthering effective solutions for achievmg this
purpose,
1. Urges the economically developed _Member States
to take into due account, when formulatmg and executing the.ir trade and economic policies, th~ interests. of
the developing and under-develope? _countries by mak~ng
maximum efforts to create condit10ns through which
they extend to these co~mtri~s adv,_mtages not . necessarily requiring full reciprocity to improve their economic situation, and to pursue as a m~tter of gr~at
urgency bilateral, multilateral an_d/or regio~a! negotiations-including where appropriate, negotiations conducted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade-to facilitate the necessary expansion of their
trade and to attain a satisfactory co-ordination of efforts
in the field of trade towards economic development;
2. Calls upon States Members of the United Natjons
and members of the specialized agencies, an1 especially
upon the more highly indus_trialized co~mtries and the
developed countries belongmg to regional and subregional economic groupings :
(a) To promote, through individual or_ collective
measures, the expansion of world trade, ~articular!); by
avoiding undue protection of their domestic production;
( b) To avoid measures detrimental to the prospe~ts
of international commodity trade for producers outside
their own countries or regions ;
( c) To make every effort to liberalize th~ re~tr!ctive
or discriminatory practices that unneces~a_rily hm1t_ the
consumption and importation of ~ommod1t1es, ~specially
those which have undergone rriaximum processmg, from
the under-developed and developing countries;
( d) To pursue policies which woul~ promote t~e
industrialization of the developing countries and to avoid
practices such as dumping and the unrestri_cted disposal
of accumulated stocks that may hamper this process;
3. Recommends that the Governments of Member
States, in recognition of the profound concern of normal
commercial exporters, pursue policies designed to avoid
the harmful effects on international markets that may
result from the disposal of surpluses and, to th~s end,
strictly adhere to the principles of surplus disposal
recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ;
4. Commends the efforts made by the International
Monetary Fund to increase its activities with regard to
drawings and standby arrangements in helping the less
developed countries to meet seasonal and cyclical maladjustments arising from fluctuations in their expo:t
earnings, and expresses the hope that such efforts will
continue;
5. Notes 'U!ith satisfaction that the Commission on
International Commodity Trade, at its tenth session,
and, at their joint session, the Commiss~on on International Commodity Trade and the Committee on Commodity Problems of the Food and Agriculture _Organization will consider ways and means of solving the
problems created by fluctuations in the commodity
export earnings of the developing and under-developed

15

countries and urges the above organs to formulate at
these se;sions specific recommendations in this connexion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Governments of States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencie? and as~ertain ~heir
views on the advisability of holdmg an mtern~tlonal
conference on international trade problems relatmg especially to primary commodity markets. and, if t_hey
deem such a conference advisable, the topics that might
be considered for a provisional agenda ;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, on t~e
basis of these consultations, to report to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session and to
the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1708 (XVI). Planning for economic development
The General Assembly,
Convinced of the urgent need of the less developed
countries to establish and implement national, all-inclusive and well-integrated development plans to build
up their societies in accordance with their own individual precepts,
Realizing that to this end it is necessary to advance
further the development of planning techniques that can
be adjusted to the specific needs and problems of various
countries,
Taking into consideration the growing trend towards
the use of different forms of planning in the economic
policies of developing countries,
Realizing further that it is imperative that economists,
other social scientists and administrators, within and
outside government service, be trained without delay
in techniques and problems relating to planning so as
to permit not only the elaboration of plans but also
their execution,
Bearing in mind the initiatives already demonstrated
in this connexion, namely that:
(a) Some African States expressed their views in
the course of the resumed fifteenth session of the General Assembly in favour of the establishment, under the
auspices of the Economic Commission for Africa ar:d
with the assistance of the Special Fund, of an economic
development institute for Africa for the pu:J>Ose of
training suitable persons in the field of economic deve_lopment, in particular in the techniques of economic
planning and programming, 7
( b) The Economic Commission for Latin America,
in its resolution 199 (IX) of 13 May 1961, requested
the establishment, under its auspices, of an institute for
planning economic development which would provide
advisory services to Governments and engage in training,8
( c) The Conference of Asian Economic Planners,
held in New Delhi from 26 September to 3 October
1961 under the auspices of the Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East, recommended to the Commission that it consider the establishment of an Asian
institute of economic development to overcome the
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 88, document A/4?47, para. ~.
• See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/3486), part III.

16

General Assembly

serious shortage of trained personnel for the formulation and implementation of economic development plans, 9
Considering that each institute should establish a
programme of training fully adjusted to the needs of
the countries in each region,
Reca_llin[? that the Managing Director of the Special
Fund, m his statement to the Governing Council of the
Fund on 23 May 1961, 10 announced that on the initiative of regional economic commissions several Governments in Latin America had made requests for that
type of project and that similar requests were expected
{rom Africa,
Noting that the Under-Secretary for Economic and
Social Affairs declared on 5 October 1961 that the
increased participation of the regional economic commissi~ns in technical assistance programmes and the
estabhs?me_nt ~nder their auspices of economic programmmg mstitutes, where Governments will find both
advisory services and training facilities for the staff of
their economic departments, will provide Governments
with new facilities on the regional level to which they
attach so much importance, 11
'
Recalling its resolution 1517 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 777
(XXX) of 3 August 1960 and 830 H (XXXII) of 2
August 1961,

I
l. I 1?-vites the Governments concerned, acting as
appropriate through the regional economic commissions
or their appropriate subordinate bodies to be established
for this purpose, to submit requests to the Special Fund
for assistance needed for the establishment of economic
d_evelopment and pla~ning i~stitutes which will be closely
lmked to the respective reg10nal economic commissions
with a view, inter alia, to giving prospective trainees
the_ b_enefits not only o_f theoretical but also of practical
tran?-mg and an acquamtance with the important work
earned out by the secretariats of the regional economic
commissions in their regions ;
2. Invites also the Economic and Social Council at
its resumed thirty-second session to recommend that the
Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East consider this matter at
their forthcoming annual meetings and that the Econo~ic _Comm!ssion _fo_r Europe consider the expansion
of 1t~ m-serv1ce trammg programme to include a substantial number of fellows from less developed regions;
. 3. Expresses the hope that the Special Fund will
give prnmpt and sympathetic consideration to the establishment of the institutes referred to above;
_4. _Expresses the hope also that the Special Fund
will give prompt and sympathetic consideration to the
establishment of similar institutes which may be proposed by a group of Member States that are not members of any regional economic commission, such institut~s to be open to participation by developing countries
which are at present members of regional economic
commissions ;

II
Requests the Secretary-General to establish an Economic Projections and Programming Centre with sub• E/CN.11/571, para. 53.

"'SF/L.51.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session
Second Committee, 717th meeting.
'
11

Sixteenth Session

centres, as appropriate, in the regional economic commissions or institutes of economic development and
planning:
_(a) To intensify the activities already initiated in
this field and to prepare, as soon as practicable, in cooperation with the international agencies concerned
long-term projections of world economic trends in orde;
to facilitate the formulation of national economic plans;
( b) To provide studies of planning techniques under
various economic and social systems which would be
helpful to national and regional institutes of economic
development and planning;
III

l. I nvitcs the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of a group of experts composed with due regard to their
f~miliarity with various planning techniques under
different economic systems and in co-operation with the
appropriate institutions of different countries, to prepare
a study summarizing the experience gained and the
techniques in use in the planning of economic development by different countries, and at the same time expresses the hope that the Governments of Member
States will help to carry out that study;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine the study at its thirty-sixth session and to
~ubmit to the General Assembly at its eighteenth session
its recommendations concerning the utilization of experience of economic planning in the interests of developing countries;
3. ?urther invites the Secretary-General to prepare
a special chapter on questions of economic development
planning in one of the forthcoming issues of the World
Economic Survey.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1709 (XVI). Decentralization of the economic
and social activities of the United Nations
and strengthening of the regional economic
commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1518 (XV) of 15 December
1960 on decentralization of the United Nations econo~ic and social activities and strengthening of the
reg10nal economic commissions,
Noting the recommendations on economic and social
ac_tivities contained in part V of the report of the Committee _of Experts appointed under General Assembly
resolut10n 1446 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 to review
the activities and organization of the Secretariat12 and
the Secretary-General's comments thereon 13
'
~- N ates with appreciation the Secretary-General's
action 31nd_ proposed arrangements with regard to decentrah~ahon an_d !O the strengthening of the regional
economic comm1ss10ns, as stated in his report to the
General Assembly ;14
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 823 (~XXII) ot 20 July 1961 and the emphasis
placed therem on the important functions to be fulfilled
"'Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 61 document
A/4776.
'
18
Ibid., document A/4794.
"Ibid., agenda items 12, 28, '29 and 30, document A/4911.
