1005th

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

Friday, 25 A.ugu~t 1961,
at 3 p~m.

Official Records
THIRD SPECIAL SESSION

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 3:
Appointment of the Credentials Committee (concluded)
Report of the Credentials Committee .......... . 113
Agenda item 7:
Consideration of the grave situation in Tunisia obtaining since 19 July 1961 (co1ttinued) ............. . 118

President: Mr. Frederick H. BOLAND (Ireland).

AGENDA ITEM 3

Appointment of the Credentials Committee
(concluded)
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS CoMMITTEE

(A/4854)

1. The PRESIDENT: A number of delegations have
asked to explain their vote on the report [A/4854] of
the Credentials Committee prior to voting. Therefore, I
now call on those delegations.
2. Mr. DIALLO Telli (Guinea) (translated from
French) : The delegation of the Republic of Guinea believes it should give a brief explanation of the way in
which it will shortly vote on the report of the Credentials
Committee [A/4854].
3. As regards the representation of China, we wish to
reaffirm our Government's position, namely, that the
interests of our Organization even more than those
of the Chinese people demand that justice be done to this
people and to the Organization by restoring without
delay to the sole representative of the people and the
Government of the People's Republic of China the rightful seat to which he is entitled in the various organs of
the United Nations.
4. On the question of the representation of Hungary,
the Government of the Republic of Guinea thinks it extremely dangerous for the United Nations to proceed
from subjective considerations in denying the legitimacy
of the Government represented here. If such a method
were to become the rule, how many delegations could ·
legitimately sit in the United Nations without dispute?
We would ask all representatives to reflect on this grave
question.
5. The Government of the Republic of Guinea also
earnestly desires a prompt settlement of the Laos situation and hopes that soon, very soon, a neutralist government will, with the approval of all the people of Laos,
control the destiny of that country and will without
delay accredit a delegation to the United Nations so that
it may come here to swell the growing body of States
which practise a genuine policy of non-alignment.
6. The Government of the Republic of Guinea wishes,
in conclusion, to express its satisfaction at the fact that
113

New York

the new Congolese Government, the •successor to the
legal Government of Patrice Lumumba, clearly expressed
in the statement it made before the Parliament upon
taking office its willingness and its determination to
conduct a policy of non-alignment. This policy was
unanimously approved by both Chambers of the Congolese Parliament, which thus 'sanctioned one of the
major objectives of the struggle which the Government
and its numerous friends have been ceaselessly waging
in the Congo and elsewher~ in the interests of the African
peoples and of W()rld peace.
7. Subject to these reservations, the delegation of the
Republic of Guinea will vote in favour of the report of
the Credentials Committee.
8. U TRANT (Burma): My delegation wishes to put
on record that the Government of the Union of. Burma
recognizes only the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China. Therefore, my delegation
holds that the credentials of the present representatives
of China are not valid.
9. The Government of the Union of Burma has also
recognized the Government of Hungary, and therefore
we hold that the credentials of the present representatives
of Hungary are quite in order.
10. With these two reservations, we will vote for the
adoption of the report [A/4854] of the Credentials
Committee.
11. Mr. LAPIAN (Indonesia): The Indonesian delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee, with the following reservations.
12. The Government of the Republic of Indonesia
recognizes the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China as the only legitimate Government of China. Therefore, we can only accept credentials which are issued by the authorities in Peiping.
Credentials issued for the representatives of China by
authorities other than these are not valid and, therefore,
are not acceptable to the Indonesian delegation.
13. As regards the credentials submitted for the representative of Hungary, the Indonesian delegation considers them fully in order and that they should be accepted by all Members of the Assembly.
14. Our approval of the report [A/4854] of the Credentials Committee should therefore not be interpreted
as a modification of the Indonesian position on the question of the representation of China and Hungary.
15. Mr. TABIBJ (Afghanistan): The delegation of
Afghanistan also supports the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee, but wishes to
make the following reservations.
16. The Government of Afghanistan recognizes as the
only legitimate Government of China the Central
People's Government of the People's Republic of China,
with which it has not only diplomatic relations but a comA/PV.1005

114

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

mon border. We also recognize the credentials of the
present Government of the Hungarian People's Republic
with which we have friendly and cordial relations. I
wi,shed to make those two reservations for the record.
17. Mrs; MIRONOVA (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : With reference
to the vote on the report of the Credentials Committee,
the USSR delegation deems it necessary to make the
following statement.
18. Although in the Credentials Committee we did not
oppose the adoption of its report, we stated there, and
feel it necessary to stress once again, ·that that by no
means signifies that we are in agreement with all the
Committee's conclusions.
19. In the first place, we cannot accept a situation in
which the seat of great China is still occupied not by its
lawful representatives-the representatives of the
People's Republic of China-but by private individuals
who represent absolutely nobody.
20. >It is common knowledge that full responsibility for
this abnormal and inadmissible situation rests with the
United States, which is compelling its allies and other
countries dependent upon it to follow its example and
is trying to impose its will upon the United Nations.
21. The illegal exclusion of the People',s Republic of
China from participation in the work of the United
Nations is highly detrimental to the latter and greatly
hampers the solution of international problems, the
settlement of which is of crucial importance for international peace and security.
22. The legitimate rights of the People's Republic of
China in the United Nations must be restored to it at
long last. We think that the first step in that direction
could be the rejection of the credentials of the group
of persons who call themselves "the representatives of
the Republic of China".
23. Furthermore, the Soviet delegation objects strongly
to the nnworthy attempt by the United States delegation to call in question the credentials of the delegation
of the Hungarian People's Republic. Needless to say,
the adoption of this wholly unfounded proposal by the
General Assembly can do nothing but harm to the United
Nations itself. It is inadmissible that the United States
for its own selfish ends should use the United Nations
to bring pressure to bear on sovereign States Members
of the United Nations.
24. The USSR delegation also deems it necessary to
state that the group of persons claiming to speak for Laos
at the third special session of the United Nations General
Assembly in fact represent rebels who have risen against
the legitimate Government of that State.
25. The Soviet Union, together with many other States,
considers that the only lawful representatives of Laos
in the United Nations can be a representative of the
Laotian Government headed by Prince Souvanna
Phouma.
26. Mr. CAIMEROM MEASKETH (Cambodia)
(translated from French) : In announcing that it will
vote for the report of the Credentials Committee [A/
4854], my delegation wishes to express the following
reservation.
27. The Royal Government of Cambodia maintains
diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China
and recognizes the Central People's Government of the
People',s Republic of China as the only Government
capable of legally representing the ·Chinese people.

28. Mr. MALALASEKERA (Ceylon) : The delegation of Ceylon supports the report [A/4854] of the
Credentials Committee, subject, as on previous occasions,
to the following two reservations.
29. The first reservation relates to the representation
of China in the Assembly. The Government of Ceylon
recognizes the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China as the only legitimate Government of China. We therefore consider that the only
representatives of China entitled to representation in the
United Nations are the representatives of the Central
People's Government of the People's Republic of China.
30. Our second reservation with regard to the Credentials Committee's report relates to the representation .
of Hungary in the United Nations. My delegation considers that Hungary, with which Ceylon has diplomatic
relations, is properly represented in the United Nations.
31. With those two reservations, my delegation supports the report of the Credentials Committee.
32. Mr. CERNIK (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic)
(translated from Russian) : The Czechoslovak delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution [A/4854] submitted to the General Alssembly by the Credentials
Committee.
3~. The Czechoslovak delegation nevertheless has
serious reservations concerning the Committee's report.
In the first place, it most emphatically objects to the
Committee's decision to accept the credentials of a follower of Chiang Kai-<shek who represents no one but
himself and who is here solely- because of the strenuous
efforts made by the United States Government. The
wholly untenable character of this situation is becoming
increasingly obvious, and we are certain that the time is
not far off when the Chinese representative's seat will be
occupied by the lawful representative of the People's
Republic of China. The credentials issued by the Government of the People's Republic of China are the only
valid credentials. It is high time to give serious thought
to the fact that, without the active participation of the
People's Republic of China, no solutions can be expected
t() the most urgent and important international problems
of concern not only to Asia and the Far East but also
to the world as a whole. The policy of discrimination .
towards the People's Republic of China which is being
imposed upon the United Nations by the United States
with a stubbornness worthy of a better cause is hurting
to the United Nations rather than the People's Republic
of China and for that reason should long ago have been
discarded.
34. The Czechoslovak delegation likewise strongly protests against the fact that the Credentials Committeeagain under pressure from the United States delegation
-questions the validity of the credentials of the representatives of the Hungarian People's Republic although
it has no grounds for doing so. The delegation of the
Hungarian People's Republic has submitted credentials
issued by Hungary's legal Government in accordance
with all the constitutional provisions. The credentials in
question therefore fulfil all the conditions necessary for
their acceptance.
35. The fact that the Credentials Committee decided to
take no decision regarding the validity of these credentials serves merely to promote the provocative policy of
the enemies of peace who oppose the coexistence of
States having different social systems; it does not in any
way promote the strengthening of peaceful co-operation

1005th meeting-25 August 1961

between peoples, which is the main purpose of the United
Nations.
36. The Czechoslovak delegation would also like to
say a few words concerning the credentials of the representative of Laos. It cannot in any way regard the
Laotian delegation's credentials as valid because they
have been issued not by the legal government of Laos
but by a government which, against the Laotian people's
will and contrary to the Constitution of Laos, has
usurped the right to represent that State.
37. Mr. STEVENSON (United States of America):
The United States supports and wiii vo;te in favour of
approving the report [A/4854] of the Credentials
Committee.
. 38. With regard to the statements concerning the
credentials of the representatives of the Government of
the Republic of China, my Government's position has
been stated many times in various organs of the United
Nations, and I need not, therefore, reiterate it at length
here today. In the view of my Government the credentials
of the representatives of the Government of the Republic
of China are fully in accord with the provisions of
rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General iA.ssembly. The United States supports the continued
seating of the representatives of the Government of the
Republic of China in the United Nations.
39. The Credentials Conm1ittee's report includes the
recommendation that no decision be taken at this third
special session regarding the credentials of the representatives o.f Hungary. Ever since the people's revolution in 1956, the General Assembly has consistentiy
refused to accept credentials submitted by the representatives of the present regime in Hungary. We believe
that it is consistent for this Assembly to maintain this
position. We believe that the present Hungarian regime
leaves no alternative. At the same time we remain
anxious and hopeful that the situation with regard to
Hungary can find substantial improvement.
40. There can be no question but that the present
Government whose representatives are seated here today
are the representatives of the legal Government of Laos.
The present Government of Laos was duly approved
by the National Assembly and invested by the King',
fully in accordance with constitutional procedures.·
Accordingly, the United States rejects any allegation
concerning the credentials submitted on behalf of the
representatives of the Royal Government of Laos.
41. Mr. MACHOWSKI (Poland) : While it will
vote for the approval of the report [A/4854] submitted
by the Credentials Committee, the Polish delegation
deems it necessary to make the following reservations.
42. First of all, the Polish delegation cannot recognize
the validity of the credentials presented here by the
persons who pretend to represent China. We strongly
object to the continuation of this fiction of the representation of China so persistently supported in the United
Nations by certain delegations for several years. The
true representatives of China designated by the only
legitimate Government of the Chinese People's Republic
should no longer rbe kept out of United Nations.
43. In the case of Laos, mentioned in paragraphs 11
and 12 of the debated report, the Polish delegation can
only recognize the credentials. issued by the sole legitimate Government of that country, which is headed by
Prince Souvanna Phouma.
44. In conclusion, I should like to draw the attention
of the Assembly to the regrettable fact of the questioning

us

by one of the members of the Credentials Committee
of the credentials submitted by the delegation of the
Hungarian People's Republic. This delegation has for
years been duly representing the Hungarian Government
and nation in the work of consecutive sessions of the
General Assembly. We therefore deplore the unjust and
unfounded decision of the Credentials Committee in this
matter.
45. Mr. CHERMONT (Brazil) : The Brazilian delegation will vote in favour of approving the repmt
[ A/4854] of the Credentials Committee, with the reservation that the Brazilian Government recognizes the
credentials of the representatives of the Hungarian
People's Republic.
46. Mr. PACHACHI (Ira:q): Our approval of the
report of the Credentials Committee is. subject to two
reservations.
47. First, the Government of the Republic of Iraq
recognizes the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China, and therefore we consider
that only the representatives of that Government can
legally represent China in the United Nations.
48. Second, my Government recognizes the Government of the Hungarian People's Republic, and we have
no doubt therefore regarding the validity of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation at this session
of the Assembly.
49. Mr. TSIANG (China): My delegation supports
the report [ A/4854] of the Credentials Committee.
SO. Nevertheless, I wish to stress the regrets of my
delegation in regard to that part of the report which
relates to the Hungarian delegation. In the opinion of
my delegation, the General Assembly should reject the
credentials issued by the communist regime in Hungary.
As this Assembly knows full well, the present regime is
a Soviet creation imposed on the Hungarian people with
Soviet bayonets and at the cost of tens of thousands
of Hungarian lives.
51. With this one regret, my delegation supports the
report, including that part relating to the credentials
o_f the Laotian delegation.
52. I observe that a number of representatives have
come to this rostrum to make reservations in regard
to the credentials of my delegation. It does not surprise
me that the delegation of the Soviet Union should make
such a reservation. If the Soviet Union could have its
own way, this Assembly would be only the third house
of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union.
53. It pains me to observe that a number of Asian
delegations have made similar reservations in regard to
my delegation. I only wish to remind the Assembly that
my Government is among the founding Members of this
Organization, and has honourably fulfilled the obligations
of membership. I wish further to remind the Assembly
that my Government is based on a constitution freely
drafte.d and adopted by the representatives of the whole
people of China. There can be no question -as to the
legitimacy of my Government. I may add that the
communist regime in China, on the mainland of China,
is un-Chinese in character and un-Chinese in purpose.
It came to power on the mainland provinces with· the
-military aid of the Soviet Union. In other words, my
country. has been a victim of Soviet subversion and
aggression. In our opinion, if the United Nations is to
remain faithful to its principles, it must uphold and
honour the credentials of my delegation.

116

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

54. Mr. LORINC (Hungary): The United States
"routine" with its impersonal visage has again reappeared in front of us. It has again come to this rostrum
to express opinions about the non-existent problem of
the mandate of my delegation, a problem which only
lives in and feeds on the imagination of the delegation
that raised it in the Credentials Committee. This special
session has been called for the purpose of stopping
aggression, a real problem. We have been told by this
very same delegation during the general debate that
on the real problem nothing should be done, no· document approved. Let us not disturb the aggressor, was the
saying of the day. This could be continued. Let us deal
with imaginary problems instead of the real ones.
55. Everybody knows that in any and all respects of
the General Assembly's requirements our mandate is
just as valid as that of the other delegations. Everybody
knows that the raising of this issue by the United States
is incompatible with the maintenance by the very same
country of diplomatic relations with my country. In
view of all this, it is just as understandable for everyone that, while protesting against such a sad misuse of
the United Nations for selfish purposes, my delegation
wishes to concentrate on the real issues and does not
at present request the revision of the Credentials
Committee's report [A/4854].
56. Let me express the hope that the time is near
when the United States delegation will realize that it is
not rthrough cold war manceuvres that results can be
achieved in this Organization. It is obvious, I think,
why my delegation will vote against the approval of the
Credentials Committee's report.
57. Mr. BHADKAMKAR (India): My delegation's
approval of the report [A/4854] of the Credentials
Committee, is subject, as on past occasions, to the
following reservations. The Government of India recognizes the Central People's Government of the People's
Republic of China as the only legitimate Government
of China entitled to representation in the United Nations.
My delegation also considers that Hungary, with which
India has diplomatic, cultural and economic relations,
is properly represented in the United Nations. Our
approval of the Credentials Committee's report should
not be construed as derogating from these positions.
58. Mr. GARCIA-INCHAUSTEGUI (Cuba) (translated from Spanish): My delegation will vote in favour
of the report of the Credentials Committee [ A/4854]
with the following reservations.
59~ In the first place, our Government maintains
cordial relations with the Government of the People's
Republic of China. It considers the latter to be the only
legitimate Government of China and does not recognize
the credentials presented by the soecalled representative
of the Republic of China.
60. In the second place, our Government also maintains
cordial relations with the Hungarian People's Republic.
It considers that Government to be the sole legal representative of the Hungarian people, and consequently
opposes any attempt to impugn that Government's
credentials, which it considers to be valid.
61. Mr. CHAMPASSAK (Laos) (translated from
French) : The Assembly has just heard the Soviet Union
representative return to his tendentious allegations
concerning my Government. That representative has
once again seen fit to question the representation of
my delegation at this special session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations.

62. If I speak at this stage of the debate, it is to record
my profound astonishment at the attacks on my Government by the Soviet Union representative, and to refute
the untruths and the lies to which he ·had recourse in
order to discredit my Government. Last time, at the
meeting which marked the end of the second part of the
fifteenth session, the same representative asserted from
this rostrum that we were "the stooges, the puppets
of Boun Oum, who came to power with the aid of
foreign bayonets and who have seized and imprisoned
the King and the members of the Parliament" [995th
meeting, para. 388]. And at yesterday's, Thursday's,
meeting of the Credentials Committee, the Soviet Union
representative contemptuously referred to the Laotians
who refuse to ally themselves with the communists as
"mutineers".
63. The repeated allegations of the Soviet Union repre~
sentative are not even worth denying. The truth is that
as recently as last week the Soviet ambassador,· Mr.
Abramov, was received in audience. by ·His Majesty the
King of Laos, at Vientiane, the seat of my Government.
He even pronounced himself satisfied after these conversations with His Majesty the King. And if we are
really "mutineers", as he claims, could the Soviet Union
representative tell us why his Government sent its ambassador to spend several days in the capital of the
mutineers?
64. I do not want to recall these facts in order to embitter the debate, but I must say that there can be no
peaceful coexistence in lies and slander ..
65. After all this, we are wondering what the Soviet
Union representative's real motive can be in raising
the question of my delegation's competence to represent
Laos-its composition having remained unchanged for
over a year-at a moment when sincere efforts are being
made at Geneva, where the fourteen- Power conference1
is being held, and at Ban N amone, where negotiations
are going on between the three factions in Laos with a
view to finding a peaceful solution to the Laotian crisis
in accordance with the aspirations of our people. Considerable progress has been recorded in these negotiations, thus bringing us on to the path of neutrality which
we all desire.
66. The Soviet Union representative knows very well
that the Government which I have the honour to represent here is the sole legal Government which has the
confidence both of His Majesty the King and of the
National Assembly. This Government, under the
premiership of Prince Boun Oum, has discharged all the
international obligations arising from the United Nations
Charter and has represented Laos at several international
conferences. It has on many occasions shown its good
faith and its willingness to settle its internal disputes
by peaceful means. It has likewise expressed its firm
resolve to follow a policy of strict neutrality and to defend
its sovereignty, unity and integrity. It is second to
none in its defence of these noble principles. It has
proved this by the support which it has given to Tunisia
in the Bizerta affair, the examination of which will soon
be concluded by the General Assembly.
67. If the Government of the Soviet Union has no particular sympathy for my Government and if it does not
recognize it, that is its right and there is nothing I can
do about it. That it should, however, raise here the
question of the legality or the illegality of my Govern1 International Conference for the Settlement of the Laotian
Crisis, opening date 16 May 1961.

l005th meeting-25 August 1961

ment is intolerable, for that is a gross interference in the
internal affairs of my country. The Kingdom of Laos
has its King, its Constitution, its Parliament, its Government. It is not for the Soviet Union to judge whether
this · or that Government is or is not legal.
68. The line of argument of the Soviet Union representative does not, moreover, have any basis either in
fact or in law. The Government whose defence he has
taken up is nothing but a puppet government intended to
serve as a· screen for open intervention in my country
by the communist Powers.
69. I have no wish to expatiate on this unhappy aspect
of the problem, because I do not want to interfere .with
the course of the negotiations in progress or to hmder
the efforts towards reconciliation and union which we
Laotians have been striving after for months.
70. Moreover, the Soviet Union representative need
only glance over the Zurich communique signed by the
three Princes on 22 June 1961 to see that the arguments
on which he bases his case are worthless.
71. Lastly, at a moment when all parties are uniting
their efforts to resolve the drama of Laos and the end
of the crisis seems to be in· sight, I would like to request
the Soviet Union representative in the interests of peace
and concord to stop sowing confusion in the conflict
which is rending my country. My compatriots have
already had enough to worry about without adding here
to their resentment and bitterness.
72. These were the few points that I wanted to clear
up ;so that the members of this Assembly might be able
to make a sound and valid judgement on the legitimacy
of my Government.
73. My delegation will vote in favour of the report
of the Credentials Committee [A/4854].
74. Mr. DJIKIC (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French) : The Yugoslav delegation will vote in favour
of the ~eport of the Credentials Committee. In approv~ng
this report I would like to make the followmg
observations.
75. In the first place, approval of the report by the
Yugoslav delegation cannot be interpreted as a modification of the Yugoslav Government's position concerning
the representation of China in the United Nations.
76. · In the second place, our affirmative vote on the report in no way means that the Yugoslav delegation approves. of the procedure adopted by the majority of the
Committee with regard to the powers of the Hungarian
delegation.
77. Mr. RIFAI (United Arab Republic) : In the Credentials Committee my delegation has already entered
its reservations regarding the question of the representation of China in the General Assembly. My Government which recognizes the Central People's Government
of the People's Republic of China as the only legitimaJte
Government of China, considers that only representatives
nominated by that Government are entitled to occupy the
seat of China in the Assembly.
78. With regard to the representation of Hungary,
with which my Government enjoys diplomatic relations,
my delegation believes that the credentials of the
Hungarian delegation to this special session of the
General Assembly are in order· and in full conformity
with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
79. With these two reservations, my delegation ·will
vote for the approval of the report [ Aj4854] of the
Credentials Committee.

117

80. Mr. ELMI (Somalia) : The delegation of Somalia
votes in favour of approving the report [A/4854] of
the Credentials Committee with the following two
reservations.
81. The Government of the Somali .Republic recognizes
the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China, with which we maintain diplomatic relations, and this State is entitled to be a Member of the
United Nations.
82. Secondly, my delegation objects to the doubts expressed concerning the validity of the credentials of the
Hungarian People's Republic.
83. Mr. BUDO (Albania) (translated from French):
Since we are about to vote on the report of the Credentials Committee [ A/4854], the delegation of the People's
Republic of Albania deems it necessary to make the following statement.
84. The position of the Government of the People's Republic of Albania regarding the representation of the
Peoples Republic of China has been stated in this
Assembly on many occasions. In reaffirmation of that
stand, we wish to make clear that we do not support
the passages of the report relating to the powers of the
Chiang Kai-shek clique's representative. The Central
Government of the People's Republic of China is the
only legitimate Government of China and is the only
Government entitled to represent the Chinese people in
the United Nations or in any other international organization. Accordingly, the representatives of that Government, and of that Government alone ·should occupy the
seat in this Assembly that rightly belongs. to them.
85. The attitude of the United States in seeking to debar the People's Republic of China from taking its place
in the United Nations is impeqing the solution of important international problems and is prejudicial to the
strengthening of peace and international collaboration.
The very authority of the United Nations is being
seriously assailed.
g6. In order to ensure the fulfilment of the Purposes
and Principles of the Charter and to do justice to the
great Chinese people, the delegation of the People's
Republic of Albania considers it essential that this
question be settled forthwith and that the People's
Republic of China be allowed to occupy the seat that has
until now been usurped by a traitorous clique that was
driven from the country and is the creature of a foreign
Power.
·
87. I also wish on behalf of my delegation to protest
strongly against the action of the Credentials Committee
in querying the Hungarian delegations credentials.
88. Any attempt to raise doubts about the credentials
of the delegation of the Hungarian People's Republic
constitutes interference in Hungary's domestic affairs
and ~serves the ends of the partisans of the "cold war".
89. As far as Laos is concerned, we consider that only
those representatives whose credentials emanate from
the legal Government headed by Prince Souvanna
Phouma are the true .representatives of that country.
90. Subject to these reservations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the report of the Credentials Committee.
91. Mr. KOIRALA (Nepal): The Government of
Nepal has recognized the Government of the Central
People's Republic of China as the only legitimate Government of China. We have consistently ·supported the

ll8

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

legitimate claims of the People's Republic of China to
be seated in the United Nations.
92. My delegation also recognizes as valid the credentials of the representative of the Hungarian People's
Republic.
·
93. With these reservations, we shall vote for the
adoption of .the draft resolution contained in the report
[ A/4854] of the Credentials Committee.
94 .. Mr. SULEIMAN (Sudan): My delegation has
noted and will vote for the approval of the report
[A/485~J of the Credentials Committee with only two
reservations.
95. We recognize the Central People's Government of
the People's Republic of China as the onlv legitinmte
•
Government of that country.
96. As for the credentials of the present delegation of
Hungary, we believe that they are quite in order and
valid.
97. Mr. MAIGA (Mali) (translated fmm Frfnch):
I should like to make a few brief remarks on the results
of the Credentials Committee's work. It would not be
right ~o bt:acket Hungary with China as regards representatwn m the General Assembly. The factor to be
taken into consideration in this regard is whether a
~overnment of unassailable sovereignty exists, it being
Irrelevant whether or not that government has the
blessing of certain Powers. This is the case for Hungary,
which is under the authority of a single government.
98. As regards China, the authority of . the Government represented here does not extend beyond the coasts
of Formosa. The great country of China has the goodfortune to be ruled by a government which has in a
very short time ·succeeded in accelerating that country's
development and social progress. There can be no doubt
that Peking enjoys all the authority that it needs and
exercises that authority fully throughout the continental
territory of China. Justice demands that the Government of Communist China should take its place in the
Organization. \Vhatever decisions may be taken here on
the questions of disarmament and peace will lose much
of their effectiveness if this nation, which abundantly
deserves the admiration of the peoples of Africa and
Asia, does not rejoin this great family of nations. I shall
go further and maintain that if, tomorrow, the Soviet
Union and the United States were to reach agreement
on disarmament, many practical difficulties would arise
unless China \vas validly represented here.
9?. I therefore appeal to the · General Assembly to
give back to the legitimate China its seat in the United
Nations. Subject to these reservations, we shall vote
in favour of the report of the Credentials Committee.
100. Mr. CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation wishes to put on the record that, in approving the
report [A/4854] of the Credentials Committee, we do
so solely on the grounds that the credentials concerned
are, considered as documents, in order and consequently,
as the Assembly will be aware, does not necessarily
imply recognition of each of the authorities by whom
the credentials were issued.
101. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated fmm
French): My delegation has already, in the Credentials
Committee, set out certain observations which it felt
obliged to make. I wish to make it clear in the General
Assembly that my Government, which maintains diplomatic relations with the Central Government of the
People's Republic of China, will vote in favour of the
report of the Credentials Committee [A/48541. My

Government maintains cordial relations with the Hungarian Government, and my delegation knows that its
credentials are in good order.
'.
102. The PRESIDENT: The delegations now lmve
before them. for consid.eration the report [A/4854] of
the Credentials Committee. They have also heard the
various reservations and objections in regard to this
report which have been expressed at the rostrum. These
reservatio~1s and obj e~tions will, of course, be duly
recorded 111 the verbahm record of the meeting.
103. Unless I hear any objection or any proposal to
the contrary, I would propose to regard the report of
the Committee as being approved, subject to the reservations and objections which have been expressed.
It was so decided.
•
AGENDA ITEM 7

Consideration of the grav;e situation in Tunisia
obtaining since 19 July 1961 (continued)
~0.4.

Mr. KOIRALA (Nepal): May I be allowed to

]Om my f.ellow :epresentatives.' who have already greeted
the Pr~sident I~ congr~tulat111g him on behalf of my

delegation on his unammous re-election to the presider:cy. of t~i~ special session of the General Assembly?
This 1s pos1ttve proof of our faith in his judgement and
of the esteem in which he is held by all of us.
105. The draft resolution [A/ L.351], which we have
the honour to sponsor, regarding the unhappy and
deplorable events that have occurred on Tunisian soil
since 19 July 1961, is before the Assembly for its
consideration. The very fact that the General Assembly
has met in this third special session at the request
fA/4831 J of the majority of the Member nations inclu~ing N epa!, shows clearly how gravely most of the
natiOns of the world have viewed the situation in
Bizerta. The case of Tunisia has been presented eloquently by its distinguished Ambassador, Mr. Slim.
and I .mu?t. congratulate him on his cool composur~
and obJectivity, although events at home provide more
than enough ground for provocation. Several speakers
have already elaborated upon the facts and the issues
involved. These are admittedly clear and simple and
need no repetition here.
'
106. Since its admission to the United Nations, Nepal
~as always clearly and unequivocally expressed i~s
mdignation at the violation of the United Nations
Charter, and against aggression in any form, in any
quarter of the world. May I repeat the words of our
first delegation, attending the eleventh regular session
of the General Assembly :
"We do not view with complacency the interference of one country in the internal affairs of
another. \V e are opposed to imperialism of any kind
or colour. We are. opposed to the stationing of foreign
troops anywhere 111 the world ... whenever the choice
is between good and evil, between freedom and slavery
or between justice and injustice we shall always
know which to choose." [602nd meeting, para. 10.]
" ... we abide by the same moral standards in
assessing international events everywhere in the
world-be it in the Middle East or in Eastern
Europe." [Ibid., pam. 11.]
107. Vj e have lived up to this ideal and we propose
to contmue to do so. The moral standard to which
I have just referred is the same with us even now and
adhering thereto, we are constrained to hold that Franc~

1005th meeting-25 August 1961

has not only acted in violation of the United Nations
Charter, but has gone much further. Even the closest
friends of France have not seen a way to defend her
aggressive actions in Tunisia and her irresponsible
behaviour towards the United Nations. It is deplorable
that France seems to have taken too much for granted
Tunisia's patience and amicable gestures, and undervalued her friendship.
108. We are a small nation and we do not claim to be
adept in the art of speaking tongue in cheek. · Since
we are a small nation and we have no axe to grind,
we are guided solely by our plain conscience. We know
only to call a spade a spade. We do not have separate
standards of sovereignty and freedom for different
nations. On another occasion we have heard France
speaking eloquently against aggression on this very
floor. How can she now exonerate herself when she
has been the aggressor ? Tunisia, a small nation. which,
like Nepal, had joined in the chorus of indignation concerning aggression against another small country, is
unfortunately the victim herself of French aggression
now. This naturally raises deep anxiety in the minds
of all the small countries about the flexible standards
often adopted by different Powers when issues at stake
affect their own interests. The meaning of independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity will certainly lose
their value if they are interpreted to suit the interests
of any particular nation. Our stand on this occasion,
as on similar occasions in the past, is very clear. In
assessing the present case purely on its own merits, we
are confident that truth and justice will ultimately
prevail.
109. Humanity has survived annihilation by keeping
its faith in its conscience, and it is the very dictate of
conscience which has united us in this Organization.
If any Member, however powerful, tries to defy it or
go against its accepted principles, we ought to rise
unanimously, declaiming against it, and make the errant
nation see reason, or else I am afraid we shall defeat
our own purpose and our own ideals. The essential
pm:pose of ·the draft resolution before the Assembly is
to open the way to settlement of the Bizerta issue by
amicable negotiations between the two parties involved.
Our delegation therefore appeals for unanimous support
for this draft resolution, so that we can prove to the
world that we live by our conscience and that "liberty,
equality and fraternity" are not yet dead.
110. Mr. MOD (Hungary): I wish first of all on
behalf of the Hungarian delegation to join all the previous speakers in congratulating the President, on his
unanimous election to the post of President of this
special session of the General Assembly.
111. The General Assembly has once again been convened with the purpose of stopping the aggression of a
colonial Power against a newly-independent nation.
Once again we are faced with an attempt to reinstate
one-sided colonial "rights"-rights which this time were
not even put on paper-against the will of a people,
its elected organs and leaders.
112. Our debate on the aggression of France against
Tunisia is nearing its end, and my delegation feels that
there are a few conclusions that one could and should
draw and lessons that we can learn from this debate.
The first and foremost of them is what most of the
speakers underlined in their interventions, that is,
"once again". Once again a colonial Power has attacked
a newly-independent nation. Once again the United
Nations and all its M<!mbers had to take a stand on

119

one of the most crucial problems of our times, the
termination of colonialism and its prerogatives, in
whatever disguise they may have assumed. Once again
the solidarity of the newly independent nations, with
the full support of the socialist countries, has succeeded
in arranging for the calling of a special session and
unmasking before the whole world the colonialist and
its allies.
113. In listening to the debate, an all too familiar
pattern has evolved in front of us. One colonial Power
has attacked a militarily weak member of the AfricanAsian countries. The substance of the pretext is always
the same, the lamb was grazing on the pasture of the
wolf. The form may be different, defence of the wolf's
rights, defence of the "Western civilization" against
the communist ·menace, defence of the "free world"
and so on.
114. The rest of the colonialists rush to the help of
the aggressor. This is the second conclusion to be drawn
from our debate. The countries fighting to stop the
aggression against Tunisia are confronted not only by
France, but by all the countries of the aggressive
NATO alliance led by the United States. So there is
nothing strange in the fact that the political manoeuvres
aimed at whitewashing France are also led by the
strongest Power of this alliance.
115. In this case, the help took the form of blocking
the approval of an effective resolution in the Security
Council and of strenuous efforts to block the calling
of this special session of the Assembly. The United
States representative in his intervention quite openly
expressed his unhappiness about the fact that the request
that the Assembly should be called to meet had
succeeded.
116. The General Assembly started its work, and with
it began the next set of manoeuvres from the colonialists'
side. This was first to whitewash the aggressor and
then to throw mud into the crystal clear situation.
The victim was accused of impatience in its negotiations
with the wolf. Arguments were advanced that approval
of a resolution--one that does not even condemn the
wolf-might provoke the wolf's displeasure and this·
should, therefore, be avoided.
117. All these manoeuvres-as has already been
pointed out from this rostrum-served the aim of
stripping the victim-Tunisia--of its most important
defence : the solidarity of the African-Asian and Socialist countries, to let it sit alone, isolated, when the
time for dealing with the wolf arrives.
118. But let us turn to another aspect of the debate.
The representative of Tunisia underlined, in his introductory statement [996th meeting, para. 74J, that the
aggression against Bizerta is but "Operation Short
Plough", to be followed by "Operation Long Plough",
the occupation of the whole of the northern territory
of Tunisia, with the aim of crushing in blood the independence struggle of another African nation, Algeria.
It is from this point that one can start to see the whole
perspective of this aggression.
119. It is aimed against the sovereignty and independence of Tunisia, Algeria, and, sui generis, against
the independence and freedom of .the whole African
continent. The dramatis personae are, as has become
clear from the debate, not simply France and Tunisia,
but the newly independent countries, supported by the
socialist countries, on the one hand, and the "Holy
Alliance" of NATO on the other. Those in douht

120

General Assembly--'-Third Special ·session-Plenary Meetings

should look; up ·the list of countries which requested
[see A/4831] that the Assembly be called into session.
120. The aggressive action taken against Tunisia is
not only the aggression of France. It is well known
that the weapons used by the French at Bizerta were
the arms of NATO, American weapons, to be exact.
If we dig into the substance of the matter, we may
establish that Bizerta is not simply a French military
base, but a NATO base, first of all.
121. Its imperialist role and purpose has been so
clearly and eloquently described by the representative
of Indonesia that I merely wish to remind the Assembly
of his statement [1001st meeting]. In these .last days
Bizerta has grown into a symbol of the struggle of the
African peoples and States for an Africa free of nuclear
weapons and foreign military bases. \V e all remember
President Nkrumah's appeal for this during the fifteenth
session [869th nteeting] of the Assembly and the draft
resolution [AjC.1jL.264/Rev.1 and Rev.1jA.dd.1]
tabled in the First Committee for this purpose. A number' of African representatives have again in this debate
quite logically advanced this thought as a solution to
the basic issues involved here.
122. One final conclusion. No one has dared to challenge openly the sovereign right of Tunisia to Bizerta.
But let us not be misled by empty phrases. The United
States representative stated:
"First, there is not and cannot be any question as
to Tunisia's sovereignty over Bizerta. There is a
practical problem as to how to relate that sovereignty
to the present dispute.". [998th meeting, para. 95.]
Listening to him one gets the impression that we
actually have just a trifle of a problem to solve. What
"trifle" it is, however, is more openly admitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, who in his
statement classified the issue in the following way:
"The issues are in truth very simple. Tunisia
claims that France should agree to a more or less
rapid time-table for the evacuation of the base at
Bizerta. France for its part does not question Tunisian
sovereignty over Bizerta, but says that it has never
committed itself to any particular date for evacuation
and. does not intend to do so during the present
dangerous situation." [1000th meeting, para. 55.].
123. Here lies the crux of the matter. France, together with its NATO allies, the United States and
the United Kingdom, does not question Tunisian sovereignty. It simply occupies a part of Tunisian territory
without question and does not intend to leave it. Tunisia,
the African-Asian countries and the socialist countries
do not question Tunisia's sovereignty either. They,
however, are of the opinion that respect in words should
be followed by respect in deeds, that is, the immediate
withdrawal of the aggressor from Tunisian soil-just
a small "practical" difference, as we all see.
124. The Hungarian delegation fully supports the just
demand of Tunisia for the withdrawal of the aggressor
from Tunisian soil. We are of the opinion that the
aggressor and its accomplices have to be stopped in
their schemes against the independent countries of
Africa and Asia. It is the sacred task of the United
Nations to do so in fulfilling the stipulations of its
Charter, according to which the United Nations is
founded on the sovereign equality of all its Members.
125. Before concluding I ask permission to make
another remark in· exercise of the right of reply.

126, During ·the current debate the representative
of the United States thought it proper to launch a
slanderous and unfounded attack on the USSR, and in
this connexion mention was made, arriong other socialist
·countries, of my country as well.
127. It would be easy for me, indeed, to prove, with
relevant data and facts, how unfounded the United
States representative's allegation are. This, however, is
not necessary. Members of the Assembly are already
used to such outbursts by United States representatives
and can pass correct judgement upon them at the first
hearing.
128. On the other hand, it is well-known fact that
whenever the representatives of the United States have
taken an untenable position in defence of their colonial
friends, they have always tried to divert the attention
of the General Assembly from the weakness of their
own moral and political stand by unleashing assaults
on the socialist countries. These tactics can deceive
nobody anymore and it is not worthwhile wasting time
on ·,them.
129. 'It is regrettable, however, that Mr. Stevenson,
instead of trying to contribute constructively, on behalf
of the United States, to the solution of the grave issues
under discussion, has resorted to a kind of manoeuvring
which is not in accord with the dignity of the Assembly
and which has already been discredited by his
predecessors.
130. Mr. URQUIA (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) : In placing the conduct of the proceedings of
this special session of the General Assembly in the
hands of Mr. Boland, the delegations present here have
wished unanimously to demonstrate their admiration
and gratitude for the ability, impartiality, zeal and tact
which he demonstrated as President of the fifteenth
regular session of this Assembly of the peoples of the
world. My delegation is pleased to congratulate you
most warmly and also to congratulate Ireland,. your
small but great country, whose conduct in the United
Nations has always been a model of wisdom, moderation
and true courage, without vainglory-an example of love
and selfless devotion for all good causes.
131. The grave situation which has obtained in Tunisia
since 19 July 1961 has been the reason for convening
this third special session of the General Assembly and
is the only item on its agenda. However, the truth
of the matter is that the unfortunate events which took
place on 19 July in the neighbourhood of the base of
Bizerta and in the town of Bizerta itself, and the situation that has existed since then, are only an episode
__.,the most recent, and certainly the most tragic-in a
state .of affairs that has persisted, and that has unfortunately very seriously impaired French-Tunisian relations, ever since France formally recognized Tunisia's
independence in the Protocol of Agreement signed by
both countries on 20 March 1956.
132. Indeed, we are all aware that serious events took
place in Tunisia during 1958, as a result of which the
Security Council was called upon to consider complaints
made by Tunisia against France, and by France against
Tunisia.
1-33. The ·first of these complaints was made by Tunisia
on 13 February 19582 and charged that France had
committed an act of aggression on 8 February 1958 at
2 Official Records of the Semrity Council, Thirteenth Year,
SuPPlement for January, February and March 1958, document
S/3951.
.

1005th ,meeting-25 August 1961

.Ul

the small Tunisian border-town of Sakiet-sidi-Yousseff.
On· the day after that complaint had been submitted,
the French delegation also lodged a complaint3 with the
Security· Council alleging that a serious situation was
resulting from the aid furnished by Tunisia to the
Algerian rebels enabling them to conduct operations
from Tunisian territory directed against Algerian territory and the safety of the persons and property of
French nationals.
134. Although the Security Council put both complaints
on its agenda, it did not in fact consider them, nor was
there any discussion about them, owing to the
fortunate circumstance that the French and Tunisian
Governments, displaying commendable prudence and
common sense, accepted the offer of good offices made
by the Governments of the United States and the United
Kingdom. The Security Council concluded its business
quickly without adopting any resolution, and the various
delegations expressed their satisfaction at the hope of
conciliation held out by the acceptance of the offer of
good offices as a means of bringing about an amicable
settlement of the matters at issue between Tunisia and
France.
135. In that initial case, thanks to the efforts of the
good offices mission and the good will shown by both
parties, the latter were about to find a way to settle
their differences in a satisfactory manner. In the course
of the negotiations which took place, a compromise
agreement was reached which provided that all pending
questions would be settled in two successive stages.
During :the first stage, all French military personnel
outside the perimeter of the Bizerta base were to have
been immediately withdrawn, and during the second
stage a provisional arrangement for the Bizerta base
was to have been established by mutual agreement.
However, that compromise agreement was never put
into effect, owing to a change of government that took
place in France at that time, and shortly afterwards
both parties again began to submit complaints against
each other to the Security Council.
136. On 24 and 25 May 1958 new incidents occurred
in the area of Remada in southern Tunisia, and on
29 May the Tunisian delegation requested an immediate
meeting of the Security Council to consider a complaint
in respect of acts of armed aggression committed against
it hy the French military forces stationed in its territory
and in Algeria. 4
137. On the same day, 29 May 1958, France asked
the Security Council to consider two questions, 5 namely,
the complaint brought by France against Tunisia on
14 February 1958, and the situation arising out of the
disruption, by Tunisia, of the modus vivendi which had
been established since February 1958 with regard to
the stationing of French troops at certain point in
Tunisian territory.
138. At the end of that debate, France proposed-and
the proposal was adopted without opposition-that the
Council should postpone consideration of the items on
its agenda until 18 June 1958, so that the parties might
·embark on negotiations.
139. The negotiations resulted in an agreement
between the parties. On the appointed date of 18 June,
the representatives of Tunisia and France informed the

Council that in an exchange of notes effected the
previous day between the Tunisian Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs and the French charge d'a.ffai1·es
at Tunis, it had been agreed that all French forces
except those stationed at Bizerta would be withdrawn
from Tunisia in four months and ,that a provisional
arrangement would subsequently be negotiated with
regard to the Bizerta base.
140. We have felt it necessary briefly to recall these
events not only because they are illuminating and
important for a better understanding of the grave
question that is now before the General Assembly, but
also because they provide evidence of two facts of equal
significance: firstly, that the difficulties which have
arisen between France and Tunisia ..have been due to
the presence of French forces on Tunisian soil and to
the developments connected with the war of independence in Algeria, a country bordering on Tunisia;
and secondly, that France and Tunisia have already
had recourse to negotiation with some measure of
success in their search for a permanent solution of their
differences.
141. The events which have taken place in Tunisia
since 19 July 1961 and which led to the convening of
the Security Council and now of this special session
of the General Assembly are undoubtedly of the utmost
seriousness, both because hundreds of people-most of
them civilians-have been killed and much damage has
been done, and because these events have deepened
the rift between two peoples which for geographical,
historical and cultural reasons, should be drawing closer
together in a spirit of mutual friendship, confidence
and co-operation in this world of today already brimful
of suspicion, unrest and anxiety.
142. The matter to be considered now is a complaint
by Tunisia against France in respect of the grave events
which took place on 19 July and the following days 6
and as a result of which France is now occupying a
part of Tunisian territory not included within the
perimeter of the Bizerta base.
143. During the initial consideration of the matter
by the Security Council, that body, on 22 July, adopted
almost unanimously-the only vote lacking being that
of France, which did not take part in the voting-a
resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire and a
return of all armed forces to their original position. 7
144. A week later the Council resumed consideration
of the matter, at the request of the Tunisian representative,8 who stated that whereas his Government had
fully complied with the provisions of the Security
Council's resolution, the French Government had merely
ordered a cease-fire and had refused to withdraw its
forces to the position they had occupied before 19 July.
The Council was unable to adopt a new resolution,
because the necessary seven votes could not be obtained,
and hence a larger number of Member States asked
that this special session of the General Assembly be
convened.
·
145. That is how matters now stand. What other course
is open to the General Assembly than to insist on the
re-establishment of the status qtw ante as ordered by
the Security Council and to urge both parties to proceed
without delay to negotiate an agreement for putting an

3Ibid., document S/3954.
4Ibid., Supplement fo1· April, May and June 1958, document
S/4013.
IS Ibid., document S/4015.

O Ibid., Sixteenth Year, Supplement for July, Augltst and
September 1961, document S/4862.
7 Ibid., document S/4882.
Bibid., document S/4893.

122

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

end to such incidents and to a state of tension which is
so dangerous in a world already beset by difficulties?
146. Tunisia is an independent and sovereign State-a
fact which no one disputes-and its sovereignty
extends to the portion of its territory on whidh the
French naval and air base of Bizerta is situated. The
presence of foreign military detachments in the territory
of a sovereign and independent State is only admissible
when the express consent of that State has been given.
147. These are truths which are recognized by international law and undoubtedly also by France, since, in
the agreement concluded by the exchange of notes of
17 June 1958, it was agreed that the parties, France
and Tunisia, would negotiate a provisional arrangement
for the Bizerta base.
148. Why a provisional arrangement, and not a final
settlement? Unquestionably because .this is a transitional
situation and by no means a permanent, and still less
a perpetual, state of affairs that would be incompatible
with Tunisia's sovereignty over the part of its territory
now occupied by the base.
149. We accordingly consider that what is needed is
for the parties to undertake negotiations. The negotiations can have as their aim either a provisional agreement on the Bizerta base or an agreement for the
complete and final withdrawal of the French forces. In
any event this is something which, in the opinion of
many delegations, including our own, must be resolved
solely by the two countries concerned.
150. We believe that the General Assembly should
refrain from attempting to determine the specific direction or objective of the negotiations, not merely on
the legal ground that it is doubtful whether the Assembly has the power to do so, but more especially for
the pragmatic reason that any attempt to prejudge the
issue without the consent of the two parties, instead
of easing the way to friendly negotiations and a possible
settlement of their differences, would have the reverse
effect to that intended.
151. Having thus expressed the views of my Government and of my delegation, I should like to add a few
comments, for the most part of a general nature.
152. ··In spite of our optimism, we cannot hide our
concern at the absence of the French delegation from
this debate. We should have liked to hear its point of
view in regard to the present stage of the FrenchTunisian problem, just as we did during the Security
Council debate in 1958, and only recently when the
Council was considering the complaint of Tunisia concerning the events of 19 July and after.
153. However, we must frankly confess that what
concerns and disturbs us much more is the obvious
tendency to exploit this matter as an element in the cold
war, as well as the increasingly .transparent efforts to
attract Tunisia and other peoples having an unquestionably democratic outlook into an alignment which is
not in keeping with their origins, their traditions, their
religion, their culture and their true interests.
154. We wish to express our admiration to the Tunisian representative, Mr. Slim, whose statements have
always been carefully weighed, serene and judicious,
notwithstanding his feelings as a national of the country
whose inhabitants have suffered the consequences of
the armed struggle which begalll on 19 July.
155. We cannot, however, say the same of all the
speakers who have taken part in the debate. No one
who looks at things dispassionately can deny that

speeches have been made here with the object not of
assisting in bringing the French-Tunisian dispute to
an end, bttt on the contrary of causing it to break out
anew, of encouraging a feeling of animosity and of
extending the scope of the deliberations into a field
\vhich no longer relates only to the questions outstanding
between France and Tunisia in consequence of the
latter's accession to independence but embraces the
whole question of military bases on foreign territory.
156. The wisdom and perspicacity of Mr. Slim have,
we are sure, enabled him to realize that although the
assistance and encouragement of many brother, or
merely friendly, countries have no doubt helped to
further his cause, the violent statements, full of hatred
and inspired by ulterior motives, which have been
heard in these precincts have rendered him scant service
in this affair.
·
157. There is no need to repeat that the present world
situation is one of the most explosive that we have had
to face in the last few years. Only by exercising
prudence, intelligence arid good will can we prevent
the danger that threatens from speedily turning into
catastrophe. Consequently, in considering international
problems we must at all cos.ts eschew violence.
158. The United Nations, if it is to be worthy of
its name and of the ideals set forth in its Charter, must
endeavour to find adequate solutions by the means and
procedures provided for in that same Charter.
159. We accordingly associate El Salvador with the
other Member States which have appealed to Tunisia
and to France to· seek once more the path of negotiation
and agreement in order to end this crisis and resume
their long-standing friendship. The moral, intellectual
and political stature of Presidents de Gaulle and
Bourguiba lead us to hope that our voices will not be
voices crying in the wilderness, and that we shall not,
as Bolivar said, have been ploughing in the sea.
160. Mr. GEORGIEV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French) : May I be allowed first of all to congratulate
the President of the current session of the General
Assembly on his unanimous election.
161. 1 should like to dwell on certain aspects of the
problem with which the General Assembly is dealing.
I shall not review the events of the past.
162. I should like first to deal with the question from
the point of view of the French attack on Tunisia.
Mr. Slim, in his speech [996th 1neetingL gave an admirable analysis of what occurred, and on the basis of
the indisputable elements of the situation he drew the
conclusion that we were confronted with French aggression. According to the facts set forth by him there was
nothing at the outset on the Tunisian side but some
popular demonstrations and a few warning shots,
whereas on the French side there was a large-scale attack by the land, sea and air units of the armed forces.
163. This attack resulted in the slaughter of hundreds
of innocent Tunisian citizens-civilians, women and
children-and caused very serious damage to the Tunisian economy. It was carried out with a cruelty worthy
of the Hitlerite SS troops, and was continued even after
the decision of the Security Council, 9 thus constituting
a challenge to the United Nations.
164. For the time being, however, I am concerned with
another aspect of the problem, namely the fact that this
act of aggression committed on 19 and 20 July 1961,.
9 Ibid.,

document S/4882.

1005th meeting-25 August 1961

goes back to 1881 and even to a far earlier time. Indeed,
it has never stopped; it has been a repeated crime, like
all cases of aggression by the imperialists against their
former co.Jonies. It is a continuing international crime,
and no legal instrument has been able to make this
aggression legally justifiable.
165. Hence in the case of Tunisia we are faced with
an international crime which has never ceased, with the
result that that country had the right at all times to
defend itself against this aggression. Even if the circumstances had not been such as in fact they were and as
they have been described here by Mr. Mongi Slim, even
if there had been an attack by Tunisia on the French
forces at Bizerta, that would have been an act of selfdefence, and the same applies to the other bases in the
former colonies.
166. vVe want to develop international law. This question forms the subject of item 70 of the provi,sional
agenda of the sixteenth session of the General Assembly.
This task was entrusted to the Sixth Committee at the
fifteenth session. Many countries have already submitted
recommendations to that Committee, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1505 (XV) on the development of international law.
167. If we really want to develop international law
instead of becoming involved in legal verbiage, we mu:st
consider the question of self-defence against the armed
forces of all the imperialist countries which possess bases
in the former colonies. That would be the real way to
develop international law.
168. It is a legal corollary of sociological principles that
insurrections of wars of liberation are justified. Of what,
in fact, does justice consist? It is a judgement concerning
the conformity of legal standards with the elements of
extra-legal social reality. In order to form an opinion
about a system of standards and to make up our minds
whether or not it is correct, we must compare it with
the extra-legal social reality, which is something that
moves and develops.
169. Hence, international law, if it is to undergo progressive development, must recognize that every former
colony on whose soil an imperialist base is situated has
the right to defend itself at any time against the imperialist forces stationed at that base, irrespective of
how they conduct themselves. That is the problem
raised by the situation in Tunisia.
170. But that is not all. In addition to the military
bases situated in the former colonies, there are also ba;ses
in independent countries. In so far as those .bases are
the outcome of agreements concluded under the pressure
of force, by fraud and through the corruption of the
leaders, or under the pressure of economic conditions,
the agreements in ·question have no legal validity.
171. But there is more. There are agreements which
are perfectly valid and in virtue of which there are bases
in completely independent countries. If, however, these
bases are to serve as spring-boards for future aggression,
they constitute a weapon of offence. Therefore from the
point of view of the United Nations Charter, which forms
an integral part of contemporary international law, they
are illegal.
172. Mr. Stevenson, the United States representative,
expressed surprise at certain legal arguments which
have been adduced against the bases. When a progressive
historical movement spreads irresistibly all over the
world, legal arguments come from all sides and legal
theories are easily formulated. That is how international

123

law is developed, and that is one of the factors in its
development. Hence there is a sound legal reason for
attacking and abolishing these bases. If that is not done,
if certain countries repudiate such attacks, it is not because they have not the right to do so, but because they
. are guided by political expediency. It is therefore political
expediency which will decide. But if we are asked:
"Have you .this right?", we shall say, "Yes, we have".
173. We have been able to see that the current session
has been the occasion for a wave of indignation all over
the world directed against military bases and especially
against those situated in the former colonies. I shall
cite by way of proof a letter 10 to the President of the
Security Council from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, Saudi Arabia and other
countries, that is to say, from the representatives of a
large number of non-aligned countries. This letter states :
"For us who mostly represent small and newly
emergent: States, the Tunisian siuation has a special
sign~ficance. While we recognizes the right of a sovereign State to permit the presence of foreign forces
on its soil, we equally recognize and insist on the
sovereign right of all States not to tolerate the presence of foreign forces or foreign military bases on
their territory. Such a right is an essential attribute
of sovereignty and is a corollary to respect for each
other's sovereignty and territorial integrity to which
Members of the United Nations are pledged under
the Charter."
This is the progressive development of international
law, and here is the proof that there is a wave of
indignation on the subject of the bases.
174. The military bases possessed by the former colonial countries demonstrate in a most flagrant manner
how these colonies are being oppressed. That is why
there is so much indignation. It is time, therefore, to do
away with these bases and to put an end to this intolerable situation, which constitutes a threat of war,
endangers international security and is leading us
towards a third world conflict. These bases are the
strongholds of the oppression of the former colonial
countries, and of the colonial countries of today, more
or less everywhere.
175. Even from the point of view of the enlightened
self-interest of the imperialist countries, aggression
against former or existing colonies does not pay. In
the specific case of the attack on Tunisia by France,
the result has been a strengthening of the international
front against colonialism and imperialism and the convening of the present session, so greatly feared by the
imperialist countries. They did not succeed in preventing its being convened; they were unable to reduce us
to silence. Despite their power, despite the pressure
of every kind which they exercised, through diplomatic
and other channels, despite all their efforts, they were
unable to find a solution of the problem outside the
United Nations, by negotiation between the two parties.
176. There is something more. If we observe the
foreign policy of the imperialist countries, both in the
present case and in all cases involving colonial problems, we see that these States are increasingly perplexed. On the eve of this session they did not know
what to do nor what attitude to adopt. They have not
been able to collect themselves or to take any definite
stand. They do not even know how to vote at this
session. They cannot decide whether to propose amendlo Ibid., document S/4896.

General Assembly~Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

ments to the present draft resolution [AjL.351],
whether to abstain or whether to vote against it. This
proves that the anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist movement is so strong that even States which possess formidable military equipment and enormous economic
resources and ·whose diplomacy has no mercy for the
:countries where it operates are unable to stop it. ·
177. Certain newspapers in the United States, in an
effort to find a way out of an untenable situation for
the imperialists, have recognized the dangt>r to the
.imperialists themselves which is represented by the
policy of extreme imperialism. The situation, however,
is such that not even the attempts of the nco-imperialists
to maintain domination over the States which were
.formerly colonies, by granting them certain advantages
and giving domination a new form, can succeed. Despite
all the efforts of the nco-imperialists, the situation
remains as it was during the era of the old imperialism.
There are, of course, ·the activities of the ncoimperialists, but these activities are combined with those
of the vilest old-style imperialism. I will quote a passage
from the draft programme of the Communist Party
of the USSR, which was reproduced in The New Y orlz
Times on 1 August 1961:
. [The speaker continued in English]
"The imperialists are using new methods and new
forms to maintain colonial exploitation of the peoples.
.They have recourse to whatever means they cancolonial wars, military blocs, conspiracies, terrorism,
subversion, economic pressure, bribery-to control
the newly free countries and to ·reduce the independence they have won to mere form or to deprive
them of that independence."
[The speaker resumed his state1ttent in French 1
All is in vain. The imperialists have not even succeeded
in reaching the stage of neo-colonialism.
178. There is one question which we cannot overlook at this special session; it is that of the special
forces used by the French Government in its attack on
·Tunisia. I am referring to the paratroops and the
Foreign Legion. The war crimes committed by these
forces in Tunisia have been described here. They are
recorded in a number of documents submitted by
Tunisia to the United Nations Security Council.
179. What are these units, who are these soldiers
responsible for the crimes to which I have just referred?
This is a special weapon, which at the present time is
also being forged in the United States and which we
should consider outlawing by international convention.
Why? Because the components of this weapon are recruited in a particular way. They are recruited among the
dregs of 'society, among common criminals. This weapon
is composed of mercenaries who do no even speal\: the
language of the nation by which they are employed;
it is composed of former followers of Hitler, former
SS men, professional killers. That is the specific composition of this weapon, which is designed for special
purposes, which is designed to sow terror among the
civilian population, to commit every imaginable crime
against the civilian population of a nation (whether a
metropolitan country or a colony) when that population
rises up . to defend its national independence and to
preserve democratic freedoms and human rights. We
have had actual experience with this kind of weapon in
the case of the SS. We must not allow it to be revived.
180. We should draw up an l.nternational convention
prohibiting such a weapon, just as poison gases and

bacteriological weapons are prohibited and as atomic
weapons should be prohibited. It is high time to pay
attention to this question, for it concerns the rights and
liberties of men all over the world, as well as the sovereignty of nations and the right of the people to defend
that sovereignty. It is unthinkable that the imperialist
States should be allowed to forge a weapon which, by
its composition and its purpose, is specifically intended
for the suppression of any popular movement in ·favour
of freedom and human rights.
181. It is one of the ironies of history that these paratroops, this Foreign Legion, who have twice attempted
to· overthrow the French Government, who have perhaps
even tried to kill the head of that Government, have been
used to kill hundreds of innocent Tunisians. This has
been a holocaust offered to world imperialism, to French
imperialism, to those very military and civilian circles
in France who wanted to overthrow the de Gaulle
government by a cou,p d'etat. This has been a holocaust
offered by that government to those very circles which
wished to annihilate it. That is the irony of history.
Those are the internal inconsistencies of an imperialist
State.
182. We are thus witnessing the extraordinary spectacle of a sagacious and far-sighted statesman, who
has undoubtedly demonstrated what we would do and
who already belongs to history, but who is fervently,
enthusiastically and, I might even say, lovingly sawing
off the branch on which he is sitting. That is the result
·of the internal inconsistencies of the imperialists, which
they are unable to reconcile and which are inevitably
and rapidly causing them to adopt the total colonialist
position. What, however, is the power behind all this?
A man who is much better qualified than I am, and who
is intimately acquainted with this power, has described
it as follows:
[The speaker contimted in English]
"We have been compelled to create a permanent
armaments industry of vast proportions. Added to this,
three and a half million men and women are actively
engaged in the defence establishment. vV e annually
spend on military security alone more than the net
income of all United States corporations.
"Now this conjunction of an immense military
establishment and a large arms industry is new in the
American experience. The total influence-economic,
political, even spiritual-is felt in every city, every
state house, every office of the federal government. We
recognize the imperative need for this development,
yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications. Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; 'SO is the very structure of our society.
"In the councils of Government, we must guard
against the acquisition of unwarranted influence,
whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial
complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. .
"We must never let the weight of this combination
endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We
should take nothing for granted. Only an alert and
knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of
defence with our peaceful methods and goals, so that
~Security and liberty may prosper together.

"
"The prospect of domination of the nations scholars
by Federal employment, project allocations and the

1005th meeting-25 August 1961·

power of money is ever present, and is gravely to be
regarded. " 11
(The speaker resumed his statement in French]
183. Who said this? The former President of the
United States, Mr. Eisenhower. He said it in his farewell speech. \iVhatever we may think of President Eisenhower's personality or of his policy-which belongs to
the past-we must admit that these words show great
civic courage, particularly in a country where anyone,
even though he is not guilty, can be destroyed overnight
by private-interest groups that are all-powerful.
184. This is the force which stands behind the acts
and crimes of imperialism. This is what we call, in
Marxist and Leninist language, a combination of economic and financial monopolies on the one hand with
the State and the army on the other. This is State
capitalism. The terms matter little, for the content is
, the same. This was pointed out with extraordinary force
by a President of ,the United States. Reading these
lines, my thoughts turned to the works of Lenin, to
his book on imperialism and to all his articles, written
during the war and the Russian Revolution, in which he
described this combination of the State and capitalism.
185. I said before that France's action against Tunisia has strengthened the international front against
imperialism. I should like to add yet another proof :
this is· the joint Bulgarian-Ghanaian communique
published on 12 August 1961 in· the organ of the
Bulgarian Communist Party, The Workers' Task. This
communique, signed by the President of the Republic
of Ghana and by the Chairman of the Presidium of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria, says, among other things
-and I translate from the Bulgarian:
"It became evident in the course of the talks that
there is complete agreement on such important international questions as general and complete disarmament, peaceful ·coexistence, the total and rapid
·liquidation of colonialism in all its forms, and other
questions. The. Governments of the People's Republic
of Bulgaria and of the Republic of Ghana have reached
agreement on the need to make every possible effort
to implement as quickly as possible the decision of
the fifteenth session of the United Nations General
Assembly calling for the liquidation of the vestiges
of colonialism. Guided by the declaration on the
liquidation of colonialism, the two countries have
condemned French aggression in Tunisia, i.e., the
attack on Bizerta, and they support the Tunisian
people's request for the immediate evacuation of all
French forces from its territory."
186. This attack by an imperialist State on a small
independent country recently freed from colonialism is
yet another proof that international unity against
colonialism is being strengthened. In saying all this
and in using the strongest words I could find, my
intention has not been, as some might think, to exacerbate international tension. No, we must tell the
full truth about colonialism, or as one might say in
Russian, the pravda. This is the name of a Soviet
newspaper, but what does the word mean? It is an·
extraordinary word, signifying both justice and truth.
It does not exist in our language, or in French. That
is why I use it-truth and justice at the same time.
This is what we must say here before the whole world.
11 Statement published in The New

ary 1961.

York Times of 18 Janu-

125

187. The colonialist countries were afraid of this
session, because they would have been seen on this
rostrum, in this chamber, before the eyes of the whole
world, stripped of their fine clothes and sparkling
jewels. They would have been seen in all their hideous
nakedness.
188. They would have been seen like lepers without
their masks. That is what they were afraid of; they were
afraid of the truth, the pravda. But they did not succeed.
I repeat that truth and justice, openly defended here
before the whole world, are the only possible foundations of any understanding between nations.
189. -We are against war, and we have said so a
thousand times. We are for international understanding,
but it is impossible to achieve such understanding by
hiding behind a curtain, as Polonius did in Hamlet, and
as the French delegation is doing now.
190. Here I shall quote the words which were used
by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers . of the
Soviet Union at the Soviet-Romanian Friendship
Meeting, and which were published in Izvestia of
13 August 1961. These, then, are the words of the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet
Union:
[The speaker continued in Russian]
"The Soviet Government proposes to the Govern~
ment of the Western Powers that they should joiri
us in solving all the problems on which our views
differ ... "
[The speaker resumed his statement in French]
We take the same view. There is no need for me to
say so, but I shall say it anyway. We subscribe to this,
and all the socialist countries subscribe to it. I shall
not give their names, but all here present know that
on this question we take the same stand.
191. I shall continue with the words spoken by the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR:
[The speaker continued in Russian]
" ... but which cannot be left unresolved, since
they cause friction among States and engender tension
in the world".
·
[The speaker resumed hi~ statement in French]
192. This is the firm policy of our country, but it
does not mean that we are ready to fall on our knees
before imperialism. It does not mean that we will
sacrifice the fundamental principles of our policy, and
what we believe to be. the progressive development of
mankind, to a peace which would be worth nothing if
these principles were not applied.
193. There is another question which was raised here
by the representative of Tunisia, and which I think most
important: He said:
"In fact, we have learnt from the Press that the
general staff responsible for the aggression of 19 July
intends to link up the French forces at Bizerta with
those operating in Algeria, 170 kilometres from
Bizerta, by means of a simultaneous attack which
would result in the occupation of the whok northern
region of Tunisia. This operation is said to be referred
to as the 'long plough', the 19 July aggression against
Bizerta being called the 'short plough'." [996th
nweting, para. 74.]
194. What does this mean? Has a plan of this kind
really been prepared by the general staff of which Mr.

126

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

Slim speaks? Have we not the right and the duty to
consider this rumour, or perhaps this journalist's report,
in the light of the French Government's declared plan
for a partition of Algeria? Have we not the right and
the duty to seek a relationship between this rumour and
the fact, mentioned here by the representative of TuInsia, that a nuntber of French citizens arrested in
Tunisia were found to possess offensive weapons? We
know of the links between continental France, Algeria
and Tnnisia, the customs and political tendencies of that
region and the events which are taking place there. If
we take all this into account, we may well be anxious.
This information may 'be correct.
195. In a leading article in The New York Times of
24 August 1961, we read:
[The speaker continued in English]
"President Bourguiba, presuming on the relative
immunity he has enjoyed in the face of his virtual
co-belligerence with the Algerian rebels to whom he
provides a privileged sanctuary, has been lured by
Sahara oil and the profits of neutralism ... "
i( The speake-r res~wz.ed his statenMnt in French]
196. What is the meaning . of this reference to the
relative immunity which President Bourguiba has
•enjoyed. Is a still more serious act of aggression being
prepared? vV e must be vigilant. I simply wished to
mention all these facts.
197. It is unfortunate that the French delegation is
absent, since it might perhaps have been able to deny
this. 'If, however, it is not denied, our anxiety will
increase.
198. I return to my general idea. I shall say a few
words about the assertion of the United States that this
·question can be settled outside the United Nations.
There is no reason why a country should not offer its
good offices. But is the United States capable of doing
anything when it is in a worse position than France,
when it is still more colonialist and still more deeply
committed to a series of aggressions almost everywhere
in the world? How can it hope to bring about a settlement? It is incredible! It is impossible! In my opinion
this is nothing more than a delaying tactic. Personally,
I do not doubt the good intentions of many statesmen
in the United States. However, we are not concerned
with this, hut with the real and objective policy of
imperialism.· If I could help these gentlemen, I should
willingly do so, but I am not a citizen of the United
States, and I am unable to come to their aid.
199. We should nevertheless try to make ourselves
understood, as Mr. Khrushchev has said. How are we
to make ourselves understood? We must make an effort,
·but the United States must also make an effort. My own
·observations up to the present time have convinced me
that the United States finds it very hard to understand
the under-developed countries and former colonies, and
that even when it makes an effort to do so, it fails. To
succeed, the United States leaders should not only
read Marx and Lenin, but they should cease to be
1mperialists. Otherwise, success is impossible.
200. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
I trust that the distinguished representative of Bulgaria
will forgive me if I point out, in a very friendly way,
that there are still .two speakers to be heard. I shall
therefore ask him, in a equally friendly manner, to
'condense his statement a little more in order that we
-:~n:- c:ispose o.f our work more quickly.

201. Mr. GEORGIEV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French) : The President is entirely right, and I shall
end with two words, and a gift.
202. I shall mention a simple fact that shows how
little the leaders of the United States know of the situation outside their own country, even if they wanted to
know about it. This is a small detail without a:ny
importance, yet it is very characteristic and very
interesting.
203. A statement by the United States Secretary of
State on the reorganization of the United Nations
Secretariat was published in The New Y ark Times of
15 July 1961. It is of no particular interest to me except
for a passage which shows how ideas about the outside
world are formed in the United States. This is the
passage: "It is called a 'troika' after the three-horse
Russian sleigh."
204. How could such a mistake have found its wav
into a statement by a Minister for Foreign Affairs-?
This is what I read in a Russian-American dictionary,
which I have before me:
"Troika, feminine word used in conversation.
"First meaning: the numeral three.
"Second meaning: mark given in class. Example:
the pupil got 3 out of 5.
"Third meaning: playing-card. Examples: the three
·
of hearts, the three of spades.
."Fourth meaning: three horses harnessed abreast."
205. How could such an interpretation have found its
way into an official statement by the Secretary of State
of the United States? Troika means the figure 3. To
speak of the troika principle is to spealc of the tripartite
principle. What is :the point of introducing this idea of
a Russian sleigh drawn by three horses harnessed
abreast? What is the public to think? The public will
say : this a northern country covered with snow, a
country v\rith strange customs where sleighs, for some
extraordinary reason, are drawn by three horses; and
tihis is the country that is trying to impose upon us its
habits, which, to say the least, are curious.
206. I do not say that public opinion will really gain
this impression, but it is possible. I do not say that
the United States Government wished to create this
impression. I simply want to show hovv badly informed
the State Department is, even a:bout the most insignificant things.
207. Since I am moved by the noblest sentiments and
anxious for mutual · understanding between East and
West, I should like to ask you, Mr. President, to
present this Russian-American dictionary to the State
Department. If the rules of procedure do not prevent
such a gift from one delegation to another, I would
ask you to offer this book to the United States delegation as my personal gift. If they do not accept it, I
should like you to offer it to the United Nations
museum, as a symbol of our wish for mutual understanding.
208. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus) : I am glad of this
opportunity to add my delegation's hearty congratulations to Mr. Boland on the occassion of his unanimous
election to preside over this special session. His wise
and skilful conduct of the fifteenth session of the
General Assembly fully justifies this token of general
appreciation.
209. I hope I shall be brief in dealing with this
matter. It is a matter of concern to my delegation that

~e--m-b_e_r
S- ta-t~e_s
~

2
96
10051
27
__o_f_t_h_e__U
__n_I.t_e_d__N
__a-tt"-o-n_sh_,_mw_e_he-ot_isn-eg____s__A_u_gu
__st__I__ _I_______________________________I___
can afford protection to the weak and reduce the existing
record has been one of particularly friendly relations and
inequality of power between the two sides, thereby
creating a more balanced climate in which negotiations
co-operation, and whose distinguished Heads of State
for a peaceful solution can be fruitful.
had in the past co-operated in seeking peaceful solutions
of other problems, should find themselves in their
213. A reasoned and objective discussion of issues in
present predicament of such strained relations. It is
the United Nations cannot fail to bring out in sharp
relief what is right and what is just, on which basis
further a matter of profound regret to us that there
alone real and workable solutions can 'be reached.
has been in Tunisia such a heavy and unnecessary loss
of life, which from today's reports appear to be far
Discussion in the United Nations is always beneficial,
graver th<Jn we originally thought. Our thoughts go out
irrespective of any possible excesses that may occur in
in sympathy to all the victims of those tragic events
the debate. The gist and the effect of the discussion lies
and our hearts beat as one with all the people who are
not in the excesses but in the resulting collective voice
struggling for their legitimate rights.
of humanity. Consequently, debate in the United Nations
210. Cyprus, as a Mediterranean island geographically
should not be shunned by those who are willing to
placed between three continents and desiring to serve
abide by the principles of the Charter. In this sense
as a bridge of friendship and understanding between
my delegation joined with forty-seven other delegations
the peoples of these continents, is particularly distressed
in the request [ A/4831] for the calling of this special
session.
by this conflict between France and Tunisia. Close,
friendly associations have linked the peoples of Cyprus
214. The issues before us are crystal clear. None of
with the people of both these countries, and it is our
the able speakers that have ,taken this rostrum have
most earnest desire to see a just settlement of their
disputed the facts as clearly stated by the representative
dispute by negotiation in mutual understanding based
of Tunisia, and none have questioned the validity of
on freedom and equal rights under the Charter.
the principles involved. Indeed there seems to be a
Regrettably this has proved so far impossible in spite
general consensus on the merits of the case. These
of diligent and persistent efforts by third parties. Indeed,
merits are concisely and accurately embodied in the
as Mr. Slim, the representative of Tunisia, explained
moderate draft resolution [A/ L.351] which my del egato this Assembly [996th meeting] in his admirable
tion, together with thirty-one other delegations, has
and lucid account, negotiations under the provisions of
sponsored.
the exchange of letters of 17 June 195812 between
215. These merits are as follows:
France and Tunisia had been sought previously by
Tunisia .but without result, until we came to the present
( 1) That France, by failing to withdraw its armed
·
·
forces to their original position, has not fully complied
Sltttat10n.
with the provisions of the interim resolution 13 of the
211. We shall not enter into the sequence of developSecurity Council;
ments that led up to the armed conflict and the tragic
(2) That the Security Council failed to take approevents that followed. Nor shall we make any apportionment of responsibility or blame in these respects. This
priate action for the implementation of the said resolumay be the work of the historians. We shall concern
tion and as to the main complaint by Tunisia that French
ourselves solely with what should be done now for a
armed forces are occupying admittedly sovereign terrijust solution of the problem in the interests not only
tory of Tunisia without the latter's agreement or
of the parties immediately concerned, but also, and
consent.
(3) That Tunisia has the sovereign right to call for
perhaps more so, in the interests of the United Nations
and of the world community at large.
the withdrawal of all French armed forces present on
212. I will not take the time to recount the proceedings
its territory without it consent.
in the Security Council on this issue, and the other
( 4) That the presence of such forces on Tunisia's
facts that rendered the convening of this special session
territory against the express will of the Tunisian Govnecessary. It has been amply done 'by many eloquent
ernment and people constitute a violation of Tunisian
sovereignty and is a permanent source of friction enspeal\:ers who preceded me. I· would only wish to say
that dearly, since the Security Council was unable to
dangering international peace and security.
216. Proceeding on these unquestionably and generally
reach agreement on any measures for the full implementation of its own resolution and for a peaceful
accepted pren1ises, the draft resolution, in paragraph 1 of
settlement of this international dispute, another organ
its operative part reaffirms the interim resolution of the
Security Council and urges the Government of France
of the United Nations, namely, the General Assembly,
should take up that task, or else the United Nations
to implement fully the provisions of operative paragraph
would be failing in its primary responsibility, that of
1 thereof.
217. In operative paragraph 2, it recognizes the savemaintaining international peace and security. In a
general sense, where agreement through negotiations or
reign right of Tunisia to call for the withdrawal of all
mediation of any international dispute cannot be achieved
French armed forces present on its territory without its
because of too wide a divergence of interests or because
consent.
the strong, being in a dominant position, are unwilling
218. In paragraph 3, it calls upon the Governments
to concede the right of the weak, the intervention of
of France and Tunisia to enter into immediate negotiathe United Nations is an imperative need in the interests
of peace, and I should say in the interests also of
tions to devise peaceful and agreed measures in accordance with the principles of the Charter for the withfreedom. By introducing in an international dispute the
drawal of all French armed forces from Tunisian
weight of world conscience with a collective sense of
justice and respect for principles, the General Assembly
territory.
219. There is no difference of opinion as to the correctness and as to the validity of these merits.
12 Official Records of the Security Council, St.rteenth Yea1·,

__

plement for July, August and September 1961, document
869.

J:l IUd.,

document S/-1882.

128

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

220. This moderate draft resolution, therefore, in its
substance, is unobjectionable and ought to be acceptable to all. Where then does the difference lie, because
obviously there is some difference?
221. n has been suggested that paragraph 3 ought to
leave the purport of the negotiations unspecified, instead
of relating it to the withdrawal of the French forces
from Tunisian territory. Considering, however, that
Tunisia's right to call for the withdrawal of all French
forces from its territory has not been disputed in the
Assembly and that Tunisia's demand for such withdrawal is an obvious fact, it follows as a logical inference
that the only possible ground for negotiations between
the parties would be nothing other than the time-table
and the modalities of such withdrawal.
222. Considering furthermore that final evacuation is
implicit in the exchange of letters of 17 June 1958 between France and Tunisia, and also that France has
made known its intention of ultimate withdrawal, it
would seem that even from the French point of view
negotiations could not be for anything other than for
withdrawal.
223. The draft resolution, therefore, rightly specifies
withdrawal as the object of the negotiations, leaving it
open for the parties to decide upon the time-table and
procedures of such withdrawal.
224. Indeed, negotiations in this sense would be in the
best interests of both parties, for independently of other
considerations, the good will of the local population is
an essential in the effective use of a base. However, it
seems to us that the real difference lies elsewhere;· the
real difference seems to be between action and inaction,
between those who would have the General Assembly
adopt a resolution and those who would have it adopt
none. In our view, inaction is impossible and would be
disastrous in its implications. It should be remembered
that the issues before us extend beyond the limits of the
Franco-Tunisian dispute and directly affect the United
Nations itself. This is the first time that the General
Assembly has been confronted with a situation in which
it is called upon to uphold a resolution of the Security
Council which has not been fully implemented because
one of the parties to which it is addressed fails to comply
with it. The fact that the resolution in question was
adopted by the Security Council without a dissenting
vote adds to the gravity of the situation.
225. What is at stake is the authority and the efficacy of the Security Council, the most important organ
of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. If the General Assembly
fails on this symbolic occasion to take appropriate action,
the whole structure of the United Nations will be irremediably shaken, and this at a time when an ominous
world crisis looming on the horizon makes a strong and
effective United Nations more than ever necessary in the
humanitarian effort for survival.
226. We cannot conceal our profound regret over the
recent attitude of France towards the United Nations

Printed in U.S.A.

and its organs, and the absence of France's representative:
from this General Assembly. The existence of this
world Organization and the principles set forth in its
Charter are in the vital interest of humanity as a whole
and of every component part of it, large or small. If, on
any particular occasion a given Power finds the United
Nations and its Charter noxious to its own pursuits
and objectives, there will certainly be other and more
important occasions when it will find it necessary and
beneficial.
227. The failure of the League of Nations and the
calamities of the war that followed it have been a lesson
for all who had no faith in the collective effort of
humanity. A new spirit brought about the establishment
of the United Nations, in which France, in keeping with
its tradition, took a leading part. We confidently hope
that the French nation will soon return to that wise and
imaginative policy, in its own broadly conceived interests
no less than in those of the world community at large.
228. We should also emphasize that as things stand,
the way in which the General Assembly deals with the
Franco-Tunisian question at the present juncture may
have serious implications for the United Nations and for
world peace. On such occasions as the present, Member States should unhesitatingly brush aside minor considerations and rally to the support of the Security
Council and the United Nations. Susceptibilities, injured
feelings, loyalties or other considerations of expediency,
understandable as they may be otherwise, are minor
compa\ed to the greater issue of the United Nations
with which we are now faced. The threat to the United
Nations is there, and the dangers involved are as real as
they are grave. Our mode of thinking and acting at this
special session will inescapably affect the outcome of
other and more vital issues, and the very functions of
this Organization, in a way that may determine its
whole future.
229. As The New York Times put the matter in its
editorial for Sunday, 20 August 1961 :
"This [session] will be more than ever a test of
the Organization's ability to deal with situations in
which the world's peace and humanity's future are at
stake."
230. A dual responsibility falls on the General Assembly :
first, to act in order to uphold the authority and efficacy of the main organ ·of the United Nations, namely
the Security Council, and second, to protect the interests
of international peace by adopting a constructive resolution based on the Charter and on the clear and unquestionable issues before it.
231. The draft resolution which has been proposed
meets both those objectives. It is important that Member
States, by overwhelmingly adopting this draft resolution, should reaffirm their faith in the United Nations
and take this occasion to revitalize its Charter at a
time when the strengthening of the United· Nations is an
imperious necessity.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

S-25119-February 1962-2,175
