S/2019/820

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-third submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018) and paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report at
least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for August and September 2019.

II. Major developments
Key points: August and September 2019
1.
Despite the ceasefires in Idlib announced by the Russian Federation and the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, on 2 and 30 August respectively, civilian
casualties, including confirmed deaths of civilians, continued to be reported over the
reporting period. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), air strikes and other hostilities between 1 August and
22 September killed 209 civilians. Following the announcement of the ceasefire on
30 August, there was a notable decrease in the number of air strikes, although heavy
exchanges of ground-based strikes continued to be reported. In total, since late April,
OHCHR has reported that more than 1,000 civilians have been killed. In addition,
there have been more than 400,000 people displaced and significant damage has bee n
caused to civilian infrastructure.

19-17137 (E)

171019

*1917137*

S/2019/820

2.
Health-care and education services continued to be affected by hostilities during
the reporting period, with 13 incidents affecting health-care facilities and assets
confirmed by the World Health Organization, and 11 incidents affecting education
facilities verified by the United Nations. The incidents, many in the north -west of the
country, resulted in the killing and injuring of women, children, people in need of
medical care and humanitarian workers.
3.
Conditions inside Rukban, on the Syrian-Jordanian border, continue to be
extremely challenging. According to findings from an inter-agency assessment
mission in August, food insecurity has reached critical levels with most of the
population reporting dependence on negative coping mechanisms to meet their needs.
From 5 to 11 September, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
conducted a joint mission to Rukban to provide urgent assistance, including delivering
a one-month food ration and nutrition supplies for up to 15,000 people. From 26 to
29 September, United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent teams provided
additional aid and also supported the voluntary departures of 329 people wishing to
leave Rukban. Since late March, more than 18,000 people have left Rukban, however,
thousands remain in the area and are in need of continued assistance until durable
solutions are found for them.
4.
In the north-east of the country, the Hawl camp in Hasakah Governorate now
hosts 68,600 people, 94 per cent of whom are women and children. Humanitarian
access to the annex hosting non-Syrian and non-Iraqi nationals for the sustained
delivery of services continued to be limited. Tensions remain high in the camp, with
security incidents reported on a weekly basis, including incidents grounded in
ideology, with one serious incident occurring on 30 September, which resulted in the
death of one female resident and seven other women being injured.
5.
Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies included food for
an average of 4.1 million people in need each month and more than 620,000 health
and medical treatments to people throughout the country. Cross -border assistance,
authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2393 (2017) and 2449 (2018), remained a vital part of the humanitarian
response. In August and September, 1,388 trucks (41 consignments) delivered gener al
food assistance for over 1 million people (monthly average).
6.
Response efforts from within the Syrian Arab Republic continued at scale in
response to assessed needs throughout much of the country, even as access to some
areas and for some humanitarian actors, including the United Nations, remained
limited. During the reporting period, the United Nations and/or its partners deployed
1,119 missions throughout the country and also reached new areas, such as Palmyra,
and some areas that recently shifted control in southern Idlib (Sinjar subdistrict),
although not yet in a sustainable manner.
7.
During the reporting period, a number of access constraints were reported in
parts of Idlib, northern Hama and south-eastern Aleppo Governorates, owing mostly
to heightened hostilities, although some response efforts are under way in those areas.
Access was also limited in Raqqah city and east of the Euphrates River in Dayr
al-Zawr, including the Hajin enclave, owing mostly to widespread explosive hazard
contamination. Some areas in the south of the country were also not accessible in a
sustainable manner to some humanitarian actors, including the United Nations, owing
to administrative restrictions and in some locations, insecurity. The United Nations
has not been able to gain access to the collective shelters in Homs for those leaving
Rukban and conduct assessments and monitoring in the areas of second destination
for people leaving Rukban, including areas in Homs and Rif Dimashq Governorates.

2/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

Humanitarian update
3.
Despite the ceasefires announced by the Russian Federation and the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in Idlib, on 2 and 30 August respectively,
civilian casualties continued over the reporting period. According to OHCHR, air
strikes and other hostilities between 1 August and 22 September killed 209 civilians.
Following the announcement of the ceasefire on 30 August, there was a notable
decrease in air strikes, although heavy exchanges of ground -based strikes continued
to be reported. In total, OHCHR has reported that more than 1,000 civilians have been
killed since the escalation of hostilities in late April. In addition, there have been more
than 400,000 people displaced and significant damage has been caused to civilian
infrastructure. One air strike was reported by the international counter-ISIL coalition,
on 31 August, against what the coalition described as an “Al-Qaida in Syria
leadership” facility north of Idlib city. The strike reportedly resulted in civilian
casualties.
4.
The overwhelming majority of people displaced in the north-west as a result of
the hostilities are reported to have moved to densely-populated areas close to the
Turkish border, in northern Idlib Governorate, where humanitarian assistance is
already overstretched. Camps for displaced people are overcrowded, with many
people forced to stay in the open air. The humanitarian community continues to
respond, but after months of intensified needs, pipelines are running low and gaps
have emerged, which remain to be addressed. The most critical need is for shelter. In
addition, with winter rapidly approaching, people need warm clothes, blankets and
other winter items to withstand the colder weather. The 2019–2020 academic year
began in September, and many school-aged children are deprived of education
opportunities as a consequence of the size of the recent displacement to already
densely-populated areas, the heavy damage sustained by civilian infrastructure,
including schools, the use of schools to house displace d populations, and the lack of
learning supplies and materials.
5.
Conditions inside Rukban, on the Syrian-Jordanian border, remain extremely
challenging. Since late March, more than 18,000 people have left Rukban, but
thousands remain in the area and are in need of continued assistance until durable
solutions can be found for them. According to findings from an inter-agency
assessment mission in August, food insecurity has reached critical levels, with most
of the population reporting dependence on negative coping mechanisms to meet their
needs. During the reporting period, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent conducted two joint missions to Rukban to assist the population. The first
was conducted from 5 to 11 September, to deliver food and nutrition items for 15,000
people. The second was conducted from 26 to 29 September and saw United Nations
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent teams support the voluntary departures of people
wishing to leave Rukban, with 329 people assisted in leaving the area. In addition,
over 1,000 people who were not reached by the convoy in early September received
food and nutrition items, over 110 medical consultations were conducted and 850
protection and legal consultations were also provided.
6.
The Hawl camp in Hasakah Governorate in the north-eastern part of the Syrian
Arab Republic currently hosts about 68,600 people, 94 per cent of whom are women
and children. Around 67 per cent of the residents of the camp are under the age of 18
and 55 per cent are under the age of 12. During the reporting period, more than 300
Syrian internally displaced persons departed the camp and returned to their areas of
origin in Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates; a small number of third-country
nationals also departed. Since the beginning of June, approximately 2,640 residents
departed the camp, including around 1,240 Syrians and 1,400 third -country nationals,
including women and children. A number of irregular departures of Syrians, who

19-17137

3/20

S/2019/820

leave without coordinating with the camp, have also taken place in recent months,
contributing to the overall reduction in residents. The humanitarian situation in the
camp has stabilized, compared with previous months, but needs remain considerable
and there is, as yet, no long-term solution across all sectors. Procedures for medical
referrals remain challenging, despite ongoing advocacy. Tensions remain high in the
camp, with security incidents reported on a weekly basis, including incidents
grounded in ideology. One serious incident occurred on 30 Septe mber, which resulted
in the death of a female resident and seven other women injured, as well as the arrest
of up to 50 women. Protection and the need to realize durable solutions for camp
residents remain the key concerns.
7.
Tensions and attacks continued to be reported in the south-west of the country.
In Dar‘a, the security situation remained unstable, with tensions rising between Syrian
Government forces and local populations. Syrian government security branches
reportedly detained individuals with former links to armed opposition groups,
including those who had signed so-called local agreements with the Government. In
response, local cells of former opposition fighters reportedly carried out attacks on
Syrian Government-linked targets. Concerns have emerged regarding the impact of
insecurity on freedom of movement for the population in the area, as well as on access
for humanitarian aid deliveries.
8.
In late September, the World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations released a joint report on crop and food security
in the Syrian Arab Republic, finding that favourable rains and improved security led
to an improved harvest compared with 2018, despite crop fires which affected a
number of farmers. The wheat output almost doubled. The overall output remains,
however, at almost half of pre-crisis levels. Higher food prices, largely due to rising
fuel prices and depreciation in the Syrian pound on the informal market, are placing
a great strain on many Syrians, in particular the most vulnerable.
Update on overall developments
9.
On 23 September, I announced the agreement of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian Negotiation Commission for a credible,
balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee that will be facilitated by the United
Nations in Geneva (see S/2019/775). The agreement was facilitated by my Special
Envoy for Syria in accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
10. On 7 August, Turkey and the United States of America reportedly concluded an
agreement on a so-called safe zone, or security mechanism, for the border area in the
northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic. Joint patrolling of the zone by the United
States and Turkey also began during the reporting period. The Syrian Democratic
Forces also reportedly handed over existing positions to local military councils. The
perimeter of the so-called safe zone, including its length, width and the extent of
demilitarization, as well as the related administrative arrangements, remain unclear.
Protection
11. The impact of the ongoing hostilities and violence against civilians and civilian
objects remained severe and extensive in parts of the country, particularly in the
north-west. Of the 209 civilian deaths document by OHCHR due to hostilities in the
north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic between 1 August and 22 September,
116 were men, 34 were women and 59 were children (45 boys and 14 girls). The
deaths were the result of air strikes by government and pro -government forces, and
ground-based strikes exchanged between government and pro-government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups, as well as one air strike by the internatio nal

4/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

counter-ISIL coalition. The greatest concentration of casualties continued to be
reported in the north-west of the country, despite the unilateral ceasefires.
12. Civilians continued to be killed and injured, also as a result of an increase in the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices, including the use of vehicle borne improvised explosive devices in populated areas under the control of various
non-State armed opposition groups in northern and eastern parts of the country. Given
the consistent pattern of civilian harm, OHCHR reports that it appears highly likely
that parties to the conflict have failed to respect the key international humanitarian
law principles of distinguishing civilians from fighters and civilian objects from
military objectives; refraining from indiscriminate attacks; proportionality in attack;
and precaution in the conduct of military operations. Civilians were also killed and
injured by abandoned mines and explosive remnants of war, including unexploded
ordnance.
13. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
continued to receive reports of arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances of
civilians, including of returnees in areas under the control of the Government by
various government security forces. Relatives of those persons were not informed of,
or were denied information about, the detention, fate and whereabouts of their family
members. Such patterns raise concerns about what appears to be enforced
disappearance, as well as whether due process was adequately followed and whether
all relevant rights were afforded to detainees, as required by international law.
14. In the northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, the situation for civilians also
remains worrying. Non-State armed opposition groups and Security Councildesignated terrorist groups continue to systematically use intimidation and
harassment as tactics against civilians, including elderly people, and media and health
service providers, through targeted killings, abductions, the deprivation of liberty,
ill-treatment, torture, enforced disappearances, looting and the confiscation of
property. The whereabouts and fate of many detainees remain unknown to their
families.
15. Military operations affecting educational facilities co ntinued to be reported by
humanitarian organizations. A total of 11 incidents were verified by the United
Nations during the reporting period, 1 including 8 in Idlib, 2 in Hasakah and 1 in
Aleppo Governorates:
(a) On 1 August 2019, Ahmad al-Alloush school in Kafr Nubl, Idlib
Governorate, reportedly sustained partial damage due to an air strike;
(b) On 10 August, Abu al-Aala secondary school for girls in Ma‘arrat
al-Nu‘man, Idlib Governorate, was reportedly damaged during air strikes;
(c) On 11 August, Has primary school in Idlib Governorate was reportedly
partially damaged by air strikes and ground-based shelling;
(d) On 16 August, Wafa primary school, a health-care facility and surrounding
buildings in Has, Idlib Governorate, were reportedly damaged by an air strike;
(e) On 16 August, Hussein al-Ali and Tariq Bin Ziad schools in Hish, Idlib
Governorate, were reportedly damaged;

__________________
1

19-17137

These attacks have been confirmed using tried and tested systems, whereby the United Nations
receives reports from partners on the ground and reviews them against at least two other
independent sources. Only attacks that are fully vetted and confirmed by all independent sources
are included in the list of confirmed attacks. These systems are used worldwide and are widely
respected.
5/20

S/2019/820

(f) On 17 August, Amal school in Hazzarin, Idlib Governorate, reportedly
sustained significant damage;
(g) On 19 August, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device reportedly
exploded near the Industrial High School in Qamishli, Hasakah Governorate, without
causing casualties or structural damage;
(h) On 20 August, non-State armed opposition groups reportedly occupied
Sinaa school in Atarib, Aleppo Governorate;
(i) On 21 August, Rifiyyah primary school in Bushayriyah, Idlib Governorate,
was reportedly rendered inoperable owing to air strikes;
(j) On 28 August, non-State armed opposition groups reportedly occupied
Hidaj school, Shaddadah, Hasakah Governorate;
(k) On 31 August 2019, an air strike reportedly caused significant damage to
Halbah school in Halbah, Idlib Governorate.
16. During the reporting period, the Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care
of the World Health Organization reported 13 incidents affecting health-care facilities
and assets. 1 The incidents reportedly resulted in the killing of 11 health workers and
patients and the injuring of an additional 10 people, as well as damage to the facilities.
Seven of the health-care facilities in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab
Republic were attacked between 28 and 30 August. The number of outpatient
consultations in the north-west of the country have decreased by over 20 per cent
when compared with the first quarter of the year, which is estimated to be, in part, a
result of the volatile conflict environment.
17. On 1 August, I announced my decision to establish an internal United Nations
Headquarters board of inquiry to investigate a series of incident s that have occurred
in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic since the memorandum on the
stabilization of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area was signed between the
Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September 2018. The investigati on will cover
the destruction of, or damage to, facilities on the deconfliction list and United
Nations-supported facilities in the area. The board, whose composition was
announced on 13 September, commenced its work on 30 September. It will ascertain
the facts of the specific incidents concerned and report to me once it completes its
work.
Humanitarian response
18. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached on average around
6.3 million people in need each month, including children, adol escent girls and
women of reproductive age, throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. During the
reporting period, humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies
included food delivered for 4 million people in need in August and 4.3 million people
in September. More than 1.3 million health and medical treatments were provided to
people throughout the country during the reporting period (see table 1).

6/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
August and September 2019
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Average number of
people reached monthly

10 000

International Organization for Migration

17 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

647 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

1 382 000

United Nations Development Programme

1 368 000

Mine Action Service

5 000

United Nations Population Fund

363 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

82 000

World Food Programme

3 593 000

World Health Organization

650 000

19. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance provided by
United Nations agencies included food for 2.67 million people in Government controlled areas and in the north-east, on average, each month. In total throughout the
reporting period, approximately 723,000 people received water, sanitation and
hygiene services and supplies. Nearly 543,000 children and mothers were reached
with primary health-care, maternal and reproductive health and immunization
services. Moreover, some 308,000 people benefited from gender-based violence
prevention, protection and psychosocial support services and child protection
services. United Nations operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic also
included the distribution of nearly 776,000 health and medical treatments to people
throughout the country.
20. As part of its countrywide humanitarian response, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners continued to deliver life-saving assistance to more than
800,000 people each month in the three Governorates of the north -eastern part of the
Syrian Arab Republic, namely Dayr al-Zawr, Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates. At
the Hawl camp, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners continue to
implement a major relief operation, where some 35 humanitarian partners are
providing more than 50 activities and services to camp residents. Effor ts to improve
overall living standards in the camp continue. Partners make daily deliveries of water
and also deliver the monthly provision of food rations and hygiene and dignity kits
(20,000 per month). However, there is a constant need to maintain and u pgrade
existing facilities such as latrines and water tanks, as well as to replace worn out or
damaged tents. Currently, partners are in the process of replacing up to 3,000 tents
across the camp, with 1,177 tents having already been replaced. Aside from s upport
to the Hawl camp, efforts also continue to deliver regular assistance to the 120,000
internally displaced persons residing in 58 sites, camps and informal settlements for
internally displaced persons across the north-east of the country, as well as to
communities hosting large numbers of internally displaced persons.
21. As mentioned above, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
conducted two joint missions to Rukban to assist the population. During the first
mission, from 5 to 11 September, the two organizations delivered much-needed
humanitarian assistance for close to 15,000 internally displaced Syrians. Food was
19-17137

7/20

S/2019/820

distributed to civilians in Rukban and nutritional supplies were provided for children.
The joint convoy consisted of 22 trucks, carrying food rations and 50 kg sacks of
wheat, as well as high-energy biscuits. The second mission, from 26 to 29 September,
included a top-up delivery of assistance to those who did not receive aid in the first
delivery. The mission also supported the departure of 329 people who opted to leave.
22. Humanitarian mine action partners continued to implement programmes across
the country. In the month of August, in Aleppo and Idlib, interventions by the Mine
Action Service reached 4,699 beneficiaries with risk education sessions. Another 114
people in need received victim assistance support, including physical rehabilitation,
psychosocial support, vocational training and self-care support. Contamination
impact surveys were conducted in 14 communities. I n Rif Dimashq, risk education
teams continued to deliver awareness sessions to promote safer behaviour in the
communities most affected by explosive hazard contamination, focusing on such
highly vulnerable groups as herders, rubble removers, adolescents an d women.
23. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2449 (2018) (see table 2). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified
the Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its
destination and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached. In August and
September, 1,388 trucks (41 consignments) delivered food assistance for more than
1 million people through cross-border deliveries (see figure I).
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: August and
September 2019 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

6 agencies
41 cross-border

1,311
1,021

consignments

1,388 trucks
82
0

Nutrition

39

Non-food Education
items/shelter

39
Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: August and September 2019 (monthly average)

8/20

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and
hygiene

Governorate

District

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Aleppo

Afrin

–

32 338

116

–

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

80 000

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

28 795

86 790

686 771

11 663

–

8 750

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

–

97

–

–

–

19-17137

S/2019/820

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and
hygiene

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

10 000

31 675

56 072

7 950

–

3 000

Ma‘arrah

–

–

160 825

–

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

25 575

7 374

4 350

–

–

Idlib

Harim

–

–

8 342

–

–

–

Idlib

Idlib

–

845 415

290 837

56 250

–

24 300

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

20 644

1 800

–

3 182

Governorate

District

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

Idlib

24. In the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian personnel
continued to provide food assistance to newly displaced households, to increase
health services in areas that are receiving people and to provide emergency protection
services. Owing to the growing humanitarian needs across the north-west, the World
Food Programme has increased its cross-border beneficiary caseload to 1.1 million
people and increased the size of the food ration to provide a total of 2,100 kcal per
person per day. This aid was delivered exclusively through the cross-border modality.
Tens of thousands received other services and support, such as schooling, non -food
items, clean water, shelter, emergency and protection services.
25. While humanitarian needs in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic
have increased, the massive response by the United Nations and its partners has
helped avoid a further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis. The past months have
seen the highest number of trucks passing through the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic cross-border operation since its inception
in 2014. More contingency stocks have been released in the past two months than in
the previous two years. As a result, much of the contingency stocks in place to respond
to emergencies have been exhausted, and without further funding the amount of aid
available will be reduced. The United Nations and partners operating cross -border
and from Damascus have contingency plans in place in case of a further escalation of
violence. Donor support is urgently needed; without it, partners will not be able to
scale up their operations and respond to both new and existing needs.
26. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
27. As of the end of September, the Syria Humanitarian Response Plan was funded
at 35 per cent, with $1.15 billion provided of the $3.3 billion requested for 2019. 2 The
response to meet the needs of the affected population in the north -western part of the
country is folded into the response plan. However, the critically low level of funding
to date has required partners to make difficult decisions that prioritize respo nse efforts
to ensure crucial life-saving humanitarian response in a timely manner to those people
most affected. Many humanitarian partners are, for example, forced to use funds
previously allocated to meet the upcoming anticipated needs during winter to fund
emergency life-saving assistance for displaced persons instead. Without additional
funding, significant gaps in the response are expected in the months ahead.

__________________
2

19-17137

See Financial Tracking Service reporting on the Syria Humanitarian Response Plan, available at:
https://fts.unocha.org/appeals/663/summary.
9/20

S/2019/820

Humanitarian access
28. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. The access landscape in the country is
complex, with different areas serviced differently and different types of services
requiring different operating modalities. Access is critical for principled humanitarian
action, which depends notably on the ability to independently assess needs and deliver
assistance and to monitor and evaluate impact independently, including by regul arly
engaging directly with affected people.
29. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to provide assistance
from within the Syrian Arab Republic to millions of people in need in thousands of
locations throughout the country. More than 1,700 United Nations staff members are
present in the Syrian Arab Republic, with more than 500 deployed in nine hubs
outside Damascus (Aleppo, Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah,
Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus). A further 3,860 staff members of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are
deployed across the country. The decentralized presence of United Nations staff
contributes to greater access and proximity to affected populations.
30. Many of the aid deliveries are implemented through national partners, in
particular national non-governmental organizations and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. The United Nations is regularly deployed alongside the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, including to undertake assessments, accompany deliveries and follow up
with monitoring and evaluation missions. In August and September, the United
Nations conducted hundreds of missions throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see
table 3). Some of those missions, in particular those for staff based in Damascus,
required formal approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (see table 4), while the
vast majority, in particular those for field-based staff, were deployed in accordance
with agreements at the local level with governors and ot her relevant parties.
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type: August and
September 2019
Note
verbale

Blanket
approval

Governorate
approval

Total
number

Assessment missions

19

19

16

54

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

13

293

3

309

Monitoring missions

38

585

33

656

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

26

74

0

100

96

971

52

1 119

Type of mission

Total

10/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies, by Governorate: August and September 2019
300
8

250
200
20

150
266

4

100

22

11

155

50

116

103

91

6

3

2

2

0

0

6

45

42

38

36

35

33

29

0

Blanket and Governorate approvals

6
24

6
10

Note verbale

Table 4
Requests for United Nations access for single-agency missions: August and
September 2019
Number
requested

Number
approved

Percentage
approved

123

32

26

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

49

15

31

Monitoring missions

156

50

32

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

70

29

41

398

126

32

Type of request

Assessment missions

Total

31. During the reporting period, the United Nations and its partners received
approval from the Syrian authorities to conduct 1,119 missions, 1,023 of which were
approved at the local level (blanket approval or Governorate approval) and 96 at the
national level (formal approval). During the reporting period, the United Nations
and/or its partners also reached new areas, such as Palmyra and some areas that
recently shifted control in southern Idlib (Sinjar sub -district), although not yet in a
sustainable manner.
32. Response efforts from within the Syrian Arab Republic continued at scale in
response to assessed needs throughout much of the country, even as access to some
areas and for some humanitarian actors, including the United Nations, remained
limited. Limitations on the ability of certain sectors to carry out structured needs
assessments across the country remained. Of the 398 submitted mission requests that
required formal approval at the national level by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
126 mission requests were approved (32 per cent). While some of the requests were
made in the last days of the reporting period, and thus would not be expected to
receive a formal response before the end of the month, the numbers indicate
limitations on access for humanitarian actors.

19-17137

11/20

S/2019/820

33. During the reporting period, a number of access constraints were reported in
parts of Idlib, northern Hama and south-eastern Aleppo Governorates, owing mostly
to heightened hostilities, although some response efforts are under way in those areas.
Access was also limited in Raqqah city and east of the Euphrates River in Dayr
al-Zawr, including the Hajin enclave, owing mostly to widespread explosive hazard
contamination. Some areas in the south of the country were also not accessible in a
sustainable manner to some humanitarian actors, including the United Nations, owing
to administrative restrictions and, in some locations, insecurity. The United Nations
has not been able to gain access to the collective shelters in Homs for those leaving
Rukban and conduct assessments and/or monitoring in the areas of second destination
for people leaving Rukban, including areas in Homs and Rif Dimashq Governorates.
34. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2449 (2018). During
the reporting period, the Mechanism monitored the delivery of 41 consignments by
six United Nations agencies, consisting of 1,388 trucks, from three border crossings:
20 from Bab al-Hawa (1,185 trucks); 19 from Bab al-Salam (195 trucks); and 2 from
Ya‘rubiyah (8 trucks). This brings the total number of trucks since the beginning of
cross-border operations to 28,383 (20,422 through Bab al-Hawa; 3,264 through Bab
al-Salam; 4,595 through Ramtha; and 102 from Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns
or questions about the humanitarian nature of the consignments sent. The United
Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
regarding all shipments. The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent
cooperation of the Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
35. Response from the cross-border operation from Turkey continued at high levels
to address existing needs, as well as new needs arising from the recent escalation in
conflict. Access constraints persisted in frontline areas owing to the intensity of
hostilities. In general, humanitarian access in areas of Idlib not affected by hostilities
remained unconstrained, with some isolated incidents or bureaucratic impediments.
In northern Aleppo, access challenges remained, primarily bureaucratic impediments.
Visas and registrations
36. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: August and September 2019
Type of request

Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending

Visas requested during reporting period

126

50

17

58

Renewals requested during reporting period

154

116

–

38

Visas pending from before reporting period

114

48

18

38

Renewals pending from before reporting period

43

40

–

3

Note: The United Nations withdrew one visa request submitted during the reporting period and
10 pending requests from before the reporting period.

37. A total of 28 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.

12/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
38. The United Nations and non-governmental organizations continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, by air strikes and by the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other
attacks. Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and landmines.
39. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 23 staff members of the United Nations and
organizations of the United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of
UNRWA; 66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8
staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff
members of international and national non-governmental organizations have also
been killed.
40. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (all from UNRWA) were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
41. The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic remains one of the greatest
humanitarian crises of our time. Active hostilities continue to be of great concern, and
the risk of further destabilization inside the country and across the wider region
remains ever-present. The situation in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab
Republic, in particular, speaks to this fact, with over 1,000 civilians having lost their
lives since the escalation of hostilities in late April. An additional 400,000 people
inside the so-called de-escalation zone fled their homes towards the Turkish border
since late April.
42. I strongly condemn continued attacks affecting civilians and civilian
infrastructure in the course of hostilities in the north-west. I remind all parties to the
conflict once again of their obligations under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians and to take constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects in the
conduct of military operations. All parties must cease any indiscriminate attacks
carried out through air strikes, shelling and the use of improvised explosive devices.
43. Regarding the Idlib de-escalation area, I reiterate my call to ensure the
upholding of the memorandum on stabilization signed by the Russian Federation and
Turkey in September 2018. This is not only essential to protect the civilian population,
but also necessary to afford the emerging political process the greatest opportunity to
succeed. Any military operations, including those by and against Security Council designated terrorist groups, must respect the rules of international humanitarian law,
including those on the protection of civilians and civilian objects.
44. Despite the immense challenges posed by hostilities as well as by operating in
an environment where the Security Council-designated terrorist group Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham has a significant presence, humanitarian partners continue to stem a
humanitarian catastrophe in the north-west through a massive cross-border operation
that is delivering aid in accordance with principled humanitaria n action to the
2.1 million people in need in the area. Without this operation, we would see increased
numbers of civilian deaths, greater prevalence of disease and even greater suffering
being inflicted on a population who cannot be reached at this scale, in such a timely
and direct manner, through any other means. In order to ensure that these operations
can continue, it is critical that the provisions of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) be further extended for another year.

19-17137

13/20

S/2019/820

45. I recall the record level of support pledged in Brussels, earlier in 2019, to
support the Syrian Arab Republic and the region. However, I note with concern the
low levels of funding received to date, in 2019, for the Humanitarian Response Plan,
which, as of the end of September, was only 35 per cent funded. Funds are urgently
needed, and I call upon all Member States, in particular those with outstanding
pledges from Brussels, to follow through and provide the supp ort necessary for the
Syrian people.
46. I urge all parties concerned to extend their cooperation to the United Nations
Headquarters board of inquiry as it investigates a series of incidents that have
occurred in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic since the signing of
the memorandum on the stabilization of the situation in the Idlib de -escalation area
between the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September 2018.
47. I am following with great concern the recent developments in the north-eastern
part of the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular the reports of civilian casualties and
displacements resulting from military actions. I call upon all parties to exercise
maximum restraint and stress that any military operation must fully resp ect
international law. Civilians and civilian infrastructure need to be protected at all
times, and sustained, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to civilians in need
must be guaranteed in order to allow the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
to continue to carry out their critical work in the northern part of the country.
48. Continued impunity for alleged serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by parties to the conflict remains of grave concern.
Perpetrators of serious violations of international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, all States, civil society and the United Nations system to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and documentation.
Taking measures to address serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
49. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law in the Syrian Arab Republ ic, I
continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR,
including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect
and promote human rights.
50. On 23 September, I announced the agreement of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Syrian Negotiation Commission for a credible, balanced and
inclusive Constitutional Committee that will be facilitated by the United Nations in
Geneva. I strongly believe that the launch of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
Constitutional Committee can and must be the beginning of the political path out of
the tragedy towards a solution, in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015),
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians and is based on a strong
commitment to the country’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. It should be accompanied by real and meaningful action on the issue of
detainees, abductees and missing persons, as well as improved and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all Syrians in need. Only an inclusive political solution can
lead to sustainable peace and put an end to one of the greatest humanitarian crises of
our time.
14/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: August
and September 2019 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 August, one civilian woman was killed and the Ahmad al -Alloush school
was damaged as a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town
of Kafr Nubl in southern rural Idlib.
• On 11 August, one boy was killed as a result of what were alleged to be air
strikes and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Has and damaged the Has
school in southern rural Idlib.
• On 12 August, the parents of a media activist from the town of Kafr Nubl in
Idlib received information through unofficial channels regarding the death of
their detained son while in the custody of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham. The media
activist was arrested by the group in his home in the town of Kafr Nubl on
26 December 2017, reportedly for being critical of the group. His whereabo uts
and fate remained unknown to his family until news of his death in the group ’s
custody was unofficially conveyed. The parents were neither informed about the
cause of their son’s death nor received his body.
• On 13 August, three civilians, including one woman, were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the city of Khan Shaykhun in
southern rural Idlib.
• On 13 August, three boys were killed as a result of what was alleged to be an
air strike that hit the town of Salihiyah in southern rural Idlib.
• On 14 August, three civilian men were killed as a result of what were alleged to
be double-tap air strikes that hit the village of Basiqah in Ma ‘arrat Hurmah in
southern rural Idlib. The first air strike hit an ambulance centre, killing two
paramedics (an ambulance driver and a nurse) and completely destroying the
centre and the ambulance. The second air strike followed soon thereafter and
killed one first responder as he rushed to the area to rescue the injured.
• On 14 August, four civilians, including two women, were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the city of Ma ‘arrat al-Nu‘man in
southern rural Idlib.
• On 16 August, one civilian woman was killed and the Hussein al -Ali and Tariq
Bin Ziad schools were damaged as a result of what was alleged to be an air strike
that hit the town of Hish in southern rural Idlib.
• On 16 August, one girl was killed and 20 other civilians, including four women,
were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the city
of Ariha in southern rural Idlib.
• On 16 August, at least nine civilians, including two women and three girls, were
killed as a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit a settlement for
internally displaced persons in the town of Has in southern rural Idlib.
* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
19-17137

15/20

S/2019/820

• On 17 August, seven civilians (two women and five children) were killed as a
result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Dayr al -Sharqi
in rural Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man in southern rural Idlib.
• On 20 August, two children were killed as a result of what was alleged to be an
air strike that hit the town of Banin in southern rural Idlib.
• On 21 August, three civilians, including one woman, were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Dayr al -Gharbi in rural
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man in southern rural Idlib.
• On 24 August, two civilian men were killed and nine civilians (four women and
five children) were injured as a result of what was alleged to be a vehicle-borne
improved explosive device that detonated in the neighbourhood of Qusur in the
city of Idlib.
• On 24 August, five civilians, including two women and two boys, were killed
as a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Tallmannis
in southern rural Idlib.
• On 25 August, one civilian woman was killed as a result of what was alleged to
be a ground-based strike that hit the town of Rasif in government-controlled
northern rural Idlib.
• On 25 August, six civilians (two women and four boys) were killed as a result
of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Tallmannis in southern
rural Idlib.
• On 26 August, three civilians (one man, one woman and one girl) were killed as
a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Bsaqla in
southern rural Idlib.
• On 26 August, three civilians (a woman and two boys) were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Ibdita in southern rural
Idlib.
• On 27 August, four civilians (one man, two women and one boy) were killed as
a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Ma ‘arr Shurin
in southern rural Idlib.
• On 28 August, two civilians (one man and one boy) were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town Ma ‘saran in southern rural
Idlib.
• On 28 August, at least 12 civilians, including two women and seven boys, were
killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the city of Ma‘arrat
al-Nu‘man in southern rural Idlib.
• On 29 August, three civilians, including one woman and one boy, were killed as
a result of what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Tah in southern
rural Idlib.
• On 3 September, a medical doctor working at the Ma‘arratmisrin hospital in the
town of Ma‘arratmisrin in Idlib was subjected to beatings and shot in the legs
by Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham gunmen as he was driving his car in the Dana area of
northern Idlib. Reportedly, other gunmen from the group raided the Bab al-Hawa
hospital in the area of Bab al-Hawa and arrested the medical doctor as he was
being treated, and verbally and physically assaulted hospital personnel who tried
to stop them. For reasons that are as yet unidentified, the medical doctor was
deprived of his liberty by the group and released a few hours later.

16/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

• On 13 September, reportedly ground-based strikes occurred near the Kiwan
medical installation in the town of Kansafrah in southern rural Idlib. As a result
of the strikes, the medical installation was damaged. The same installation was
also affected by the hostilities on 23 May.
• On 15 September, four civilians, including two boys, were killed and three other
civilians were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an explosion of
unexploded ordnance that detonated in the vicinity of the Ram Balyun camp for
internally displaced persons on the outskirts of the village of Ram Balyun in the
Jabal al-Zawiyah area of southern rural Idlib.
• On 15 September, one civilian woman was killed as a result of what was alleged
to be a ground-based strike that hit the town of Kansafrah in southern rural Idlib.
Hama Governorate
• On 6 August, three civilians (one woman and two boys) were killed as a result
of what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the village of Ayn
Sulaymu in western rural Hama.
• On 17 August, three children were killed and three other children were injured
as a result of what was alleged to be unexploded ordnance that detonat ed on
agricultural land in the government-controlled village of Mas‘adah in southeastern Hama.
• On 25 August, one civilian woman was killed as a result of what was alleged to
be a ground-based strike that hit the village of Rasif in northern rural Hama .
Aleppo Governorate
• On 8 August, two civilians (one man and one boy) were killed and four civilians
were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an improved explosive device
attached to a motorcycle that detonated in the vicinity of the Kawa roundabout
in the city of Afrin in western rural Aleppo.
• On 10 August, one civilian man was killed and six other civilians, including two
boys, were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an improvised explosive
device attached to a motorcycle that detonated in a marketplace in the city of
I‘zaz in rural Aleppo.
• On 18 August, three civilians were injured as a result of what was alleged to be
a roadside improvised explosive device that detonated near a civilian vehicle
driving along the Qabbasin-Aleppo highway.
• On 20 August, one boy was killed as a result of what was alleged to be a ground based strike that hit the town of Kafr Hamra in western rural Aleppo.
• In the city of Afrin, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) received reports that, on 25 August, gunmen raided
the house of an elderly couple, aged 78 and 74, in the Ashrafiyah
neighbourhood, looted the house and subjected the couple to beatings with their
hands and guns. The man died while being assaulted and his wife suffered
serious injuries, resulting in her death on 6 September.
• On 30 August, between 2300 and 2330 hours, the al-Iman maternity and
children’s hospital sustained significant damage as a result of what were alleged
to be several air strikes that hit the areas around the hospital in the town of Urum
al-Kubra in western rural Aleppo. As a result of the strikes, six civilians
accompanying patients were injured.

19-17137

17/20

S/2019/820

• On 30 August, between 1500 and 1600 hours, one boy was killed as a re sult of
what was alleged to be an air strike that hit the town of Zarbah in southern rural
Aleppo. Another air strike on the town also occurred near a medical centre and
caused significant infrastructure damage.
• On 3 September, at about 1130 hours, one civilian man was killed and 11 other
civilians were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an improvised
explosive device attached to a motorcycle that detonated inside a busy local
market, known as the al-Turki bazaar, in the city of I‘zaz in northern rural
Aleppo. On the same day, at about 1345 hours another explosion of what was
alleged to be an improvised explosive device attached to a motorcycle occurred
near the al-Maytam mosque and an orphanage in the city of I‘zaz. As a result of
the second explosion, five civilians were injured and the external wall of the
orphanage was damaged.
• On 13 September, at least 11 civilians were injured as a result of what was
alleged to be a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated inside
a busy local market in the city of Afrin in north-western Aleppo. The explosion
was reportedly followed by two mortars that hit a residential area in the vicinity
of the al-Urubah high school in the city of Afrin.
• On 15 September, an explosion of what was alleged to be a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device occurred in the vicinity of a residential area in the
town of Ra‘i in northern rural Aleppo. As a result of the explosion, 12 civilians,
including two women, were killed and 15 other civilians were inj ured. The
explosion also caused partial infrastructure damage to the Ra ‘i hospital building
and other houses in the area.
Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates
• On 3 August, two attacks with improvised explosive devices attached to
motorcycles occurred in two different neighbourhoods in the city of Hasakah.
No civilian casualties were reported but both attacks caused significant damage
to civilian objects in both the Ghuwayran and Mushayrifah neighbourhoods near
a busy marketplace.
• On 3 August, one boy was killed and four other civilians were injured as a result
of what was alleged to be an improvised explosive device attached to a
motorcycle that detonated in a livestock market in the neighbourhood of
Nashwah in the city of Hasakah.
• On 7 August, three children were killed and at least two other civilians were
injured as a result of what was alleged to be a vehicle -borne improvised
explosive device that detonated in the town of Qahtaniyah in Hasakah
Governorate. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claimed responsibility
for the attack and alleged that it had targeted a vehicle belonging to the Syrian
Democratic Forces in the area.
• On 11 August, one boy was killed and three other civilians were injured as a
result of crossfire between the Syrian Democratic Forces and unidentified armed
men in the town of Sha‘fah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. On the same day, one
girl was killed and two other civilians were injured as a result of crossfire
between the Syrian Democratic Forces and unidentified gunmen in the town of
Busayrah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 18 August, two civilians were injured as a result of what was alleged to be a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated in the vicinity of a
high school in the neighbourhood of Abawiyah in the city of Qamishli in
Hasakah.
18/20

19-17137

S/2019/820

• In September, OHCHR documented at least seven incidents of arbitrary arrests
or enforced disappearances that targeted civilians, including media and human
rights activists, who had been perceived as critical of the Syrian Democratic
Forces in areas under its control. In one example that occurred on 15 September,
two civilian men were arrested by members of the Syrian Democratic Forces at
one of the group’s checkpoints in the village of Jurdi in eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr. The fate and whereabouts of the two men remain unknown to their
families, who were denied information when they approached local authorities
in the area.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 6 August, two attacks with improvised explosive devices occurred in the city
of Raqqah. One of the devices detonated in the vicinity of the national hospital,
with no civilian casualties reported, and the other device killed a civilian man,
the community leader (mukhtar) of the Jami‘a al-Nour neighbourhood, when it
detonated near his house.
• On 16 August, the Syrian Democratic Forces arrested a media activist at his
home in the city of Tabaqah, reportedly on the basis of accusations from
unidentified sources. OHCHR received reports that the Syrian Democratic
Forces raided his house at approximately 1800 hours and took him to an
unidentified location. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown to his family
despite them approaching local authorities to obtain further information.
• On 16 August, the Syrian Democratic Forces arrested the head of a
non-governmental organization at his home in the city of Karamah in Raqqah
for unknown reasons. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown to his family
despite them approaching the local authorities to obtain further information.
• On 26 August, two civilians (one man and one boy) were killed and three
civilians, including a woman, were injured as a result of what was alleged to be
a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated in the middle of
Falastin street in the city of Tabaqah.
• On 13 September, the Syrian Democratic Forces arrested a media activist at his
home in the city of Tabaqah in western rural Raqqah Governorate. The
perpetrators raided his house at dawn, arrested him and took away his laptop
and cellular phone. The fate and whereabouts of the activist remain unknown to
his family, who have been denied information by the Syrian Democratic Forces.
Ladhiqiyah Governorate
• On 2 August, one civilian man was killed as a result of what were alleged to be
ground-based strikes that hit the government-controlled village of Bshalama in
eastern rural Ladhiqiyah.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 12 August, 10 young men, including 3 under the age of 18, were arrested
and detained by government air force security officers in Dar ‘a. The 10
individuals were arrested at different times at checkpoints and were all from the
Tafas and Shaykh Sa‘d areas in western Dar‘a. On 27 August, and following the
intervention of the Russian military police, all men were released and returned
to their homes, with no clarification given to their families or the community
regarding the reasons for their arrest.

19-17137

19/20

S/2019/820

• In Dar‘a Governorate, OHCHR recorded an increase in the number of incidents
that appeared to involve the targeted killings of civilians who had reconciled
themselves with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and had been
employed in government civilian institutions, such as local councils. In August,
OHCHR recorded a total of 27 incidents in which 17 men were killed. In one
example, on 24 August, the chief of the local council in the town of Muzayrib
was killed by unidentified gunmen in a drive-by shooting in the town.

20/20

19-17137
