A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/142
6 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.3)]
52/142. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all States Members of the United Nations have an obligation to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and as elaborated
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights2 and other
applicable human rights instruments,
Mindful that the Islamic Republic of Iran is a party to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights on
the subject, and taking note of the most recent, Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/54 of 15
April 1997,3

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

98-77119

/...

A/RES/52/142
Page 2

1. Welcomes the report of the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran;4
2. Notes with interest that presidential elections were held in the Islamic Republic of Iran in 1997,
and calls upon the Government to meet expectations for tangible progress concerning human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all individuals;
3.

Expresses its concern:

(a) At the continuing violations of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular the
large and increasing number of executions in the apparent absence of respect for internationally recognized
safeguards, cases of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including stoning,
amputation and public executions, the failure to meet international standards in the administration of
justice and the absence of due process of law;
(b) At the grave breaches of the human rights of the Baha'is, the discrimination against members
of other religious minorities, including Christians, and the death sentences pronounced against Dhabihullah
Mahrami, Musa Talibi and Ramadan-Ali Dhulfaqari, on the charge of apostasy, and against Bihnam
Mithaqi and Kayvan Khalajabadi because of their beliefs;
(c) At the lack of continuity in the cooperation of the Government with the mechanisms of the
Commission on Human Rights;
(d) At the continuing threats to the life of Salman Rushdie, as well as to individuals associated with
his work, which appear to have the support of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and deeply
regrets the increase announced in the bounty offered for the assassination of Mr. Rushdie by the
15 Khordad Foundation;
(e) At violations of the right to peaceful assembly and restrictions on the freedoms of expression,
thought, opinion and the press, as well as at the harassment and intimidation of writers and journalists
seeking to exercise their freedom of expression, the sentencing of the writer Faraj Sarkuhi being only the
most recent example of such unacceptable practices;
(f) At the lack of full and equal enjoyment by women of human rights, while noting efforts to
integrate women more fully into the political, economic and cultural life of the country;
4.

Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran:

(a) To resume its cooperation with the mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights, in
particular with the Special Representative to allow him to continue his inquiry at first hand and to
continue his dialogue with the Government;
(b) To abide by its freely undertaken obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights
and under other international instruments on human rights and to ensure that all individuals within its

4

A/52/472, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/142
Page 3

territory and subject to its jurisdiction, including members of religious groups and persons belonging to
minorities, enjoy all the rights enshrined in those instruments;
(c) To implement fully the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance and of
discrimination based on religion or belief relating to the Baha'is and to other minority religious groups,
including Christians, until they are completely emancipated;5
(d) To take effective measures to eliminate human rights violations against women, including all
discrimination in law and in practice against them;
(e) To refrain from violence against members of the Iranian opposition living abroad and to
cooperate wholeheartedly with the authorities of other countries in investigating and prosecuting offences
reported by them;
(f) To provide satisfactory written assurances that it does not support or incite threats to the life of
Mr. Rushdie;
(g) To ensure that capital punishment will not be imposed for apostasy or non-violent crimes or in
disregard of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and United Nations
safeguards;
5. Decides to continue the examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, including the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is, at its fifty-third session under the item
entitled "Human rights questions", in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on
Human Rights.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997

5

E/CN.4/1996/95/Add.2.
