S/2023/51

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2023
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Thirty-sixth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 16 September 2022 (S/2022/696).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) attended, in its
observer capacity, the 122nd and 123rd sessions of the Technical Subcommittee of
the Tripartite Commission held in Kuwait on 10 October 2022 and in Amman on
12 December, respectively, as well as the fifty-fourth meeting of the Tripartite
Commission, held in Amman on 14 December. During the meetings, the members of
the Tripartite Commission provided updates on their efforts to identify and explore
potential burial sites of interest. These efforts continued to rely on witness testimony,
satellite imagery and field missions.
3.
Satellite and aerial imagery analysis remains an important tool for the
identification of potential burial sites in Samawah (Tall al-Shaykhiyah and Faydat
al-Azayir sites), Karbala’ and Khamisiyah, as well as two sites in Kuwait, on the basis
of coordinates provided by the United States of America and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. During the 123rd meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) provided
updates on the status of satellite imagery requests for nine sites of interest previously
submitted to a Technical Subcommittee member. ICRC informed meeting participants
that the geographic scope and time frame of the original requests had been narrowed
down, in order to assist the Technical Subcommittee member with processing the
requests. ICRC added that it had received satellite imagery for two sites of interest
located in Kuwait, noting that a newly recruited expert would soon conduct the
imagery analysis. Feedback on satellite imagery requests for the remaining seven
sites, including those in Samawah, Karbala’ and Khamisiyah, is still pending. Kuwait
reiterated the importance of exploring additional avenues that could help narrow

23-00599 (E)

250123

*2300599*

S/2023/51

down the size of the sites of interest, including new technologies, reviews of archives
and past reports, rather than relying solely on receiving satellite and aerial imagery.
4.
Recalling the success of the excavation work in 2019 and 2020 in Samawah
(Tall al-Shaykhiyah site), Iraq and Kuwait exchanged views during the 123rd meeting
regarding the possibility of having an expert, provided by ICRC, re -examine available
commercial satellite imagery of the Tall Al-Shaykhiyah site. Kuwait further proposed
the re-examination of work previously undertaken on the Faydat al-Azayir site.
5.
In addition to satellite imagery, members of the Tripartite Commission
continued to emphasize the importance of sustained efforts to locate witnesses who
might have relevant information regarding potential burial sites. Kuw ait reiterated the
importance of following up on witness information for the two potential burial sites
in Samawah and urged Iraq to step up its efforts to discuss the matter with the
Governor of Muthanna. During the 123rd session of the Technical Subcommittee,
Kuwait also stressed the need for Iraq to remove any impediments that could delay
the excavation process and potential recovery of human remains, including by
preventing any improper conduct with regard to the handling and preservation of the
burial sites. Iraq informed the Technical Subcommittee of a planned upcoming
meeting between the Governor of Muthanna and the Office of the Prime Minister to
discuss the matter.
6.
The Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued efforts to locate witnesses who might
have relevant information regarding the Khamisiyah site, in particular a witness who
was reported to be in Sweden or in Jordan. Efforts by Iraq to locate this witness
included liaison with the Embassies of Iraq in Sweden and Jordan, with the Iraqi
security forces and with the Residency and Travel Directorate of the Ministry of the
Interior, but without any results. Iraq asked for ICRC support to locate a person in
Cairo who had previously had contact with the witness believed to be in Sweden or
Jordan.
7.
Regarding the naval base site in Kuwait, and pursuant to an earlier agreement
between Iraq and Kuwait, the witness with possible information on this site
accompanied the Iraqi delegation to Kuwait for the 122nd meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee and visited the site on 9 October, together with the Kuwaiti delegation
and ICRC. The site visit concluded that the potential burial site was located outside
the naval base and not within its perimeter, as previously assessed. A report of the site
visit, which included recommendations on the way forward, was shared with all
Technical Subcommittee members following the visit. During the 123rd meeting,
Kuwait stated that it would, through relevant Kuwaiti authorities, continue its search
for aerial imagery, if available, that could help identify the precise location of the
burial site.
8.
In addition to the satellite imagery received by ICRC for the two sites located
in Kuwait, ICRC continued to discuss, with the United States, the feasibility of
researching the archives of the United States. With regard to the permission to search
the archives of the United Kingdom, ICRC noted that it was awaiting feedback from
the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom and had continued to follow up on
the matter. ICRC also announced that on 8 December 2022, the United States had
launched a call for war veteran witnesses. The call encouraged veterans possessing
information about potential grave sites from the 1990 –1991 Gulf War to contact the
United States Government and/or ICRC.
9.
From 29 November to 1 December, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, in the
presence of ICRC, conducted an assessment and excavation mission at the Mahawil
site. The excavation mission focused on areas of interest based on witness testimony
and was conducted following confirmation that the site had been cleared of war
remnants. The excavation uncovered bone fragments, which were most likely
2/6

23-00599

S/2023/51

non-human according to a preliminary assessment. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq
temporarily halted the excavation owing to the unavailability of experts from the
Medico-Legal Directorate of the Ministry of Health of Iraq and the Mass Graves
Directorate of the Martyrs Foundation to analyse the recovered fragments.
10. Iraq and Kuwait continued to explore options to elicit more specific details from
two witnesses who had come forward saying they had information on potential burial
sites in Mosul and Kuwait. No concrete outcomes have transpired to date.
11. During the 123rd meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, Iraq and Ku wait
exchanged views on possible procedures for the identification and transfer of the
genetic profiles of 15 human remains exhumed from the area of Hawli, Najaf
Governorate, in April 2022. Kuwait noted that general guidelines on the transfer of
human remains, including DNA profiles and bone samples, had already been adopted
by the Tripartite Commission and that all its members had reiterated their
commitment to respecting them. Iraq and Kuwait concluded that discussion on the
procedures for the identification and transfer of the genetic profiles of the 15 human
remains would continue between ICRC, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq and the
Medico-Legal Directorate of Iraq.
12. Regarding the Muradiyah site in Diyala Governorate, ICRC shared with
Technical Subcommittee members the final report of the joint ICRC-Ministry of
Defence of Iraq survey of the site, conducted in July 2022. On 10 November, ICRC
held a working group meeting with the Ministry of Defence of Iraq and provided
feedback on the topographic map of the Muradiyah site. The Ministry of Defence
subsequently submitted a request to the Iraqi State Commission on Surveys for a new
topographic map of the area based on ICRC feedback.
13. During the reporting period, more persons responded to the call for witnesses
launched by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on 27 July 2022. In response to the
broadcast, an individual approached the ICRC delegation in Baghdad, claiming to
possess information on detained civilians and military personnel from the State of
Kuwait during the 1990–1991 Gulf War. The individual provided his testimony on
1 November during a meeting with an ICRC representative in Baghdad and consented
to sharing it, along with his personal and contact information, with members of the
Tripartite Commission. Kuwait, after cross-checking the information, deemed that the
witness testimony required additional follow-up with the witness himself and with
another potential witness who had been identified in his statement. Following further
information provided by Kuwait and discussed among Technical Subcommittee
members, it was agreed to include the recent witness testimony in the discussion on
the Karbala’ and Samawah (Faydat al-Azayir) sites.
14. Another individual approached the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on 27 November
and provided information on a potential burial site in Abu Ghurayb, Baghdad
Governorate, which the witness claimed could contain approximately 10 to 12
remains of Kuwaiti citizens. It was agreed that ICRC would include these two
witnesses in the confidential list of witnesses for further follow -up.
15. Iraq issued several more calls for witnesses during the reporting period. The
Ministry of Defence of Iraq broadcast a call for witnesses on 15 November on its
official Facebook page. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq also issued calls for
witnesses from 28 November to 30 November through its diplomatic and consular
representations around the world. In an effort to encourage further witnesses to come
forward, the Ministry of Defence approved the allocation of financial rewards to
persons providing information on burial sites that could potentially contain the
remains of missing persons. The Ministry of Defence also initiated a formal process
for the formation of a committee comprising members of Iraq’s security agencies. The
committee, chaired by the Ministry of Defence, would be mandated to gather
23-00599

3/6

S/2023/51

information on potential mass grave sites through different sources. During the 123rd
meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, Kuwait commended th e initiatives as
important steps in expediting the search for missing Kuwaiti citizens and third country nationals.
16. With respect to the case of a missing national of Saudi Arabia, who is listed on
the official request lists of both Kuwait and Saudi Ar abia and is alleged to be alive in
an Iraqi prison in Nasiriyah, ICRC continued consulting the registry of detainees
transferred from Nasiriyah prison prior to 2017, but without result. The Ministry of
Defence of Iraq dispatched a delegate to the Ministry of Justice to search for the name
of the missing person in its registries, but without success. The case remains open as
Saudi Arabia continues to search for more information about the missing person.
17. During the 123rd meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the United Kingdom
updated members regarding efforts to explore information reported by The Sun
newspaper in July 2021 regarding an Iraqi national who had allegedly ordered the
execution of 35 Kuwaitis in 1990. On 1 November, a British detective visi ted Kuwait
to follow up on the information reported by newspaper, as part of a criminal
investigation under way in the United Kingdom. Kuwait provided the required
information to the enquiries put forward by the United Kingdom. Further updates will
be provided to the members of the Technical Subcommittee as soon as they are
available.
18. Ahead of the 123rd session of the Technical Subcommittee, consultations were
held among the Technical Subcommittee members on 11 December, to discuss the
draft road map for the implementation of the review project recommendations, as
agreed during the 122nd meeting of the Technical Subcommittee. The final draft was
shared by ICRC with all Technical Subcommittee members prior to the 123rd
meeting. It was agreed that ICRC would include an annex to the draft road map with
a detailed overview of expected outputs and milestones for each recommendation.
19. On 14 December, during its fifty-fourth session, the Tripartite Commission
renewed the mandate of the Technical Subcommittee and the official observer role of
UNAMI. Technical Subcommittee members expressed appreciation for the Mission’s
observer role. The Tripartite Commission collectively adopted the road map prepared
by ICRC on the basis of the review project recommendations. The importance of
continued collaboration to achieve positive results was highlighted by all members.
20. On 7 September, the Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance of UNAMI met with the Director of the Human Rights
Directorate in the Legal Department of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, Thaer Saad
Abdullah. They discussed progress made on the file pertaining to missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals, notably through increased field missions and witness
testimonies. The Deputy Special Representative expressed the full support of UNAMI
for further advancing progress on this important file.
21. On 11 October, the Deputy Special Representative travelled to Kuwait and met
with the Assistant Minister for International Organizations, Abdulaziz Saud
Al-Jarallah, and the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for Kuwaiti
Prisoners and Missing Persons, Rabe’a al-Adsani. Discussions were focused on
developments related to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and property
files. The Deputy Special Representative also visited the General Department of
Criminal Evidence at the Ministry of the Interior of Kuwait, together with all
members of the Technical Subcommittee, as part of a visit organized by Kuwait on
the margins of the 122nd meeting of the Technical Subcommittee. During that visit,
the Deputy Special Representative commended the diligent efforts and technical
expertise of the identification work carried out by the Department’s teams.

4/6

23-00599

S/2023/51

22. On 7 December, the Deputy Special Representative met the Undersecretary of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq for Administrative, Technical and Legal
Affairs, Omer Ahmed Kerim Berzinji, with whom he discussed the Kuwaiti missing
persons and property file. The Undersecretary reiterated his Government’s
commitment to making further progress on this important humanitarian file.
23. Between 7 and 11 November, UNAMI successfully completed the advanced
training on the use of ground-penetrating radar, in Brindisi, Italy, of six staff from the
Ministry of Defence of Iraq. The training was carried out in partnership with
geospatial expert trainers from the United Nations Logistics Base in Brindisi. UNAMI
briefed the Technical Subcommittee at its 123rd meeting on the outcome of t he
training and provided recommendations. As a result of the briefing, the Technical
Subcommittee members agreed to the proposal by Kuwait to include training,
capacity development and the transfer of knowledge as a permanent agenda item of
Technical Subcommittee meetings.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
24. During his meeting with the Deputy Special Representative, the Undersecretary
for Administrative, Technical and Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Iraq noted that, following the handover of 738 boxes and other property in July 2022,
representatives of all relevant Iraqi ministries and institutions had been instructed to
expand their search for missing Kuwaiti property. He reiterated his Government’s
commitment to identifying modalities that could further facilitate the search for the
missing Kuwaiti national archives.

IV. Observations
25. The continued perseverance and focus of all members of the tripartite
mechanism, under the auspices of ICRC, has been maintaining the momentum on this
important humanitarian file. I commend the sustained exploratory work conducted by
the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, through increased field missions, in the search for
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. I hope that these efforts will soon yield
further positive results and lead to the identification of new potential burial sites.
26. Witness information and satellite imagery remain central components of this
process. I welcome the steps taken by the Government of Iraq to encourage more
witnesses to come forward, in particular the expanded call for witnesses and
allocation of financial rewards for witness testimony relevant to the search for
missing persons. I also commend the dedicated efforts of Kuwait in following up on
new witness information.
27. The continuous cooperation of the members of the Tripartite Commission with
ICRC regarding the provision of satellite imagery is vital to efforts for the
identification of new potential burial sites. The receipt of satellite imagery and
planned analyses for the two sites of interest in Kuwait will hopefully generate
relevant information soon.
28. I also welcome the productive consultations that took place for the
establishment of a clear road map for the implementation of the review project
recommendations. I trust that this new road map will help further reinvigorate the
search for missing persons.

23-00599

5/6

S/2023/51

29. I reiterate my call upon the Government of Iraq to continue its efforts to locate
remaining missing property, in particular to step up its search for missing documents
from the Kuwaiti national archives.
30. My Special Representative for Iraq, my Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance, and UNAMI staff remain fully committed
to supporting the efforts of the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, the Tripartite
Commission and other partners to promote and facilitate efforts in support of this
important mandate.

6/6

23-00599
