S/PV.8879

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8879

th meeting
Thursday, 14 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/824)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-28845 (E)
*2128845*

Colombia

S/PV.8879

(spoke in Spanish)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/824)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and I
request the Protocol Officer to escort her to her seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda,
Coordinator of Butterflies with New Wings and
representative of the Afro-Colombian women in the
Special Forum on Gender; and Ms. Daniela Soto, Youth
Leader, Regional Indigenous Council of Cauca.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/824, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Colombia (S/2021/824) and to
update the Security Council on recent developments in
the country since the issuance of the report.
2/23

14/10/2021

It is a pleasure to be in the Chamber presenting the
report in the company of Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia. I am also very pleased to be with the
indigenous leader Daniela Soto and the Afro-Colombian
leader Bibiana Peñaranda — women whose voices tell
the story of the challenges faced by ethnic groups in
conflict-affected regions and their daily struggle to
build peace.
We are approaching the fifth anniversary of the
historic Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the Colombian
State and the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). As the
Secretary-General has said, this is an opportunity to
reflect on how much we have achieved in this first
third of the period foreseen for its implementation, as
well as how much we have yet to achieve. It is also an
opportunity to renew our commitment to persevering,
every day, towards building peace.
Recent events have shown us the full potential of
the implementation of an agreement that focuses on
the victims. I am speaking, for example, about the
establishment of seats in Congress that will allow
Colombians from the regions hardest hit by the conflict
to participate actively in the democratic debate, as
well as the unquestionable progress made by the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition, which continues to work to
honour the rights of millions of victims and promote
national reconciliation.
What we see today is the result of the commitment and
cumulative efforts of the parties, civil society, various
State entities, the international community — including
the Security Council — who have insisted that what
was agreed must be implemented. I would like to stress
the word “cumulative” because it is precisely the steps
that have been taken during these five years that allow
us to continue, even amid enormous challenges, on the
path of building peace.
Preserving what has been achieved, making
progress on the pending tasks and overcoming the
challenges of the implementation will depend, to a
large extent, on the parties’ abilities to implement all
elements of the peace agreement. Their implementation
in isolation would not be sufficient to eliminate the
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

factors that led to decades of armed conflict and to
ensure the agreement’s transformative potential.
(spoke in English)
A few weeks ago, I travelled to Meta, a department
that the Council visited in 2017. Meta was an important
FARC-EP stronghold, and today hosts more than one
out of ten of its former members. Their experiences
illustrate what has gone right, what needs improvement
and the challenges facing the reintegration process and
the implementation of the agreement more broadly.
I spoke there to former combatants who are growing
coffee and had set up a bakery in one reintegration area.
In another area, they had planted avocados. It became
clear to me that collective efforts to boost reintegration
in the early years of the process had been crucial to
instilling hope among thousands of men and women
who, until this day, continue to bet on peace. Their
determination to advance their productive initiatives
remains palpable, as is their desire to be active
members of their communities and participate in local
politics and decision-making, as envisioned clearly in
the peace agreement.
Nevertheless, as one female leader of the former
combatants in Meta put it:
“So many efforts and so many investments
may now be in jeopardy. To protect hard-fought
gains, decisive actions are required on matters such
as land, housing, sustainable income generation
and security.”

S/PV. 8879

made by the Government to acquire land for former
territorial areas for training and reintegration so that
the endeavours of more former combatants across the
country can literally take root.
As time passes, it is becoming increasingly evident
that deeper transformations are required to consolidate
the reintegration process and other elements that have
been put in motion over these five years, including
within the territorial development programmes and the
programme for the substitution of illicit crops. However
fruitful the early stages may have been, the long-term
success of initial investments is contingent upon the
agreement’s promise of reshaping rural Colombia by
establishing sustainable development opportunities and
State services and institutions for communities whose
expectations remain unfulfilled. To that end, furthering
the implementation of the comprehensive rural reform
and progress in addressing the problem of illicit drugs
will be instrumental.
We continue to follow security issues in various
regions with utmost concern. It is particularly
challenging that the very areas prioritized for the
agreement’s implementation —from Meta to Antioquia,
from the Pacific coast to Catatumbo — are the ones
facing the most dire situations.

Otherwise, she fears, former combatants will
continue to be forced to relocate in search for better
opportunities and to preserve their lives. The leadership
qualities displayed by women former combatants, as
well as those of women social leaders like Ms. Peñaranda
and Ms. Soto, remind us that their full involvement and
the implementation of the agreement’s gender approach
are a necessary condition for peacebuilding.

To date, 296 men and women who laid down their
arms in good faith have lost their lives, primarily
due to actions of illegal armed actors and criminal
organizations. Conflict-affected communities, former
combatants and social leaders still bear the brunt of
the actions of illegal armed actors taking advantage of
limited State presence, poverty and illicit economies.
Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities are being
disproportionately affected by all kinds of violence,
from the killing of their leaders to displacements and
confinements. This situation demands the urgent and
simultaneous implementation of all provisions of the
agreement pertaining to security guarantees.

Five years into implementation, there is broad
consensus on the essential role that land plays in
anchoring the reintegration process, especially with
regards to housing and productive initiatives. During
my visit, I witnessed the challenges posed to projects
that are heavily dependent on land, the anxiety of former
combatants and their reluctance to invest additional
resources due to uncertainty, as well as their frustration
with cost overruns, since they operate on rented land.
It is worthwhile intensifying the significant efforts

In the light of the formidable threats that these
regions face, the Government and State entities should
make better use of the mechanisms created by the
agreement itself, including the National Commission
on Security Guarantees, to devise effective measures
to curb the violence. The progress made by the National
Protection Unit in the approval of hundreds of pending
protection requests by former combatants is clearly
a welcome development. The swift provision of the
approved security measures is now crucial.

21-288453/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

The end of the conflict with the FARC-EP led, in
2018, to the least violent and most participatory elections
in Colombia in decades. That milestone is a testament
to the undeniable relationship between strengthened
democracy and lasting peace, and Colombians deserve
to be able, once again, to massively and safely take part
in the upcoming elections.
This time, thanks to the peace agreement, an
important new opportunity presents itself in the 16
conflict-affected regions where local populations will
have the chance to elect their candidates for the special
transitional electoral districts for peace. This will
require not only State-provided guarantees for equal
political participation, but a genuine commitment by
all actors to fostering a responsible and respectful
electoral campaign, free of stigmatization.
Beyond the approaching elections, we should
all remember that there remain many ways in which
the peace process can continue to strengthen and
deepen Colombian democracy, especially through
the implementation of key pending provisions of the
agreement’s section on political participation.
(spoke in Spanish)
Even amid great challenges, the Colombian peace
process continues to demonstrate, with eloquent
examples, the benefits of ending the conflict through
a negotiated agreement and of continuing to focus on
victims’ rights.
Last week, the parties convened an ethnic round
table in the National Reintegration Council, which I
am sure will be key to advancing the reintegration of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian ex-combatants, in line
with their specific needs.
Likewise, thanks to the final agreement, we
continue to witness gestures of profound practical and
symbolic significance that reflect the commitment of
those who took up arms in the past. A few days ago,
as a result of the collective effort of the Government
and ex-combatants and the support of the international
community, Humanicemos DH — the humanitarian
demining organization comprised of former FARCEP members — delivered its first mine-free area, in
Caquetá, an important department of Colombia, which
will now be returned to an indigenous community.
I am also pleased to report that the Constitutional
Court extended the mandate of the Truth Commission.
That decision recognizes the impact of the pandemic
4/23

14/10/2021

on the Commission’s work and the importance of its
having the time and resources to continue to hear the
voices of those who experienced the war most directly.
I am confident that the broad support for this decision
will help build consensus on the importance of the
recommendations that the Commission will make
in its report to ensure that the horrors of the past are
never repeated.
Now that the 2022 budget is being discussed, the
Government and Congress have in their hands the
possibility of reaffirming their commitment to peace
by guaranteeing that the Commission and the other
components of the agreement have the necessary
resources to continue and enhance their work.
In conclusion, from the ceasefire and the laying
down of arms to the current work on the design of
the mechanism to verify the sanctions of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, I am proud of the work of every
member of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to support the parties in fulfilling their
commitments. During these five years, we have been
constantly inspired by the tenacity of Colombian society
in its transition to peace. Now, as we embark upon a key
stage in the consolidation of the process, I thank the
Council for its ongoing trust, which will undoubtedly
remain an essential pillar of support for Colombia.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Peñaranda.
Ms. Peñaranda (spoke in Spanish): I extend cordial
greetings to every member of the Security Council. My
name is Bibiana Peñaranda Sepúlveda, an anti-racist,
black woman. I am the Coordinator of Butterflies with
New Wings in the Buenaventura district, and I represent
black, Afro-descendent, Raizal and Palenquera women
in the Special Forum on Gender in order to ensure the
implementation of a transversal gender approach with
regard to the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace — one that
builds peace for all and protects human rights.
I warmly thank the Kenyan presidency of the
Security Council for inviting me to participate at this
important meeting. To the representatives of Colombia,
I offer my greetings of solidarity for the situation we
are living in our country. And I thank those who care
about Colombian issues out of Ubuntu.
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

S/PV. 8879

Council members have heard a lot about
Colombia — the Peace Agreement, the social problems
and the armed groups that have nested in our country,
fed by a history of systematic violence that began
with the colonial period and has persisted until today.
Council members know that Colombia’s public and
private sectors are rife with corruption and drug
trafficking, contributing thereby to bloodshed in the
country, producing a war that has gone on for so many
years that I do not remember a single day in which I was
aware of not hearing news of war and death.

receive threatening messages every day, and the
risks are mounting. In specific relation to gender,
we are concerned that no progress has been made on
the “ethnic chapter”, particularly issues relating to
Colombia’s indigenous black peoples. Although the
Government has put forward processes for retitling
land, it is made clear that these land adjudications in
favour of indigenous and black peoples are part of
previous agreements — not part of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The issues of eradication and
Government’s non-compliance are of concern.

I want to make it clear that although violence
regulates power relations in Colombia, the Peace
Agreement is important for those of us in communities
who are living with violence, abandonment or
expulsion from territories. The main strength of this
Peace Agreement is that it listened to the voices and
the proposals of rural folk, women, ethnic peoples,
young people and people of diverse gender and sexual
orientations. Its worst weakness, however, is that we
are a society whose Government is woefully absent,
sectionalized and racist. It is a Government that
simulates democracy and continues to believe that
violence is the way to regulate power relations, as was
demonstrated in this year’s social unrest.

We are also concerned that with regard to the
“ethnic chapter”, the gender approach that is being
applied is not an anti-racist. Indeed, we can say that the
State is applying racist processes because it is unaware
of the dispossession to which ethnic peoples have been
subject. The real, felt needs of Afro-Colombian, Raizal
and Palenquero, indigenous and gypsy black women
are not being addressed anywhere. As black women,
we bet on life, recognize ourselves as teachers of peace,
dig our own trenches, march, define our agendas, we
defend the territory. We make compassion true and
affective through comadreo — female bonding — and
we turn our pain into creativity.

This Government has lacked the stature to fully
comply with the demands of the Peace Agreement,
despite the fact that the Agreement was the ultimate
wish of the ethnic communities and peoples of
Colombia. What is in the agreement is not what the
now-defunct Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo asked of former President
Santos Calderón, but what the people want: territory,
land, housing, to eat well, live in peace, drink clean
water, be educated, have access to health, raise animals
and care for the land. Is that too much to ask for?
Despite the persistent resurgence of war and
conflicts between armed groups, transnational interests
in the territories and the weak or barebones response of
an absent Government, the transformative capacity of
those of us who want and support peace truly exists; not
only is it contained in the agreement, but it is also what
we are striving to build upon on a daily basis — behind
the backs of a political class that looks only after its
own interests, those of its families, its trade unions and
its allies.
I wish to express concern about the lack of
safety for peace signatories and leaders, as they

We need the armed groups to leave our territory, and
we need to recover solidarity in our neighbourhoods,
strengthen the fraternal bonds that used to unite us or
create new ones from the pieces that remain, and reinforce
the circles of knowledge, healing spaces and ancestral
wisdom. We need the policy of fighting armed groups
to be developed and for the policy of reconciliation to
become a reality in our country. We need the rights and
territorial autonomy of the authorities of the black and
indigenous peoples of Colombia to be recognized, and
we need comadreo to be the symbol of compassion.
We need a specific path for reincorporating former
combatants and peace signatories from the black and
indigenous peoples, and we need for the violence that
is disproportionately affecting ethnic territories, their
authorities, their leaders and their communities to stop.
We need the Security Council, as the highest
representatives of the international community,
to continue believing in us, in Colombia, to
continue supporting us so that transformation,
inclusion, equity and peace become a reality, and
so that we — Afro-Colombian, indigenous, ethnic
communities and peoples, and above all, women — can
continue to work together with it to make progress on
the “ethnic chapter” of the Peace Agreement and ensure

21-288455/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

its comprehensive implementation from an anti-racist
gender perspective. As Colombians we must continue to
work to build a colour-blind, ethnicity-blind anti-racist
peace that acknowledges indigenous black peoples in
their territories, their authorities, their worldview and
their view of life. Peace in Colombia will either be
anti-racist or it will not be.
The President: I thank Ms. Peñaranda for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Soto.
Ms. Soto (spoke in Spanish): I send you my warmest
greetings, Mr. President. My name is Daniela Soto Pinto.
I am a woman from the Nasa, an indigenous people
in the municipality of Caldono, in the Department of
Cauca. I am part of the youth and women’s leadership
processes of the Regional Indigenous Council of Cauca,
and, since I was a teenager, I have been working for
human rights and the rights of indigenous peoples to
be vindicated.
Greetings to all present in the Security Council
Chamber today. I offer particular thanks to the Kenyan
ambassador for his invitation to join this meeting.
I would like to start by commenting that when the
talks to reach a peace agreement between the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the Colombian Government
began, there was a sense of hope in the country.
Sadly, that feeling lasted for only a few months after
the signing of the agreement. In territories like mine,
in the municipality of Caldono, which the Security
Council visited in 2019, we were eagerly awaiting the
laying down of arms and the longed-for peace. We
had always experienced the onslaught of war directly
in our territories, in our own homes and even in our
own bodies.
The Peace Agreement gave us hope by proposing
structural solutions to the problem of social inequality
in Colombia and by addressing important issues for
indigenous women, such as access to land. However,
the current situation of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Colombia is worrying. Although we see
the laying down of arms by the now-defunct FARCEP armed group and the entrepreneurial initiatives
for the reincorporation of members of that group as
positive, compliance with the Peace Agreement has
been minimal on such points as comprehensive rural
reform, the substitution of illicitly used crops and the
6/23

14/10/2021

full implementation of the “ethnic chapter” of the Peace
Agreement and its gender focus. This non-compliance
increases the conditions of inequality and violence in
the territories, especially for women and young people.
It is women and young people whose rights are
being violated the most. In Cauca, the non-compliance
with the Peace Agreement on such issues as rural
reform and the substitution of illicit crops, inter alia,
has led to an increase in the cultivation of illicit crops
there, and, in turn, an increase in the reconfiguration
of armed groups, dissidents and others who are fighting
for control of the territories and the drug trafficking
business through war exercises that are bleeding our
communities dry.
I remember as a child, in my territory, my
grandmother always took me to pick coca leaves. As
Council members know, for my people, coca is a sacred
plant. Today I see with sadness and powerlessness how
something so sacred has been misused so as to generate
violence and conflict in the country.
The armed conflict continues to rage in many parts
of Colombia. In our territories, boys and girls as young
as 13 are being forcibly and ideologically recruited
into the armed ranks of these groups. Likewise, young
people and women are being recruited or co-opted
across the entire chain of the drug-trafficking business.
In some parts of Cauca, recruitment has exceeded 600
children and young people in the past two months, for
example, in the municipality of Cantón. Many of those
children and young people are female. Women are also
co-opted into work preparing meals, but, above all,
what is most degrading is that they are co-opted into
sexual enslavement or prostitution.
In addition, the presence of armed groups in our
territories represents a direct threat to indigenous
women, owing to the many cases of harassment and
sexual abuse that we have been victims of. Women
who resist all of that must choose either to stay in the
territory despite the threats or to be displaced from
our territories to live in the cities, which may lead to
experiencing other forms of violence and vulnerability.
In this war, the women leaders who oppose the system
continue to be killed. More than nine indigenous
women leaders have been murdered this year defending
their territory in Cauca department — a risk similar to
that taken by women leaders in other territories.
Those murdered women were governors,
indigenous guards, spokespersons, wives, mothers and
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

daughters. This morning another indigenous female
colleague, named María Stefania Muñoz, and her niece
were murdered in the municipality of Buenos Aires
in Cauca — in addition to other colleagues who were
killed in July. Such murders have many repercussions
for the families, communities and organizations that
the victims led. Above all, they also lead to instability
and intimidation with regard to the processes that we
as women have struggled to achieve despite the many
constraints and threats.
Our participation as women in peacebuilding must
enjoy the necessary security guarantees and conditions
if we are to carry out our work with a differentiated
approach. In exercising the right to social protest, I
myself was almost killed on 9 May in an incident in
which armed civilians shot at the demonstration in the
presence of the members of public security forces in
Cali. I was shot in the lower part of my abdomen. When
I arrived at the hospital, I had no vital signs and was in
shock. I was admitted to the emergency room with little
chance, but I managed to survive.
However, what happened weakened the leadership
process in my community, and the leadership process
of indigenous women has been exposed to intimidation,
as they are afraid of being threatened, persecuted or
falling victim to the same ordeal I experienced. Despite
the situation, in general, women, especially indigenous
women, have been developing peacebuilding initiatives
from the ground up in our territories. We have been
working to raise awareness of the need to support the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, in conjunction with
institutions and the community as a whole, with a
differentiated approach when it is imperative to support
women, children, young people and other victims in the
context of armed conflict or other forms of violence.
Similarly, we have also been strengthening our
own mechanisms for self-protection and territorial
control through such processes as the indigenous
guards, of which more than 40 per cent of participants
are women. That exercise has raised awareness about
the need to care for the territory and search for peace
through dialogue, while clearly rejecting armed groups
and violence in general. We have been working with
schools and colleges to train authoritative leaders
and to inculcate a culture of peace in primary and
secondary education. We have also made progress in
building trust and understanding in our territories by
promoting respect for diversity and differences and even
establishing intercultural round tables for dialogue.

S/PV. 8879

We continue to opt for peace in our territories and
to demand that the national Government fully comply
with the peace agreement. As a young indigenous
woman, I believe that the Government must be able
to guarantee the fundamental right to life of every
woman and man. That is where the Security Council
must focus its efforts. Likewise, we must also support
and strengthen the initiatives that are already being
implemented at the territorial level. Support must be
given to forming indigenous and Afro-Colombian
women leaders and encouraging constructive ventures
and projects to address the economic inequality facing
us. All of that is set out in the peace agreement.
We hope that the international community and the
Security Council will continue to support us —the
indigenous communities, women and young people of
Colombia — in this process.
We hope that the Council will continue to urge full
compliance with the agreement, with particular focus on
the ethnic dimension and the integral gender approach
to the entire agreement so that we can finally have a
better society in Colombia. As indigenous women,
we have said that violence must be rejected wherever
it may be, we must protect our territories, people can
always count on us for peace, never for war, and we do
not want to continue giving birth to children for war.
The President: I thank Ms. Soto for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): First, let me thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing today and the
important work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. I would also like to thank our two
briefers, Ms. Daniela Soto and Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda,
for their perspectives and the powerful testimony that
they have given on the situation in Colombia. It is a
pleasure to welcome Vice-President Ramírez to the
Security Council once again. Her presence demonstrates
the importance that her Government attaches to the
Security Council’s role in supporting Columbia on its
journey towards lasting peace.
Next month, we will mark the fifth anniversary
of the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. This
is a significant milestone. We know that more than half
of all peace agreements fail within the first five years.
It is therefore an important moment for the international

21-288457/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

community to celebrate with Colombia the progress
achieved to date and the way in which Colombia’s peace
process serves as an example to the world.
One such element is the novel transitional justice
system created by the peace agreement, which puts
victims at its heart. The United Kingdom commends
the continued progress achieved in recent months by the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition. We reiterate our appreciation and
support for the vital work of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Special Unit
for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing, and
we welcome the extension of the Truth Commission’s
mandate. We encourage all actors to play their part in
this process, acknowledging their crimes and injustices,
fulfilling their responsibility to the victims of the
conflict and paving the way towards reconciliation.
Another major achievement during the reporting
period was the creation of 16 special transitional
electoral districts for peace. The United Kingdom
supports this important initiative to facilitate the
political participation of historically excluded groups.
While celebrating the achievement represented
by the fifth anniversary of the peace agreement, it is
also an important time to take stock of the challenges
that remain to its comprehensive implementation and
the commitment required to overcome them. The gains
of the past five years cannot be taken for granted.
Foremost among the challenges, as we have heard
today, is the high number of killings and threats against
former combatants, social environmental leaders,
human rights defenders, women leaders and those from
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. Again, I
recognize the testimony of Ms. Peñaranda and Ms. Soto
in this regard.
In order to end the ongoing violence, we urge
the Colombian Government to further integrate its
presence in conflict-affected areas and strengthen
the institutions that can investigate and prosecute the
criminal actors responsible. We note with concern that
the National Commission on Security Guarantees did
not meet fully during the reporting period. I call on the
Government to make full use of that body, working with
civil society, to develop a public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups. We also call on all institutions
to heed the early warnings of the Ombudsman’s Office
to help prevent attacks from happening and to protect
those at risk.
8/23

14/10/2021

Finally, as the 2022 elections come into focus,
we underline the importance of peaceful preparations
and call on all parties to take steps to ensure safe
and inclusive elections and to minimize the risk of
pre-electoral and political violence.
The United Kingdom has been proud to accompany
Colombia on its journey so far to implement the peace
agreement. As we look ahead, we remain committed
to supporting Colombia in consolidating the gains
achieved and overcoming the challenges that remain.
In conclusion, I would like to add that we look
forward to beginning work shortly with other Council
members on the upcoming renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for
his briefing and acknowledge the commendable work of
his entire team. We also thank Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda
and Ms. Daniela Soto for their courageous and thoughtprovoking presentations. We once again welcome the
presence of Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Mexico welcomes the progress made as we
approach the fifth anniversary of the signing of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. This is an opportune
moment to take stock of the gains made and to highlight
outstanding tasks but, above all, for the Security
Council to renew its commitment to the future of the
peace agreement through to its full implementation.
The peace agreement has successfully led, inter
alia, to development plans and alternatives to illicit
economies, all with a gender perspective, while
simultaneously allowing for progress in the area of
transitional justice through the Comprehensive System
for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.
Those actions have meant a new beginning for the excombatants who chose to lay down their weapons of
their own free will, as well as for Colombian society
in general, as it has enabled it to strengthen its
justice system.
The work carried out by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in Case 03, on killings and forced disappearances,
should be highlighted. The contribution of the Colombian
security forces to the investigations has been notable.
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

The relevance of Case 07, on forced recruitment and the
use of children in conflict, is also noteworthy.
We take note of the actions taken by the Verification
Mission with a view to the sanctions soon to be issued by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and we acknowledge
the actions taken by the Truth Commission. We await
the Commission’s final report, which we hope will be
another key element in the reconciliation process. We
commend the work of the Special Unit for the Search
for Persons Deemed as Missing in bringing certainty to
thousands of victims’ families.
We acknowledge the enactment of the legislative
act creating the 16 special transitional electoral
districts for peace as part of efforts to involve the whole
of Colombian society. So far, the signing of the peace
agreement has benefited more than half of accredited
ex-combatants with productive projects.
Nearly 60 per cent of female ex-combatants are part
of that initiative, and all collective productive projects
approved by the National Reincorporation Council
have been designed with a gender perspective. The
Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders should be a pillar
of peacebuilding.
Nevertheless, as we have heard, it is imperative
that all indigenous and Afro-descendant women have
an opportunity to be present in all decision-making
processes. It is they who continue to disproportionately
suffer the impacts of violence and bear the greatest
burden of the challenges to sustainable development.
The deterioration of security conditions in certain
regions, particularly for those living in rural areas, is
also a cause for concern. Equitable access to land and
housing must be a fundamental component of rural
reform and reconciliation.
Mexico condemns the acts of violence by illegal
armed groups, which has led to the forced displacement
of nearly 15,000 people so far in 2021. We also call for
the trafficking of small arms and light weapons into the
country to cease and for the consolidated integration
of State institutions and services in order to continue
to address the underlying causes of violence, namely,
exclusion and inequality.
On the other hand, we commend the conducting of
training activities for 7,000 members of 300 municipal
councils to design peacebuilding initiatives, as well
as the initiative of the so-called peace promoters for

S/PV. 8879

their capacity to promote alternative conflict resolution
mechanisms while respecting human rights and social
coexistence without exclusion.
Five years ago, Colombia showed the world that
there is no way out of armed conflict and that dialogue
and mutual understanding could indeed prevail. The full
implementation of the peace agreement is a common
goal, and the priorities outlined by the SecretaryGeneral serve as a road map to achieve it and avoid new
cycles of violence.
The renewal of the Verification Mission’s mandate
must continue in order to support not only the Colombian
Government but all other actors in building a stable and
lasting peace.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me
join others in welcoming the participation of the
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
in the Security Council’s meeting today. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda
and Ms. Daniela Soto for their insightful briefings.
The progress made in the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, especially in the past three
months, is reassuring. The enactment of the law creating
the 16 special transitional electoral districts for peace
has provided an opportunity for historically excluded
populations to participate in the next elections.
Peace-related funding in the national budget for
2021 has been increased by nearly 4 per cent. There
is renewed activism in the legislature, with ruling
coalition members and the opposition presenting
draft bills on issues related to the implementation of
the peace agreement. The first indictments from the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, new convictions by the
Special Investigations Unit and continuing protection
measures by the National Protection Unit reflect the
progress on transitional justice.
The political parties have begun preparing for
the congressional and presidential elections due next
year. On the socioeconomic side, we note that the
Government’s priorities for this last legislative period
included a new tax reform, which was enacted in
September, and changes to the National Police. The
reintegration process has continued to move forward
despite several challenges. Thus the implementation of

21-288459/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

the peace agreement has overall maintained a positive
trajectory. In that regard, we congratulate the President
and his Government on the various positive steps
taken in the implementation of the peace agreement.
We appreciate the strong commitment and action in
that direction.
There are still aspects of the peace agreement
that face impediments in implementation. The
disputes between illegal armed groups, including
various Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo dissident groups, over
territorial control and strategic illegal trafficking routes
have intensified. Those disputes have aggravated the
violence, particularly in areas affected by the conflict
and prioritized for the implementation of the peace
agreement. That cycle of violence, which has generated
displacements and confinements and led to the killings
of former combatants, social leaders and human rights
defenders, including indigenous and other vulnerable
sections of the population, needs to cease.
Threats, killings and the subsequent displacement
of cooperative members is having disruptive effects
on reintegration initiatives. We are confident that the
Colombian authorities are taking suitable steps to
implement the security, housing and land guarantees
contained in the agreement. The gap in the integrated
presence of the State between urban and rural areas,
especially those affected by the conflict, needs
continued attention. My delegation is fully cognizant
of the difficulties faced by the Government, since those
are complex challenges.
As we approach the fifth anniversary of the signing
of the peace agreement, one thing that stands out is
the collective commitment and determination of the
Colombian stakeholders to overcome the obstacles
to its implementation. The peace agreement not only
put an end to the conflict but also laid the foundations
for lasting peace through a robust and interconnected
set of programmes, norms and institutions. While the
peace process continues to be a source of inspiration
to the world, the international community needs
to support unequivocally the Government and the
people of Colombia in this journey to consolidate and
sustain peace.
In conclusion, Colombia remains an important
bilateral partner of India in Latin America. Despite
the pandemic disruptions, our bilateral relations have
been expanding, particularly in the economic and
10/23

14/10/2021

commercial spheres. The visit of the Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Her Excellency Marta
Lucía Ramírez, to India earlier this month, preceded by
the visit of India’s Minister of State for External Affairs
to Colombia in September, have further contributed to
the strengthening and diversification of India-Colombia
bilateral ties. As a long-standing friend and partner of
Colombia, India will continue to stand in solidarity
with the people and the Government of Colombia.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It is
my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Kenya, the
Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1).
At the outset, we thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Massieu; Ms. Daniela
Soto, Youth Leader, Regional Indigenous Council of
Cauca; and Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda, Coordinator of
“Butterflies with New Wings”, for their presentations.
We also welcome Her Excellency Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Colombians will celebrate in a few weeks the fifth
anniversary of the historic Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
That emblematic agreement — a testament to the
Government and the people of Colombia’s commitment
to peace — remains an exemplar and inspiration for
peace processes globally, as it epitomizes the centrality
of dialogue to overcome conflicts, no matter how
deeply entrenched.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement, we
have witnessed progress and setbacks. We welcome
the positive developments achieved over the years
and encourage the parties to consolidate the gains
made, and we further urge them to pursue with
rigour this vital agreement. The A3+1 also offers the
following observations.
First, the security situation remains of serious
concern. We strongly condemn the incessant killings
against the groups made most vulnerable, including
former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo combatants, indigenous
and afro-Colombians, women social leaders and human
rights defenders. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/824) emphasized the deteriorating
security situation in south-west Colombia, which we
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

believe requires greater attention in order to dismantle
illegal armed groups.
We welcome the recommendations by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the progress underscored
within the National Protection Unit. Enhancing
security guarantees in marginalized and conflict areas,
including strengthened protection and prevention
measures, remains critical. We therefore call for the
regular convocation of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees.
Similarly, we urge the parties to settle differences
on the content and legal status of the Strategic Plan for
Security and Protection for former combatants, as well
as to advance on the public policy to dismantle illegal
armed groups and accelerate the implementation of the
comprehensive programme for women social leaders
and human rights defenders.
The A3+1 maintains that those policies, plans
and programmes are pivotal to enabling a robust
and integrated approach to addressing lingering
security challenges.
Secondly, the security and socioeconomic
challenges facing former combatants are closely
interlinked. In that respect, we underscore the
importance of protection measures to ensure the proper
reintegration of former combatants into Colombian
society and applaud the ongoing efforts to facilitate
their reintegration, including through development
programmes with a territorial focus and comprehensive
rural reform programmes.
As we have repeatedly stated, the full and sustainable
reintegration of former combatants is crucial. That leads
to our call for the resolution of differences surrounding
the allocation of lands and housing, including the
challenges facing former combatants residing outside
the territorial areas for training and reintegration. It
is also reported that only two of approximately 320
former combatants living in urban areas have access
to housing solutions. Advancing on a comprehensive
strategy to guide the provision of housing to former
combatants is therefore key.
Further, we note with satisfaction the joint work
between the Government and the Comunes in the
design of the National Reintegration System, and hope
that it meets the year-end target.
We recognize the reported possible delays in the
implementation of the ethnic approach of the Agency

S/PV. 8879

for Reintegration and Normalization and fully endorse
the call of the Inspector General for the Agency to
update its registry and implement specific measures
for the economic and social reintegration of indigenous
and Afro-Colombian former combatants.
The A3+1 echoes the Secretary-General’s call for
both parties to ensure that women, youth, indigenous
and afro-Colombian former combatants participate
meaningfully in the decision-making process so that
equal access to income-generating opportunities and
protection measures are guaranteed.
Thirdly, the parties continue to make headway in the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition. We commend the developments
on Case 03 and acknowledge the strategy presented by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace on Case 07 on forced
recruitment and the use of children in armed conflict.
Accepting transgressions is essential for
forgiveness and creates the platform for justice,
reparation, reconciliation, non-repetition and the full
integration of former combatants into society. It is also
a fundamental aspect of peace processes, especially for
countries that are emerging from deep-rooted conflicts.
We therefore acknowledge the latest recognition of
former combatants Rodrigo Londoño and Salvatore
Mancuso before the Truth Commission.
After more than half a century of armed conflict,
Colombians decided that peace was paramount and
achievable through dialogue. Peace for Colombians
remains peace for everyone, especially for the Latin
American and the Caribbean region. We maintain that
the Government and the Ejercito de Liberación Nacional
should engage in dialogue to foster a more peaceful
and harmonious society. We also renew our call for the
parties to capitalize on the Commission for the FollowUp, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Peace Agreement to settle differences.
Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines reiterate our full support for the Colombian
peace process and the United Nations Verification
Mission and call on all parties to the Final Agreement
to ensure that it is implemented comprehensively.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank all
the briefers for their informative and valuable briefings
today and express Estonia’s strong support for the work
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
We warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía

21-2884511/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Colombia.
The fifth anniversary of the signing of the
Final Peace Agreement on 24 November gives us an
opportunity to reflect on what has been achieved and
identify areas that require more effort. We recognize
the positive developments and efforts made towards
sustainable peace during this period. The Peace
Agreement has had a significant impact on the
country’s development. It has not only led to the end of
the conflict but also formed the norms and institutions
that are needed in order to reach lasting peace. It has
also transformed the Government´s public policy
approach with respect to those local areas that are most
affected by violence. The peace process has proved that
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts can mitigate
local conflict dynamics.
However, challenges remain, and participation by
all stakeholders throughout the process is required,
including at the local level. The main challenges
hindering the implementation of the Peace Agreement
are linked to dynamics of violence. We are concerned
about the increase of violence against social leaders,
human rights defenders, former combatants and
communities. In 2021, 158 killings have been reported
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Almost 300 former combatants have
been killed since the signing of the Peace Agreement.
Violence against these individuals is hindering the
successful implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Fighting impunity is key to stopping violence. It is
essential to bring perpetrators to justice. Security needs
to be ensured for all parts of the country and vulnerable
groups of society. As rural areas are disproportionately
more affected, we call on the Government to increase its
presence in those areas. Communities need protection
from violence by illegal armed groups, and basic
services need to be ensured.

14/10/2021

peace process. The inclusion of different gender and
ethnic groups is crucial. Furthermore, we reiterate the
importance of guaranteeing the independent functioning
of all institutions established under the Peace
Agreement, including transitional justice mechanisms.
Finally, we encourage all parties to make good use
of the tools available to pursue a genuine dialogue at
both national and local levels. I would like to express
Estonia´s full support for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in its entirety.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Let me first warmly
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia to our meeting today.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu, Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda and
Ms. Daniela Soto for their informative briefings.
Since the signing of the landmark Peace Agreement,
Colombia has made important achievements. We
commend the Government for its efforts in promoting
socioeconomic development, including comprehensive
rural reform. The reintegration process has also been
expanded at all levels. However, as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/824), various
provisions of the Agreement have not been implemented
successfully. As a result, the reintegration, like other
processes, continues to be fragile, while reconciliation
faces multiple challenges.
Against this background, we would like to stress
the following. First, political will and determination
of all relevant parties in conducting the next steps of
the Final Peace Agreement are extremely important
for the way forward for Colombia. We acknowledge
the Government’s commitments in the reintegration
process, including the provision of protection and
security for former combatants.

We welcome the progress made during the last
reporting period with regard to transitional justice,
particularly the work made by the Truth Commission.
Also, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has progressed
with cases involving both the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia and the security forces,
including cases of forced recruitment and use of
children in conflict.

We call on all relevant parties to continue engaging
in constructive dialogue at political and technical levels
and to address various challenges and differences in
the peace process, especially through the mechanisms
devised by the Agreement, with a view to bringing
about reconciliation, solidarity and progress for all. In
this regard, it is also important to note that this process
is a long-term one that requires patience as well as
practical steps.

Victims need to stay at the centre of the process.
It is important to improve victims’ participation in the

We welcome the creation of 16 special transitional
electoral districts and commend the efforts made

12/23

21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

by the political parties in reviewing their electoral
campaign and strategy for the 2022 elections. This
year will be decisive for Colombia, especially in terms
of the preparations for the 2022 congressional and
presidential elections. Every effort should therefore
be made to create the most favourable conditions for
the participation of all political parties in the elections.
The measures should also be taken to ensure safe
and inclusive elections, especially measures for the
protection of women and children. The United Nations
and the international community should support
Colombia’s efforts towards this end, while respecting
the country’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.
Secondly, the report of the Secretary-General
gave us worrying information on the unabated
violence and attacks against Colombians, including
former combatants, social leaders, conflict-affected
communities and public security forces. We condemn
all these attacks and urge all concerned groups to stop
these appalling acts immediately. We reiterate that
such violence is unacceptable and that the perpetrators
must be brought to justice. In this regard, we urge the
National Commission on Security Guarantees to take
concrete actions to dismantle these organizations and
strengthen investigations and the application of justice.
It is also important to redouble efforts to ensure security
and bring about development to conflict-affected
communities through practical measures. It is through
the well-being of these communities that the value of
peace is upheld and maintained.
Thirdly, Colombia has achieved various degrees
of progress in the socioeconomic and political fields.
The process should continue to be implemented
in a comprehensive manner that is politically and
socioeconomically sustainable. We therefore encourage
the introduction of further measures to promote, inter
alia, economic and inclusive development, social
cohesion, rural development, housing, education and
job creation. The development plans of the country
need to take into account the particular needs of
its communities.
We expect to see a greater role played by the
Government, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común and the National Reintegration Council,
together with the United Nations and regional and
international organizations, in developing a joint
strategy for strengthened socioeconomic development

S/PV. 8879

that lays out concrete measures to assist former
combatants in attaining sustainable livelihoods.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our strong
support for the process of peace, stability, security,
national reconciliation, national unity and development
in the country, as well as for the role and the renewal
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
to that end.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/824) on the situation in the country.
We also thank Ms. Peñaranda and Ms. Soto for their
briefings. We welcome the participation in person of
the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, in this briefing.
We agree with the conclusion of the report that
there has been some progress in the Government’s
implementation of its commitments under the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. However, a great deal
more needs to be done in order to achieve true and
lasting peace. We are concerned by the fact that even
Colombians themselves believe that the implementation
of the agreement is being dragged out, and now it is
expected to take 26 years instead of the 15 years
stipulated in the agreement.
We also agree with the report’s conclusion that the
primary task is to ensure the security of the parties to
the peace process and other representatives of civil
society. The activity of criminal groups remains a
scourge. Their operations have resulted in more than
15,000 additional internally displaced persons, whose
total number has exceeded 57,000. More than 46,000
more have been cut off from the outside world in their
settlements. The number of former combatants who laid
down theirarms and were killed since the signing of the
Final Agreement is approaching 300, and the number
of human rights defenders and activists killed since the
beginning of this year exceeds 150.
Amid those sad statistics, the National Commission
on Security Guarantees, which, according to the Final
Agreement, is supposed to meet monthly, has not met
once in the past six months, and neither has the National
Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence.

21-2884513/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

The report rightly points out that the most problematic
areas are those where the central Government is weak.
That power and law and order vacuum is being filled
by various illegal armed groups, which is resulting
in increasing criminality and ongoing high levels of
violence in the country. However, the local authorities
are well aware of the situation. They are well aware of
the areas in which they need to increase their presence
and take steps to curb crime and drug trafficking.
It is time to finally recognize that the full
implementation of the Final Agreement will not be
possible without addressing the problem of drug
trafficking, which is the main cause and source of
violence in the country. In addition, States that receive
Colombian cocaine must acknowledge their share of
responsibility and take a more proactive approach to
combating drug trafficking within Colombia and to
reducing their own domestic consumption.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Truth
Commission have a key role to play in consolidating
public accord around the Final Agreement. They must
retain their full independence.
We believe that the entry into force of the decree
establishing 16 special transitional electoral districts
and the same number of seats in the lower house of
Parliament was an important development, which
should redress the situation regarding the historically
underrepresented regions in the legislature. Another
important development was the achievement of the
50 per cent benchmark in the number of registered
participants in the peace process who enrolled in the
Government’s income-generating programmes.
At the same time, while progressing towards a
settlement, it is important to bear in mind that sustainable
reconciliation in Colombia cannot be achieved unless
all actors, including the National Liberation Army, are
engaged in the process. We understand that establishing
a dialogue between the Government and that group is not
an easy task, taking into account the previous history of
mutual distrust and hostility. Nevertheless, we consider
it extremely important to overcome the blockages on
the path to resuming the dialogue suspended in 2019.
We are convinced that sustainable peace and
stability in Colombia could be helped by establishing
relations with neighbouring Venezuela. We welcome
the efforts to reopen the border crossings. We hope that
that will be followed by restoring dialogue between the
law enforcement agencies of both countries. That is
14/23

14/10/2021

urgently needed in order to combat the rampant crime
in the border areas and could serve as a safeguard
against possible misunderstandings or provocations
with dangerous ramifications.
The date 24 November will mark five years since
the signing of Colombia’s historic agreement. That is a
third of the 15 years that were set out for the agreement’s
implementation. It is time to take stock of the interim
results. Much has certainly been accomplished, but
even more remains to be done.
We are convinced that the Government’s strict
implementation of its commitments remains essential.
Replacing the agreement by any unilateral programmes
that have not been agreed to by all parties to the peace
process is fraught with a backlash, with the most
negative long-term consequences.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia will continue to support the Colombian peace
process in order to make it sustainable and irreversible.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/824). We appreciate the vital
role that the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia continues to play in supporting peace in that
country. I also thank Ms. Peñaranda and Ms. Soto for
their informative briefings. We offer a warm welcome
to Vice-President and Foreign Minister Marta Lucía
Ramírez to the Security Council today.
As we approach the five-year anniversary of the
signing of the peace agreement, this is a moment to
acknowledge both the enormous progress made and
the significant challenges ahead. Thousands of former
combatants laid down their weapons to take part in the
democratic process. Colombians have faced far less
violence since. The new transitional justice processes
foster reconciliation, while also addressing the rights of
victims, including historically excluded communities.
On that note, we are pleased to see that the
Colombian Constitutional Court has extended the Truth
Commission’s mandate for seven months. The role of
the Truth Commission is essential. Only by clarifying
the past, elevating the voices and experiences of
victims and addressing the root causes can the cycle
of conflict and abuse be broken. Its efforts during
this reporting period helped lead former leaders of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

(FARC) and the Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia to
acknowledge their responsibilities. We commend the
Truth Commission’s interest in engaging all sectors of
Colombian society, including opponents of the peace
accord within the FARC.
By bridging social divisions, Colombia can
overcome the drivers of violence and realize its
enormous potential. We encourage all Colombia’s
institutions and social sectors, including political
parties, security forces and private-sector entities, to
accept the Commission’s invitation to dialogue and to
consider its recommendations with an open mind. We
encourage the Commission to take full advantage of
the extended mandate. That is an opportunity to engage
victims of the conflict in Colombia’s most remote and
difficult-to-reach areas.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has also made
significant progress. Despite great challenges, it has
demonstrated its commitment to establishing the truth,
providing justice and supporting long-term peace and
stability in Colombia. We welcome the efforts of the
Attorney General and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
to increase collaboration.
Of course, the coronavirus disease pandemic makes
carrying out the activities of the peace agreement more
difficult. To that end, the United States has provided
a total of 6 million vaccine doses to Colombia as part
of our ongoing solidarity with the people of Colombia
as they recover from this devastating pandemic. These
donations have allowed the Government of Colombia
to provide vaccines to some of the most remote and
vulnerable communities in the country.
Despite the progress spurred by the peace agreement,
we remain concerned about continued violence and
human rights violations. As the Secretary-General’s
report confirms, killings of former combatants, social
leaders and human rights defenders continue. This must
end. The continued violence makes it harder for former
combatants to successfully reintegrate into society. It
threatens the peace process as a whole.
We hope the Government of Colombia continues
to invest in peacebuilding in Colombia’s 2022 national
budget, including funding for the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace and the Truth Commission. We also hope it
prioritizes peace accord mechanisms. Regular meetings
within these peace accord mechanisms ensure that all
people affected by the conflict will have a voice and a
role in the implementation of the accord.

S/PV. 8879

We have seen encouraging steps for fostering fair
and sustainable peace in Colombia over the past five
years. While many challenges remain, the progress
made to date and the work of the Verification Mission
serve as a model for how to address long-standing
conflicts. We commend the work of all parties over the
past five years and know that the lives of Colombians
have benefited from these efforts.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to start
by warmly welcoming Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia. It is good to have her with us today, and we
welcome her to today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for the
continued work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which we appreciate. I also
thank Ms. Soto and Ms. Peñaranda for their powerful
briefings on the distinct experiences of indigenous and
Afro-Colombian women. I truly appreciated hearing
from them today.
Today, we are all reflecting on five years since
the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
Five years of peace, reconciliation and progress have
served as an example of what can be achieved when
peace is prioritized and protected — in other words,
when peace is given a chance. Ireland extends our
warm congratulations to the people of Colombia on
this anniversary. While it was the signatories who put
pen to paper, this accord and its peace dividends belong
to every Colombian. We welcome and encourage
the continued commitment of the Government and
signatories to its comprehensive implementation.
Today’s milestone marks only one-third of the
time frame projected to implement the accord. Much
remains to be done. It is more important than ever
that the international community support Colombia
in fully realizing the promise of peace in the face of
multifaceted challenges. Ireland will continue to keep
faith and to stand by Colombia’s side. In Ireland, we
know that the delivery of the provisions of a negotiated
agreement comes with challenges, but we also know
that peace cannot be secured by turning back. All
parties must remain committed and look ahead.
I wish to highlight three areas where sustained
efforts are particularly necessary.

21-2884515/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

We warmly welcome the Government’s enactment
of the transitional electoral districts for peace. The
inclusion of victims’ voices from conflict-affected
regions in Parliament is a powerful moment for
political reintegration efforts. However, threats and
intimidation of candidates across the political spectrum
are worrying, and efforts must continue to ensure the
safe and meaningful participation of women and youth
in the political process.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued
targeting of ex-combatants. We encourage the
Government to reinforce protection guarantees for excombatants and to adopt a gender-sensitive approach to
ensure the provision of equal and adequate protections
to women, within the scheme. We are also concerned
about reports of violence against human rights
defenders, who deserve to work in all communities
without fear.
I wish to reiterate again our concern about the heavy
toll of violence, forced displacements and confinements
on indigenous and Afro-Colombian populations, as well
as on other community and social leaders, particularly
women and youth leaders. We encourage all efforts to
support these communities, expand State presence in
these municipalities, dismantle armed groups and bring
perpetrators to justice.
Continued and committed dialogue in Colombia is
essential. We welcome the engagement by all parties
with the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, and we appreciate the Mission’s work to
help overcome difficulties and operationalize this
valuable platform. As Colombia approaches elections,
spaces for dialogue about implementing the Agreement
are more important than ever and need to be preserved.
Truth and reconciliation processes have the power
to unlock grievances and help put all citizens on a shared
path to progress. Colombia’s peace accord has been
truly innovative, including in putting victims of the
conflict at the centre. In that regard, Ireland welcomes
the extension of the Truth Commission’s mandate.
We also reiterate our support for the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. Its investigations of conflictrelated sexual violence and the forced recruitment and
use of children in conflict are particularly important.
These heinous crimes have caused some of the deepest
wounds. Justice for survivors, even after decades, will
facilitate healing.
16/23

14/10/2021

In conclusion, on this landmark anniversary, it is
important to celebrate the progress we have made. At a
time when so many conflicts around the world appear
intractable, the Colombian accord stands as an example
of what we can achieve. Like any peace process, it
has required courage, patience and trust. There have
been challenges and setbacks, and there is still a long
path ahead.
But looking forward, today we should be
emboldened by the gains of the process. All parties must
redouble their efforts to protect this hard-won peace by
ensuring full implementation of the Agreement. Ireland
and the Council will continue to support Colombia and
its people as they continue on this journey.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing. We also thank Ms. Peñaranda
and Ms. Soto for their powerful statements. We warmly
welcome Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to our
meeting today.
As so many speakers before me have noted,
in just six weeks we will celebrate the five-year
anniversary of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The accord put an end to 52 years of violent conflict
with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo guerrilla group. This
achievement was the result of strong commitment
by the parties, with the robust support of Colombian
civil society, and was wholeheartedly supported by the
international community.
Indeed, its comprehensive, steady and successful
implementation remains a priority for the Security
Council today. Implementing a peace agreement takes
time. Yet, much has been accomplished, including
progress in the reintegration of former combatants.
We are nevertheless troubled that the Office of the
Comptroller General indicates that at this pace, it will
take 26 years to fully implement the accord — not the
15 years agreed upon. We urge Colombia to accelerate
implementation, while making sure it is done in a
holistic manner.
The current high levels of violence — causing
mass displacement — represent the greatest threat to
the Agreement. Moreover, the number of human rights
defenders, social leaders and former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia combatants killed
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

is staggering. That leads to insecurity, and undermines
people’s faith in the agreement. Additional efforts
must be made to improve the security situation. And a
particular focus must be given to the 25 municipalities
where most of the violence occurs, especially
indigenous communities.
A main objective of the accord is to replace violence
with political participation. Colombia has taken
significant steps in that direction. An important hurdle
was passed when the law creating the 16 transitional
electoral districts for peace was enacted. And as we
approach the 2022 elections, considerable efforts must
be made to avoid political violence, including against
the candidates for the 16 special seats, who are at
particular risk.
The implementation of the Comprehensive Security
System for the Exercise of Politics, as stipulated in
the agreement, would be a significant step. We hope
the political parties can, once again, rally around a
platform of non-violence. People taking to the streets to
peacefully protest is a legitimate expression of political
participation and must be respected, not met with
disproportionate use of force.
An inclusive political dialogue requires the
participation of community leaders, civil society and
human rights defenders. We know that women and
peace and security is a high priority for Colombia. We
acknowledge the work undertaken to ensure women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation, and encourage
even more resources be allocated to strengthen security
guarantees for women, human rights defenders, excombatants and social leaders.
Providing dignified living conditions for former
combatants is imperative. Making sure that the
signatories to the agreement are able to provide food
and adequate housing for themselves and their families
is of utmost importance. And we are pleased to learn
that steps are being taken to overcome differences. We
encourage both parties to make the best possible use of
the various formal and informal spaces created by the
agreement, not least the National Reintegration Council
and the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. We are again pleased to highlight the
progress made by the integrated system for transitional
justice. The Truth Commission provides an invaluable
space for truth telling and encounters between victims
and perpetrators. Granting the Commission another

S/PV. 8879

seven months of operations will provide valuable time
to comply with its mandate. Hopefully, its report will
serve to heal wounds and become a point of departure
toward a peaceful future.
Finally, rest assured that Norway remains committed
to accompanying Colombia in its efforts to ensure the
peace agreement is comprehensively implemented.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the presence of Her Excellency
Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, at today’s meeting. I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. I have also listened
carefully to the statements by the representatives of
civil society.
In the past five years since it was signed, the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace has been steadily implemented,
thanks to the concerted the efforts of the Colombian
Government and all parties. The peace process
continues to be advanced and remarkable results have
been achieved.
China welcomes the Colombian Government’s
creation of special transitional electoral districts for
peace, which gives historically excluded populations
in conflict-affected regions the opportunity to
participate in national elections for the first time. That
is an important step forward in the implementation
of the peace agreement, and we commend the efforts
made by all Colombian parties in that regard. I look
forward to the successful holding of congressional and
presidential elections next year, which will create an
enabling environment for the follow-up implementation
of the peace agreement.
The comprehensive implementation of the peace
agreement is a complex and systematic undertaking. It
requires the Colombian Government and all parties to
make unremitting and sustained efforts to consolidate
their hard-won achievements. We have noted that
there is still a gap between the implementation of the
peace agreement and the progress expected. Much
more needs to be done in some parts of the country
to improve the security situation, protect the safety
and security of former combatants and allocate land
to them. We hope that the Colombian Government and
all parties will work together to maintain the current
positive momentum, promote the implementation of the
peace agreement in a balanced manner and boost the

21-2884517/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

14/10/2021

confidence and support of all sectors of society for the
peace process.

held in good conditions. The security of the candidates
is a priority.

China supports Colombia in continuing its rural
and land reforms and accelerating the reintegration
of ex-combatants into society. Public services need to
be further improved. The substitution of illicit crops,
cultivation and other projects that benefit the people
need to be fully implemented. All those efforts will
create a solid economic and social foundation for the
long-term peace and stability of Colombia.

Secondly, we welcome the continued progress of the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition. The extension of the mandate of
the Truth Commission, will allow it to complete its
essential work. The issuance of the first indictments in
Case 03 is a positive development. We encourage all
parties to the conflict to engage in that process.

The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has done a tremendous amount of work to
support the implementation of the peace agreement.
China commends the mission and supports the
extension of its mandate. We hope that the mission will
facilitate greater dialogue and consultation between
the Colombian Government and former combatants
to resolve differences and problems arising in the
implementation of the peace agreement. At the same
time, the mission should strengthen its coordination
with the United Nations country team and play a
positive role in the early achievement of lasting peace,
stability and sustainable development in Colombia.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing and Ms. Peñaranda and Ms. Soto for their
testimonies and their daily action in their communities.
I also welcome the Vice-President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Colombia is about to celebrate the fifth anniversary
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. That is a historic
agreement and much progress has been made, which
we welcome. However, we must also draw clearheaded conclusions with regard to its implementation
and continue efforts accordingly, because several
challenges remain, as has been mentioned repeatedly
before me.
I will touch upon four aspects.
First, France welcomes the creation of the 16 special
transitional electoral districts for peace. That will allow
historically excluded populations in conflict-affected
regions to participate fully in the political process. The
election campaign is approaching and with it the risk
of increased violence. The Colombian authorities must
do everything possible to ensure that the elections are
18/23

Thirdly, the continued violence in Colombia is
not acceptable. Each assassination undermines the
implementation of the peace agreement. The solution is
well known to Colombians. The State’s presence must
be strengthened in the most remote areas. The role of
the National Commission on Security Guarantees must
also be strengthened in order to implement the policy of
dismantling armed groups.
Fourthly, in order to achieve peace, viable and fair
socioeconomic opportunities must be provided for all.
There have been welcome advances in rural reform,
illicit crop substitution and access to land and housing.
That progress must be accelerated and consolidated
and, above all, accompanied by an appropriate budget.
The chapters of the agreement that deal with ethnic
and gender issues must be given special attention. The
civil society representatives have provided us with an
example of that.
Before I conclude, I would like to echo the
Secretary-General’s call in his report (S/2021/824)
to make full use of the institutions provided for in
the peace agreement. I am thinking in particular
of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. Those institutions were built to promote
dialogue and they need to meet more often.
In conclusion, France, as well as the European
Union, will continue to support all those in Colombia
who are working every day to achieve peace. The
President: I now call on the Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Ms. Lucía Ramírez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank all the members of the Security Council for
their continued interest in the situation in Colombia.
I especially thank Kenya for convening this meeting. I
am very grateful for the briefings by two outstanding
representatives of Colombia and Colombian women,
Ms. Bibiana Peñaranda and Ms. Daniela Soto. I thank
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

them for their remarks. Among other things, we are
very grateful for the fact that Bibiana was part of
a process that led to her re-election and the overall
process that the Government of Colombia, especially
the Counsellor for Stabilization, Mr. Emilio Archila
Peñalosa, organized. We are also very pleased to see in
Ms. Soto a young woman with such authority on Cauca
and the suffering there and how violence has taken root
in Caldono, unfortunately, as a result of the growing
presence of drug trafficking. I express my solidarity
with both women. We stand ready to work with both
of them with open arms, as we are perfectly aware that
the voice and work of women and their ability to build
bridges will enable us to move our country forward.
I also thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his briefing, his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/824) and his continued work.
The report outlines the progress that almost all
Council members have acknowledged. For that, we
thank everyone on behalf of President Iván Duque
Márquez and our entire Government. That progress
is particularly important as we are on the eve of
commemorating the fifth anniversary of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, the implementation of which
has been achieved, for all intents and purposes, over
the past three years. More specifically, during the
past three years of our term in Government, we have
implemented the policy of peace with legality, which
is non-exclusive and is the essence of what was needed
in Colombia following the many years of conflict we
unfortunately experienced.
The report also acknowledges the implementation of
the agreement in its establishing space for communities
to work with the Government in drafting development
plans and alternatives to illicit economies, in which
there has been an unprecedented gender approach,
referred to for the fourth consecutive time in the report.
The policy of peace with legality has embodied our
vision to help Colombia overcome the challenges that it
should have addressed decades ago and that led to the
conflict lasting for so long.
The Constitutional Court has stated that the
commitments provided for in the agreement should be
worked on continually over a 15-year period — that
is the time frame, not 26 years — and therefore our
country will have to achieve its implementation in
15 years. That means that our Administration has to
carry out 26 per cent of the implementation. As the

S/PV. 8879

representative of Ireland noted, that constitutes one
third of the time that has elapsed. Although much time
remains, it is important not to backslide with regard to
what has already been achieved in terms of the 26 per
cent that our Government has to implement.
As is clear, a great deal of progress has been made,
which would have been impossible to imagine two
years, or even one year, ago. We are very proud of that.
Every three months, we have shown how we have been
able, first, to provide political and legal guarantees to
the process; secondly, provide support for the victims;
thirdly, reintegrate former combatants; fourthly, roll
out crop substitution programmes; fifthly, develop the
territorial areas for training and reintegration; sixthly,
provide comprehensive rural development, which is
increasingly comprehensive in terms of infrastructure,
economic development, social investment and the
environment and includes working with communities
and providing education for children; and, lastly, the
gender approach.
I
agree
with
what
our
civil
society
representatives — Bibiana and Daniela — said earlier
in their briefings, as the gender approach has been
vital to the agreement. With that approach, the gender
round table has demonstrated how all the indicators
are reflective of the very obvious progress. Was there
also a need for an ethnic approach? Well, therein the
importance of a round table with an ethnic focus, which
should also be included. Personally, it was my initial
belief that the approach must include all ethnic groups,
because we women have a range of ideas, needs and
demands. But if such a round table contributes to better
implementation, we welcome it. Counsellor Archila
Peñalosa is working on that.
We have faced major challenges. We have addressed
them because that is our commitment to Colombia as
the Government of President Duque. Continuing to
build peace every day entails enormous efforts by the
Government, political will and budgetary resources, as
the representative of France just mentioned. But how
can it not be a challenge to implement a process in which
13,996 former combatants were demobilized, including
their families? How can it not be a challenge when the
development programmes with a territorial focus cover
nearly 7 million inhabitants, which is comparable to
the populations of Lebanon, Libya, El Salvador, Laos,
Bulgaria or Hong Kong? I wonder what country in the
world would be able, in three or five years, to resolve all
of the problems of any of those countries.

21-2884519/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

Of course, we have great commitment in line
with what the civil society briefers said, but also with
what Melissa Herrera said, who spoke at the previous
meeting on behalf of Latin American Foundation Viva
la Vida (see S/PV.8818). I have written to her and told
her what we are doing. We have invited her to actively
participate in the transformation that the Government
of President Duque is carrying out. That includes the
major pact for youth initiative, which concluded a few
days ago after holding 500 workshops made up of more
than 15,000 young people representing every race,
social background and region of the country. That was
a very significant step that our country will have to
follow up with a perspective on the mid- and long-term.
As all members know, the support for reintegration
was conceived of in 2019, and it should therefore be
coming to a conclusion now. However, our Government
has decided to extend the time frame for as long as it
takes — for those who have been reintegrated — as
enshrined in our national development plan. Of course,
the necessary resources have been allocated every year
in the budget.
In line with the policy of peace with legality, we
have established the National Reintegration Council,
which has enabled us to develop robust planning
that includes specific actions with time frames and
indicating those responsible, according to the needs
of former combatants. There has been very significant
coordination in the reintegration process in which the
former combatants have participated. As many said
earlier, it is a historic processes, and, in the area of
reintegration, the Government is going even further
than what the agreement sets out.
In terms of economic guarantees, we have
dispersed $118 million to the benefit of 13,216 former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC). As I mentioned previously, 13,996
former combatants have laid down their weapons. The
territorial areas for training and reintegration were
initially planned as temporary sites that should have
been dissolved by now. However, our Government
decided to transform them into a permanent fixture
and include them in local territorial planning. We have
maintained 24 areas and are preserving their current
administration and providing resources totalling more
than $18 million dedicated to covering the costs of
their maintenance, rent and administration to ensure
that they can function properly. We have also provided
food support, and the national Government has
20/23

14/10/2021

provided such support with an investment of more than
$7 million dollars.
As members are well aware, the agreement did not
provide land to former FARC combatants. However,
given that some of the productive projects require land,
the Government has begun acquiring plots so that
former combatants’ projects can be viable, profitable
and lasting and overtime enable them to make an
adequate income.
More than $2.5 million has already been
disbursed for the purchase of more than 570 hectares
and, as I mentioned previously, 3,550 individual
and collective productive projects have benefited
from leased land, thanks to which 57 per cent of excombatants — representing 7,100 ex-combatants and
their families — enjoy a stable income. Despite the fact
that ex-combatant status was not foreseen as a criterion
for receiving land, many of those ex-combatants
received land for their productive projects.
We have seen outstanding results in those projects
thanks to the dialogue to which several Council
members referred, which is an ongoing process, on
the President’s instructions, being carried out by
the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila Peñalosa, who is
here with me today. The analyses and discussions
in the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and in the National Reintegration Council,
as well as the multiple constructive meetings with excombatants convened by Mr. Archila Peñalosa and
Director Stapper, have provided clarity within each
of the steps that are being taken in that process jointly
with the ex-combatants.
After having initially agreed on the first housing
solutions in the former territorial training and
reincorporation spaces, the former FARC component
changed its mind about the construction system and
rejected the national Government’s offer of housing.
We understand that to be a process issue that must be
swiftly resolved. The guarantees in the reintegration
process are available to all demobilized ex-combatants
who are party to the agreed road map, regardless of
whether or not they belong to the FARC or Comunes
political parties. No matter whether an ex-combatant is
a party member or not, they will face no discrimination
whatsoever, provided that they are already fulfilling
their obligations. Today there are 12,910 persons in the
21-28845

14/10/2021

Colombia

reintegration process, over 10,400 of whom are outside
the former territorial training and reincorporation
spaces and 2,469 of whom remain within them.
As several members of the Council have said, we are
currently on the verge of an electoral process that will
be fundamental for the continuation of peacebuilding
and stabilization in Colombia. We are convinced that
its proper implementation will contribute to achieving
a lasting peace if our country takes advantage of the
opportunity to build on the gains that have already been
made. It is also essential to protect the lives of those
participating in the electoral process and that the next
Government, whichever it may be, continues to build
on what has been achieved thus far.
That is why the fact we have strengthened all
our institutions for the implementation of the peace
agreement is so important, as institutions constitute
one of the assets of the main pillars of peacebuilding.
That is precisely why we also welcome the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia for one more year. The guarantees we
made to the candidates of the Comunes political party
regarding their participation in the recent elections
achieved their purpose of protection from the risk of
homicide and kidnapping, which have, unfortunately,
in the past, led to several ex-combatant candidates
losing their lives or being forced to withdraw. That
has set a good precedent for the vital measures we are
already preparing to take in order to guarantee even
better security for the members of the Comunes party
throughout the next electoral process.
In the same vein regarding political participation,
and although it is not part Mission’s mandate, we must
highlight President Duque Márquez’s announcement
of the signing of the decree providing for 16 seats
for victims’ representation in Congress from 20222030. Victims are at the centre of that initiative, and
therefore it is very important that the Mission be fully
aware of the need to constantly support that effort for
the benefit of the victims in those seats. I am very
grateful to the representatives of Mexico, Viet Nam and
India, among others, for their remarks in that regard.
The commitment of President Duque Márquez and
the Government to providing assistance, security and
reparation for victims has been reflected in all aspects
of our policy of peace with legality, in particular the
results of the Victims and Land Restitution Units.

S/PV. 8879

With regard to the second of the three aspects of the
mandate, on security guarantees, we have set in motion
the implementation of policies for our strategic security
plan, which was developed by Counsellor Archila
Peñalosa. For our Government, even a single death is
unacceptable, and we grieve for every life lost. Again,
that is totally unacceptable. Under that premise, we are
working to reduce acts of violence and all homicides
against the ex-combatant population. Homicides
against persons in the reintegration process went from
74 in 2019 to 68 in 2020, which is 8.1 per cent lower,
but I insist that there is no justification for the death
of an ex-combatant. Likewise, between 1 January and
24 September 2021, that rate was 18.7 per cent lower
than during the same period in 2020, but our goal is to
reach zero homicides.
As several Council members have mentioned,
including the representative of the United States, the
investigation, indictment and conviction of those
acts by the Prosecutor’s Office must continue to
be fulfilled in a prompt and effective manner. As of
1 October, investigative progress had been made in
182 of the 340 cases reported against persons in the
reintegration process. The Prosecutor’s Office reports
that the majority of incidents — more than 70 per
cent — occurred in drug trafficking corridors and in
areas where there are disputes between groups of drug
traffickers, including FARC dissidents. Many of them
killed their former comrades-in-arms when the latter
refused to return to coca cultivation. That is not true for
all cases, but the figures from the Prosecutor’s Office
show that 70 per cent are closely related to those areas
linked to drug trafficking activity.
Between January and August, we also saw a 29 per
cent decrease in the number of murders of human
rights leaders and defenders as compared to the same
period in 2020. That is why the strategic security plan
is so important. Despite the work of the Government
and Colombian society as a whole, we cannot ignore
the fact that drug trafficking poses a major challenge,
and we hope that the former FARC will make far more
progress in its commitments to fight that scourge.
Above all, we hope that headway will also be made
in terms of transitional justice by obtaining the truth
about the effective identification of drug trafficking
routes and allied cartels operating in other countries,
including where they launder their money or keep their
financial assets.

21-2884521/23

S/PV.8879

Colombia

Let us remember that the peace agreement was
signed knowing that the FARC was not, at that time,
the sole generator of violence, which was fuelled
for decades by drug trafficking in our country. The
National Liberation Army, the Clan del Golfo, Los
Pelusos, Los Caparros, Los Contadores and many
others with different names already existed when the
peace agreement was signed. Today they are still in the
drug trafficking business, generating violence with the
FARC dissidents who never entered the peace process.
Therefore, the implementation of the peace
agreement alone was not enough to achieve the stable
and lasting peace that we all yearn for. Those who
divert attention from the real causes of the violence by
trying to attribute it to alleged failures on the part of our
Government are mistaken. Not only have we achieved
in three years that which had not even begun in the first
two, we have gone above and beyond our commitments
on several fronts of the agreement and will continue
to do so. We are doing everything in our power to
achieve a true and lasting peace with legality alongside
an economic development that generates quality jobs
across all of Colombia, including in rural areas.
It must be acknowledged that those groups that
persist in drug trafficking activities are hindering the
implementation of the peace agreement. They have
attacked civilians, assassinated social leaders and
killed dissidents and persons participating in crop
substitution efforts. That is why it is so important to
insist, once again, before the Security Council, on
the need for the entire international community to
genuinely assume its shared responsibility in the fight
against the infamous drug business that has fuelled the
FARC, the National Liberation Army and the many
other groups I mentioned in Colombia and in so many
other places across the world.
Colombia reiterates its call for the shared
undertaking of responsibility against drug trafficking
because ours is a country that struggles every single day,
with the tireless efforts and hard work of its 50 million
inhabitants, to continue advancing and achieving peace.
However, to be quite frank, I must inform the Council
that our entire country is the primary victim of a vile
business, which, today, already processes part of the
coca in laboratories in the most developed countries.
It feeds on social vices and the financial business
of money-laundering, which few countries dare to
acknowledge or address with the required severity.
22/23

14/10/2021

In the fight against drug trafficking, our Government
has invested $280 million to assist families taking part
in the national illicit crop substitution programme in
56 municipalities. Interventions have been carried out
to assist 99,000 families that have found an option
that guarantees development and social and economic
progress, within the confines of the law, in the regions
most affected by the scourge of drug trafficking.
Our Government has respected the autonomy
and independence of the bodies that comprise the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition. That point was underscored by
the representatives of Estonia and Norway, and, for us,
judicial autonomy is crucial.
The pandemic emerged and affected all Government
entities. Funding allocated to the budget for the
transitional justice system, the Truth Commission and
the Search Unit for Missing Persons has been higher
than that traditionally earmarked for the justice system.
Funding allocated to those three entities totalled
$132 million in 2020 and $151 million in 2021. That
means that the Government of Iván Duque has allocated
$278 million to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. It is
an unprecedented budget and level of investment that
we must maintain.
I would like to make a few specific remarks about
some issues that are not related to the three main aspects
of the mandate outlined in the report (S/2021/824).
With respect to the Government’s efforts every
year to increase resources and funding allocated to
peace, as I mentioned in my previous statement (see
S/PV.8818), the total cost of that implementation is
equivalent to almost two full years of Colombia’s gross
domestic product. That, undoubtedly, exceeds the
budgetary capacity of our nation and, I would imagine,
of any nation represented in the Chamber today. Which
country could allocate two whole years of its gross
domestic product to implementing an agreement that
would assist a large segment — albeit barely 10 per
cent — of the population?
Our Government will continue making the
necessary investment, which, to date, amounts to
$8.413 billion over the past two years. It demonstrates
our genuine commitment in that area. In spite of the
pandemic, the Government allocated the largest
budget in history for victim care, at $263 million; the
reintegration of former combatants — a much larger
21-28845

14/10/2021

S/PV. 8879

Colombia

amount — and for municipalities that are most affected
by poverty and violence, with more than $2.894 billion.
With regard to new reintegration areas, I underscore
that such statistics do not exist and that it would not
help to create them. We must strengthen what already
exists, in particular elements that are already part
of the agreement and the mandate. We must take all
the necessary steps towards normalcy, including by
accepting the territorial planning system already in
place. As reintegration is guaranteed for all former
combatants, we expect that when they move, they will
relocate to areas where opportunities are accessible,
regulated and operational and not to areas where they
are more complicated. We request that the Mission
support us in that objective.
With regard to ethnic affairs and in response
to comments from the representatives of various
members, such as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
together with the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — I would
like to inform the Council that, a week ago, in Cali, the
capital of Valle del Cauca, the Government met with the
agency tasked with reviewing ethnic issues pertaining
to the implementation of the agreement and agreed on
a work plan for next year. We have 97 ethnic indicators
and 12 of them have been finalized. The remaining 85
have recorded progress and developed work plans for
2021 and 2022. Some 66 of the 97 ethnic commitments
will be implemented in the period 2026-2031.
With respect to the gender approach, which several
Council members have also mentioned, tomorrow
marks the International Day for Rural Women. A total
of 45 per cent of former women combatants already take
part in productive projects that are scalable, profitable
and sustainable. The Government provides technical
assistance, as well as funding and support.
The Mission’s verification work responds to a
specific mandate from the Council. We note, for
example, that the Government’s presentation to
Congress of the Escazú Agreement as key legislation for
the implementation process is completely unnecessary
and, above all, outside the mandate. The Government
has made herculean efforts in that area. Nonetheless,
challenges within the Congress remain. For that reason,
I would like the progress made on implementation
to be acknowledged, whether or not the agreement
is approved.

I sincerely thank all representatives for their
comments, in particular the remarks by the representative
of Ireland about the courage, perseverance and trust
required to remain committed to a process of this
kind. That is also in line with the remarks made by the
representative of the United Kingdom at the start of his
statement. Several processes fail before reaching the
five-year mark. It is, for all of us, an inspiration and
a reason to celebrate, given that we know that, for the
past five years, we have made steady progress in this
process. Of course, we will continue our efforts every
day to build peace in our country, with the support of
the Verification Mission. Today, therefore, on behalf of
President Iván Duque, we request that the mandate be
extended for another year, from 31 October. I sincerely
thank the United Kingdom, in its capacity as penholder,
on this specific issue.
Colombians are returning to economic growth after
a very hard blow dealt by the pandemic. Many lives
have been lost; the same occurred in several countries
represented here. We extend condolences for the many
lives that have been lost in each one of the countries
represented here. Regrettably, we have lost many people
in our own country — approximately 130,000. We
have also lost considerable wealth. We have lost jobs
and small and medium-sized enterprises. We have lost
hope; many families have lost their savings and their
small businesses. We are now in a period of growth and
recovery. We have just one goal — to create jobs. Those
jobs will bridge gaps in Colombia. They will close
regional gaps and enable us to achieve equality because
peace must go hand in hand with equality.
Progress in implementing the policy of peace with
legality is the result of our Government’s political
will and that of all parties that have supported the
implementation process. It is also the result of the
determination of the Colombian people who work
every day in support of the rigorous implementation
process, led by President Ivan Duque, while endorsing
the progress already achieved. The entire country must
continue to trust that the international community
supports us, in particular with regard to the principle
of shared responsibility required to combat drug
trafficking, which continues to fuel violence throughout
our country.
I sincerely thank all members for their support and
remarks. I also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
work in Colombia.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

21-2884523/23
