106

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate
with the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges all States to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparation of the report.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/114.

zations outside the United Nations system and nongovernmental organizations, to collaborate wit~ the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements m the
preparation of those reports;
6. Requests the Executive Director of the Uni!ed
Nations Centre for Human Settlements, in consultation
with the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, to
explore the establishment of .efficient mechani~ms for
regular and systematic reportmg and consultations for
the above-mentioned reports.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

Global report on human settlements and periodic reports on international co-operation
and assistance on human settlements

The General Assembly,
Recq,lling its resolution 2598 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it directed the Secretary-General to
prepare a comprehensive housing survey every five years,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
976 G (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963, in which the Council
requested the Secretary~G~neral to prepar~, with the
co-operation of the specialized agencies, reg10nal commissions international financial institutions and governmental ;gencies, a biennial r_eport o~ the le~el a!"ld kind
of official assistance and mtemat10nal aid given to
developing countries in the field of housing, building
and planning,
1. Decides that the quinquennial housing survey
called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 2598
(XXIV) should become the "Global report on human
settlements" and should be issued every five years, according to the objectives, format and contents set out in
paragraphs 10 to 20 of the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) ;65
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements to undertake the
preparation of a biennial report in 1982, beginning with
an interim report in 1981, on the following subjects:
(a) Financial and other assistance provided to and
among developing countries for human settlements, and
the human settlements activities of the United Nations
system, according to the objectives, format and contents
set out in sections II and III of the report of the Executive Director, 65 as modified by the Commission on
Human Settlements; 66
(b) Activities and collaboration between the Centre
and non-governmental organizations;
(c) Human settlements activities of intergovernmental organizations outside the United Nations system
and co-operation between them and the Centre;
3. Urges all Member States to provide the necessary
information for the preparation of the above-mentioned
reports;
4. Calls upon the Secretariat, particularly the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs
and the Department of Technical Co-operation for Development, the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and all other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to provide the necessary information for the
preparation of the above-mentioned reports and to
collaborate with the Centre in their preparation;
5. Invites organizations working in the field of
human settlements, including intergovernmental organi65 HS/C/2/8.
66 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/34/8), paras. 89-95.

34/115.

United Nations Audio-Visual Information
Centre on Human Settlements (Vision
Habitat)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 115 of 16 December 1976,
by which it established the United Nations Audio-Visual
Information Centre on Human Settlements,
Recalling further its resolution 32/162 of 19 December 1977 by which it established the United Nations
Centre f~r Human Settlements (Habitat), entrusted it
with responsibility for promoting the fur!her and continued use of audio-visual material relatmg to human
settlements and decided that the Director of the United
Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on Human
Settlements (Vision Habitat) should report to the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements,
Recognizing that the effective dissemination of information, including the use of audio-visual techniques and
materials will help accelerate the process of development th;ough the effective and rapid dissemination
among policy-makers, experts and the public_ in all
countries of information on the need for new awareness
and on new approaches, methods a~d techniques
improving human settlements, especially their social,
economic and environmental aspects, as well as through
their increasing use for project-monitoring, education,
training and public information,
Noting that the agreement between the Government
of Canada and the United Nations on the operations of
the United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on
Human Settlements expires on 31 March 1980,
Convinced that the programme developed by the
United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on
Human Settlements should be continued,
Noting that the audio-visual activities have been fully
integrated into the work programme of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements,
1. Recommends that the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
should take the necessary steps to establish a unified
information service within the Centre to comprise a suitable range of information and communications skills
and capabilities, including an audio-visual component
at an appropriate level;
2. Decides that, upon the termination or expiration
of the agreement referred to above, the functions and
transferable assets of the United Nations Audio-Visual
Information Centre on Human Settlements (Vision
Habitat) should be transferred to the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the Government of Canada on the appropriate formal

!or

V.

Resolutlom adopted on tbe repom of the Second Committee

arrangements regarding the termination or expiration of
the agreement;
4. Encourages all Member States to make available
to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
audio-visual material prepared for their programmes of
national action;
5. Appeals to all States and interested organizations
to make available to the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements the necessary resources for continuing its audio-visual and information activities;
6. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements to report to the
Commission on Human Settlements at its third session
on the progress achieved towards the establishment of a
unified information service.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/ 116.

Strengthening of human settlements activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 2718 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, 3001
(XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3327 (XXIX) of 16
December 1974 and 32/162 of 19 December 1977,
Noting that in the report of the Commission on Human
Settlements on the work of its second session° 7 Member
States are called upon to deal with human settlements
programmes as an integral and important element of
national development plans,
Recognizing that the goals of the new international
economic order encompass both general economic improvements in developing countries and the achievement
of social equity in the distribution of benefits from
economic growth,
Convinced that human settlements activities can make
an important contribution to achieving both those goals
of the new international economic order,
Recognizing that one of the most urgent needs in
developing countries is to upgrade the living and working conditions of low-income and disadvantaged groups
in both rural and urban areas,
Convinced that human settlements programmes provide a direct mechanism for redressing imbalances in
access to shelter, utility services, health care, education
and community amenities, and hence can have a significant impact on the immediate, day-to-day needs of lowincome and disadvantaged groups,
Convinced that human settlements programmes offer
an effective tool for generating the energy-conserving
and resource-conserving community patterns which will
be called for,
1. Urges Member States, within the context of their
national priorities, to devote a larger share of national
resources to the strengthening of human settlements
activities as vehicles of economic and social change;
2. Suggests that Member States should examine
mul~ilateral and bilateral co-operation programmes,
particularly those financed by the United Nations Development Programme, to determine whether an increased allocation can be made to the human settlements
sector;
3. Requests Member States to report every two
years to the Commission on Human Settlements on the
67 Ibid., Supplement No. 8 (A/34/8).

107

progress made in implementing the recommendations for
national action adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements and, where possible,
on the level and sources of international and national
funding being devoted to human settlements activities.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/117.

Technical co-operation among developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 33/134 of 19 December
1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries 08 as an important
instrument of the international community to intensify
and strengthen co-operation among developing countries,
thus making international co-operation for development
more effective,
Noting the Arusha Programme for Collective SelfReliance and Framework for Negotiations, 00 adopted by
the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventyseven, held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania,
from 12 to 16 February 1979,
Noting also the Economic Declaration, the Programme
of Action for Economic Co-operation and resolution 7,
containing policy guidelines on the reinforcement of
collective self-reliance between developing countries,
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, 70
Bearing in mind resolutions 112 (V) on strengthening
the technological capacity of developing countries, including accelerating their technological transformation,
~nd 127 (V) on economic co-operation among developmg countries, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its fifth session held at
Manila from 7 May to 3 June 1979, 71
'
Reiterating that the implementation of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action would constitute a major contribution in the evolution of international co-operation for
development and to the establishment of the new international economic order and an important element of
the international development strategy for the third
United Nations development decade,
Taking note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on organiza68 Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication Sales
No. E.78.11.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
'
69
Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E'.79.11.D.14), annex VI.
70 See A/34/542, annex.
71
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one,
sect. A.
