S/2019/447

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 30 May 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the sixty-eighth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution
2118 (2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 24 April to 23 May 2019.
Pursuant to the framework of the structured dialogue agreed between the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic, the Declaration Assessment Team
continues its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration
of the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to the report of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat on the analysis of all the information and documents, including of samples
collected during the technical consultations held in the Syrian Arab Republic from
10 to 17 April 2019.
In relation to the inspections at the Barzah and Jamraya facilities of the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre, which were conducted by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat in 2018, the results of the analysis of the samples taken during
the inspections were received by the OPCW Technical Secretariat and subsequently
shared with the Syrian Arab Republic. The OPCW Technical Secretaria t will report
on the results of the inspections to the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety -first
session, to be held from 9 to 12 July 2019. I reiterate my hope that the dialogue
between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian authorities will contr ibute to
finding ways to move forward on all chemical-weapons related issues in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Furthermore, and pursuant to the decision adopted by the Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention at its fourth special se ssion on
27 June 2018, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has established an Investigation and
Identification Team, which has initiated its work to identify the perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to the next
progress report on implementation of that decision, to be submitted to the OPCW
Executive Council at its ninety-first session.
As I have stated repeatedly, the use of chemical weapons is abhorrent. There are
no imaginable circumstances that can excuse the use of such weapons. It is, therefore,
imperative to identify and hold accountable all those who have used chemical
weapons. Unity in the Security Council is fundamental to achieve this urgent
obligation.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-08865 (E)

030619

*1908865*

S/2019/447

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the Executive Council of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the
Security Council (see enclosure). My report covers the period from 24 April to
23 May 2019, and also covers the reporting requirements in Executive Council
decision EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Fernando Arias

2/6

19-08865

S/2019/447

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Report of the Director-General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Detailed
Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian Chemical
Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013). In
paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat should report
on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated
4 February 2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW
Fact Finding Mission in Syria (FFM), along with information on the Council ’s
discussion thereof, as part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First
Session, adopted a decision entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the
Declaration and Related Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4,
dated 23 March 2016), noting the Director General’s intent to provide information on
the implementation of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled “OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical Weapons Use in
the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November 2016). In
subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director-General
shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision and
incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United Nations
Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the sixty-eighth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the period
from 24 April to 23 May 2019.

19-08865

3/6

S/2019/447

Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
6.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) As stated in previous reports, the Secretariat has verified the destruction
of all 27 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian
Arab Republic;
(b) On 16 May 2019, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
sixty sixth monthly report (EC-91/P/NAT.3, dated 16 May 2019) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19
of EC M 34/DEC.1.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties
hosting destruction activities
7.
As stated in previous reports, all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have been destroyed.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to Executive
Council decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
8.
The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continues its efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic in
accordance with paragraph 3 of Council decision EC-81/DEC.4 and paragraph 6 of
Council decision EC-83/DEC.5.
9.
Pursuant to the framework of the Structured Dialogue agreed between the
Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic on all chemical weapons -related issues, the
twenty-first round of technical consultations between the DAT and repr esentatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic took place between 10 and 17 April 2019 in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The visit involved a range of activities, including:
(a) Technical meetings: the DAT and technical experts from the Syrian
National Authority held several technical meetings to discuss some of the outstanding
issues.
(b) Field visits: five site visits to former CWPFs were conducted. During these
visits, the DAT collected a total of 33 samples, which will be transported to the OPCW
Laboratory and then shipped to OPCW designated laboratories for analysis.
(c) Other meetings: the Head of the DAT held a meeting with the Head of the
Syrian National Authority, Deputy Foreign Minister Dr Fa isal Mekdad, to discuss the
activities and progress of the DAT.
(d) Interviews: one interview was conducted in Damascus on the occasion of
the removal and smelting of the remnants of the destroyed chemical munitions and/or
production equipment previously located at several former declared CWPFs.
10. The Secretariat will analyse all the information, documents, and results of the
analysis of samples collected during the twenty-first round of consultations, together
with any further information that may be provided by the Syrian Arab Republic and/or
collected from possible future DAT deployments, and will report to the Council at its
Ninety-First Session.
11. In accordance with paragraph 10 of Council decision EC-83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat continues to assess conditions for the conduct of inspections at the sites
identified by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in its third
and fourth reports. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Council decision EC-83/DEC.5, the

4/6

19-08865

S/2019/447

Secretariat conducted the third and fourth rounds of inspections at the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in
November and December 2018, respectively. Samples were taken during both
inspections for analysis in OPCW designated laboratories. The results of these
analyses have been received and were subsequently shared with the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Secretariat will report on the results of both inspections to the Council.
Other activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to the
Syrian Arab Republic
12. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to provide
support to the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance with the
Tripartite Agreement concluded between the OPCW, UNOPS, and the Syrian Arab
Republic.
13. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
14. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
23 November 2015), as well as by United Nations Security Council resolution
2209 (2015), the FFM continues to study all available information relating to the
allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
15. At the end of September 2018, the FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
to gather further information and conduct interviews regarding five reported incidents
currently under investigation: two incidents in Kharbit Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and
4 August 2017; one incident in Qalib Al-Thawr, Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; one
incident in Yarmouk, Damascus on 22 October 2017; and one incident in Al-Balil,
Souran on 8 November 2017. The FFM is currently analysing the information
collected with regard to these incidents and will report to the Council on the results
of this analysis in due course.
16. In response to a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic dated
28 November 2018, the Director-General deployed an advance team to Damascus
from 4 to 6 December 2018 to collect information provided by the Syrian National
Authority regarding an incident of alleged use of chemicals as a weapon in Aleppo
on 24 November 2018. The FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic from 5 to
15 January 2019 to conduct interviews and visit hospitals in Aleppo, and to receive
samples provided by the Syrian authorities in Damascus. The Secr etariat is analysing
the collected information.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to decision
C-SS-4/DEC.3 of the Conference of the States Parties at its Fourth Special
Session related to the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
17. Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 (dated 27 June 2018) entitled “Addressing the Threat
from Chemical Weapons Use” addresses, inter alia, the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic. In paragraph 8 of the decision, the Conference of the States
Parties (hereinafter “the Conference”) encouraged the Director General to continue
to provide regular updates on the FFM’s operations, taking into account the need to
protect the security and safety of Secretariat personnel.
18. Pursuant to paragraph 10 of C-SS-4/DEC.3, the Secretariat has established an
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) and initiated its work to identi fy the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic by
identifying and reporting on all information potentially relevant to the origin of those
19-08865

5/6

S/2019/447

chemical weapons in those instances in which the FFM determines or has determined
that use or likely use occurred, and cases for which the OPCW United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism has not issued a report.
19. Pursuant to paragraph 24 of decision C-SS-4/DEC.3, the next progress report
on implementation of that decision will be sub mitted to the Council at its Ninety-First
Session.
Supplementary resources
20. As previously reported, the Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the FFM and other remaining activities, which include the
work of the DAT and IIT, and the biannual inspections of the SSRC. As at the cut -off
date of this report, total contributions to this fund stood at EUR 21.1 million.
Contribution agreements had been concluded with Australia, Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Monaco, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, and the European Union.
Conclusion
21. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be on the activities of the FFM; the implementation of Council
decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related issues;
annual inspections of the underground structures already verified as destroyed; and
the implementation of Conference decision C-SS-4/DEC.3. These activities will
continue to be implemented within the framework of the Structured Dialogue with
the Syrian Arab Republic.

6/6

19-08865
