United Nations

S/PV.4335

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4335th meeting
Friday, 22 June 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Touré
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2001/565).
Report of the Security Council Mission on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) (S/2001/600).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-42223 (E)

*0142223*

S/PV.4335

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2001/565)
Report of the Security Council Mission on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) (S/2001/600)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Sweden, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Šahović
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr. Schori (Sweden),
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Security Council mission on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), document S/2001/600. Members of the Council
also have before them the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, document S/2001/565.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following additional documents:
S/2001/538, letter dated 22 May 2001 from Sweden
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/2001/563, letter
dated 5 June 2001 from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/2001/601, letter dated 15 June 2001
from the Russian Federation addressed to the
Secretary-General.
I give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: I very much welcome this
opportunity to discuss the main challenges facing
Kosovo, which the Council was able to experience first
hand during its recent visit.
The report of the mission concurs with the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report on
Kosovo which was circulated on 13 June. The report
points out that the key challenges are indeed
interrelated. They are security, return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, the issue of the missing
and detainees, confidence-building measures and the
holding of Kosovo-wide elections later this year.
The Security Council mission will have seen that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is working on all fronts to move
forward in all of these areas, particularly to improve
the situation of the minority communities and solicit
their participation in the UNMIK-led process, which is
the key to the success of the democratic process.
Today I will not go into too many details; these
are amply provided both in the Secretary-General’s
report and in the report of the Security Council
mission. Instead, if I may, I will focus on the main
messages that came out of the Council visit and that are
crucial for the future development of Kosovo: namely,
multi-ethnicity, the engagement of all communities in
the political process and confidence-building measures.
First, how to engage the communities. We were
very pleased to see from the findings of the Security

S/PV.4335

Council mission’s report that its main message to the
representatives of all communities was the need for
multi-ethnicity. This was precisely the message I took
with me when I visited Kosovo back in April. I then
told the members of the Kosovo Albanian leadership
that it is the duty of the majority in a democratic
process to ensure the rights of the minority
communities, and I told the minority communities that
the only way to ensure a viable future was through
participation in the political process. I shared the view
of the Council and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Haekkerup that while the
international community can assist in creating
conditions conducive to a multi-ethnic Kosovo, it is
very much the responsibility of the Kosovars
themselves to achieve that goal. I was pleased to see
that this message was delivered in such an unequivocal
way to those members of the Kosovo leadership with
whom the Council mission met.
As both the Council mission’s report and the
Secretary-General’s report underline, the political
engagement of all communities in this process,
particularly the Kosovo Serb community, remains a
major challenge for UNMIK. This challenge can only
be rendered more difficult by the continuing division
within the Kosovo Serb community itself.
We are pleased to note from the Security Council
mission’s report that the meetings the mission had in
Belgrade were held in a very constructive atmosphere.
The authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
are still concerned about some aspects of the
Constitutional Framework, but they accept that the
document cannot be changed. Instead, we should be
looking at the creation of confidence-building
measures vis-à-vis the Kosovo Serb community.
We fully support this, as does the Council in its
report. It is essential to move the process forward and
elaborate such confidence-building measures in
conjunction with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. In this regard, we are very
pleased to see an increasing dialogue between Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haekkerup and
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It
is only through consistent and patient dialogue that we
will be able to move the process forward.
As far as the divisions in the Kosovo Serb
community are concerned, we believe that the Council
mission saw these first hand during its visit. We agree

with the assessment of the Council and the Special
Representative that the key element in encouraging the
participation of the Kosovo Serb community is a clear
signal from the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. In this regard, we fully support and
welcome the message that the Council delivered during
its meetings in Belgrade. We would encourage the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to assist in conveying a
clear message to the Kosovo Serb community that
participation and integration into the structures
UNMIK is establishing are indeed in their best
interests.
But this is not a one-way process. We are fully
aware, as is the Council, that the Kosovo Serb
community has legitimate grievances. UNMIK is
addressing these, as highlighted in both reports, and we
must ensure that efforts continue and are enhanced to
eliminate the root causes of these grievances.
One of the main challenges in this regard remains
the fragile security situation, particularly for the
minority communities, as highlighted in the reports.
The communities, particularly the Kosovo Serb
community, continue to suffer disproportionately from
major crimes and ethnically motivated acts of
intimidation. These factors continue to undermine
UNMIK’s efforts to convince the Kosovo Serb
community that they will derive tangible benefits from
cooperating in the UNMIK-led process.
I would like to say a word on the security
situation and the law enforcement initiatives recently
taken. We hope in this respect that the recent adoption
of several major pieces of legislation will contribute to
an improvement of the overall security situation.
Namely, these are the entry into force on 4 June of
regulation 2001/10, on the prohibition of unauthorized
border/boundary crossings, and regulation 2001/7, on
the authorization of possession of weapons in Kosovo.
In addition, a week ago today Special Representative
Haekkerup signed into law the regulation on the
prohibition of terrorism and related offences.
In addition to these three key legislative
initiatives, the establishment of the new police and
justice pillar in UNMIK will pave the way for a
gradual improvement in the law and order situation in
Kosovo. I want to note that improvements have already
been made, including the excellent police work in
cooperation with the Kosovo Force that resulted in the
detention, only two days after the attack, of a suspect

3

S/PV.4335

in the bombing in central Pristina on 18 April. That
bombing claimed the life of the head of the passport
office of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Committee on Cooperation.
On the issue of returns, progress has also been
made, as can be seen from both reports. Although such
returns remain minimal, a lot of work continues in the
background to identify potential return sites and to
develop conditions that will be conducive to the return
of Kosovo Serbs. A vital element in this process is the
acceptance by the majority population of minority
return. In this respect, we very much welcome the
acceptance by the Interim Administrative Council of a
general statement of principles guiding return, as well
as the identification of 10 sites where return is planned
to take place later in the year. I would note, however,
that although there is clearly an urgent need for
demonstrable progress in this area — and we know that
this issue of return is of key symbolic and political
importance — it remains UNMIK’s and our firm policy
that return should take place in secure and sustainable
conditions.
On the issue of the need for developing more
confidence-building measures, I would like to address
the issue of Mitrovica. Mitrovica has been identified as
a key area for confidence-building in order to dispel
the hatred and mutual distrust that still exists on both
sides. We welcome the Council’s support for efforts to
develop a comprehensive strategy to resolve the very
complex situation in Mitrovica. Key to the success of
such a strategy, as the Council pointed out, is the
creation of multi-ethnic initiatives in the social,
economic and religious areas to start rebuilding
confidence between the communities. At the same
time, there is a crucial recognition that Mitrovica is a
microcosm of the problems of Kosovo as a whole, and
that the correct approach will entail Kosovo-wide
confidence-building measures, as well as measures that
are specific to the situation in Mitrovica. One area I
would highlight in the context of confidence-building
measures is the very delicate issue of the missing on all
sides. We were pleased to note the Council’s
recommendation for further progress in this crucial
area, which continues to be a major impediment to
reconciliation.
In conclusion, one of the major benefits of the
Council’s visit to Kosovo is that there is clear
unanimity on the need to move the process forward. As
the Council mission noted, the Constitutional

4

Framework represents an important step in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). Moving the process forward on the basis of a
broad consensus is essential to combating extremism
and encouraging moderates on all sides. This in turn
will have a beneficial effect on the security situation
and the prospects for return. There is no doubt that
participation in the political process is a precondition
for progress.
Positive signals in favour of Kosovo-Serb
registration are encouraging, but the Kosovo Serbs
must also take part in the elections and take their
rightful place in the provisional self-government. Both
the Secretary-General and the Council have underlined
that the benefits of cooperation are preferable to
marginalization. This will, of course, entail risks for all
communities and, in particular, for the Kosovo-Serb
community. The Council’s report puts it well when it
says:
“although the Kosovo Serbs did not want to
commit to the political process until the process
had produced improvements, the process could
not produce results unless the Kosovo Serbs
committed to it. The only way out was to accept
the structures UNMIK was putting in place and
take some risks in working with moderate views
on the other side.” (S/2001/600, para. 17)
The Council’s mission has succeeded in
delivering firm and balanced messages. The United
Nations and the international community are
committed to ensuring the protection of the rights of all
communities, but the people of Kosovo must accept
their share of the responsibility. The Kosovo Albanians
must respect the rights of the minority communities
and, in turn, the minority communities must accept the
risk of participation.
The Council mission has made it clear that there
is no hidden agenda. What we are all trying to do, in
conformity with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), is to take the process forward by establishing
provisional self-government through the November
elections and by creating a society in Kosovo that will
be able to produce legitimate interlocutors for the
discussions on a final settlement for Kosovo, as
foreseen in resolution 1244 (1999).
I should like to conclude by extending, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, my warmest appreciation to
the Council for the significant contribution it has made

S/PV.4335

through its recent visit to the furtherance of the
democratic process in Kosovo. We hope that the
discussion we have here today will enable us to move
further along this path, as this will serve the cause of
peace in Kosovo and in the region.
The President: Allow me to bring to the
Council’s attention the fact that the report of the
Security Council mission to Kosovo was presented to
the Council in a public meeting on 19 June, the first
available afternoon following the return of the mission
to New York. The official record of that meeting is
available in document S/PV.4331 and provides a
verbatim record of the presentation that was made on
the mission and its findings.
The findings of the mission are contained in
paragraphs 29-39 of document S/2001/600. These are
very well articulated, carefully considered and intended
to make progress in the resolution of outstanding issues
in Kosovo and in enhancing the democratic process
there. As Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno just mentioned, the
Council mission conveyed a very firm and balanced
message during its visit and we hope that it will make
some difference in the situation there. Again, I would
draw the Council’s attention to the findings of the
mission and urge it to consider them for further action
in this area.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the detailed report he has submitted on the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). His assessments and conclusions,
supplemented by the report of the Security Council
mission on its visit to Kosovo and Belgrade, provide us
with a good opportunity for a comprehensive review of
the situation in and around the province and to identify
further possible steps fully to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
We listened attentively and with great interest to
the detailed and extremely useful briefing given by
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno. He
has offered a valuable analysis of the situation in
Kosovo; Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
We extend our thanks to you, Sir, as the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United
Nations, for the excellent manner in which you
organized the Security Council’s mission to Kosovo
and Belgrade. We are also grateful to the leadership of
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as well as the

personnel of the Secretariat here in New York, for their
assistance during the mission.
The outcome of the mission’s work confirm the
timeliness and value of the visit by members of the
Security Council to Kosovo and Belgrade, which had
been proposed by Russia. It held substantive meetings
of great importance with the UNMIK and KFOR
leadership; the leadership of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia’s
Committee
on
Kosovo;
the
representatives of Albanian and Serbian communities
in the province; and with delegations from other
Kosovo minorities. I note in particular the importance
of the substantive talks between the mission and
President Kostunica of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and other Yugoslavian leaders in Belgrade.
The main result of the visit was a clearly stated
demand to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and all Kosovo
political leaders that they ensure the full and
comprehensive implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), primarily with respect to the
security of minorities.
One very important event was, in our opinion, the
meeting between the Security Council mission and the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, on 17 June at the headquarters of the Russian
contingent in Kosovo. At that meeting, what was
particularly stressed was the need to isolate extremists
on both sides in Kosovo and to prevent them from
driving a wedge into the position held by members of
the international community on a settlement in Kosovo.
Today, first and foremost, we must put an end to
violence, terrorism and drug trafficking in and around
Kosovo, ensure security and equal rights for all
communities in the province without exception, and
create appropriate conditions for the return to the
province of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Further serious efforts are essential to complete the
disarmament of combatants and to eliminate their
illegal armed units. We must step up the battle against
crime, smuggling and illegal deliveries of weapons into
the province, in violation of Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998).
The recent steps taken by the UNMIK leadership
against the illegal possession of weapons, the illicit
crossing of the administrative and other borders of
Kosovo, and terrorism create additional opportunities
here.

5

S/PV.4335

One of the key issues now is the preparation of
the Kosovo-wide elections. Our position on the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional SelfGovernment in Kosovo is well known. Too many
concessions have been made to the radicals. The
document has a whole range of substantive
shortcomings, to which Russia has frequently drawn
attention. First of all, the Constitutional Framework
contains no reference to the need for full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999), including its basic
provision of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia. We regard as hasty the rushed
adoption of the Constitutional Framework by the head
of UNMIK and the declaration that province-wide
elections would be held this autumn. Truly democratic
and representative Kosovo-wide elections require
careful preparation and — I would stress this point —
the active involvement of Belgrade. We believe that in
order to hold the elections, security conditions must be
established that would guarantee that the genuine will
of all ethnic communities in the province is respected
and that they can all participate fairly in the new bodies
of self-government. In this regard, it is important that
even before the elections, the steady process of the
return of refugees and displaced persons should begin.
We have often said — and we would like once
more to stress the point — that haste in holding the
elections would only strengthen the mono-ethnic nature
and the radical and nationalistic mood of Kosovo.
We would like again, to warn very seriously
against any attempts to impose coercive measures
under the pretext that the status quo is unacceptable
and that the situation in Mitrovica needs to be resolved
before the elections. Solving the problem of Mitrovica
is inseparable from imposing order and security
throughout the territory of Kosovo. Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno spoke of this. Only
when the Serbs can feel safe everywhere can one start
establishing a normal multi-ethnic life in Mitrovica.
We agree with the opinion that was expressed at the
meeting between the Security Council mission and the
municipal administrator of Mitrovica, Mr. Rogers, that
the status quo is preferable to extremist scenarios. Any
acts of violence here would be fraught with the most
dangerous consequences: a flare-up of violence
throughout northern Kosovo, the involvement of
Albanians in it, and then Serbs being forced out of that
part of the province, which in fact would mean that
they would be driven completely out of Kosovo. The

6

solution can only be a political, comprehensive and
carefully monitored one, and the basis for it must be a
strengthening of trust between the Serb and Albanian
communities.
We note the work done by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in Kosovo, Mr.
Haekkerup, and the Mission that he heads as they try to
establish normality in the province. We welcome steps
to develop a dialogue between UNMIK and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
particular, we welcome the recent visit by Mr.
Haekkerup to Belgrade. We are counting on further
development of such cooperation on all matters relating
to implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999),
and not just in those cases where UNMIK comes up
against problems that require it to count on assistance
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We would
like to emphasize once more that unless there is solid
involvement with Belgrade, the Mission will not be
able to discharge its mandate.
In this connection, I would like to note in
particular the importance of fully taking into account in
the work of UNMIK and KFOR the proposals made by
President Koštunica in his meeting with the Security
Council mission on specific steps by the international
presence there to ensure that real progress is made in
enhancing the level of security for Serbs and other
minorities. We confirm the need for signing with
Belgrade a status-of-forces agreement for UNMIK and
KFOR. As was stressed by President Putin of the
Russian Federation, in order to speed up stabilization
in the Balkans it is necessary to coordinate the efforts
of the international community in countering terrorism
and extremism and to ensure strict implementation,
without any exceptions, of resolution 1244 (1994) and
the Dayton Peace Accords on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The aggressiveness of the terrorist and extremist
groups is extending to new areas, threatening further
territorial spillover and undermining general security in
the whole region. The main source of instability is still
Kosovo. Any attempts to appease the terrorists will
simply worsen the current explosive situation and
expand it to include the entire Balkan region. This
applies fully to what is happening today in Macedonia.
All of this confirms yet again that in order to
stabilize the situation in the Balkans we need
approaches based primarily on the political will of the
States in the region and active assistance from the

S/PV.4335

international community. That was the thrust of
President Putin’s proposal to convene a Balkan summit
so that States of the region could conclude a legally
binding agreement setting forth their mutual
commitments to comply fully with the basic principles
of inter-State relations, including, primarily, the
inviolability of borders, sovereign equality, respect for
territorial integrity, non-intervention in one another’s
internal affairs and non-use and non-threat of force.
The signal from the international community
must be clear and unambiguous. There can be no
further redrawing of borders in Europe, including in
the Balkans. It is necessary to establish a solid,
effective barrier to extremism, national intolerance and
religious fanaticism. People who try to solve extremely
complex problems of a national and religious nature by
force of weapons are not worthy of support from the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me
in my capacity as representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
will keep my remarks very brief, because I think the
report of the Council mission basically says it all. As
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno noted in his
comments, the mission sent clear messages to its
interlocutors. In my view, and in the view of my
authorities, it was very useful. I want to commend you
also, Mr. President, on your leadership and your effort
to get so much into such a short period of time. It really
was quite useful. It was particularly useful, I think, that
we had the occasion to meet with Presidents Putin and
Koštunica during the visit, because it I think it helped
all of us understand better the context that we are
working in.
I just wanted to emphasize a couple of key points
from the United States point of view. We strongly
support the efforts of Mr. Haekkerup and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), including on the importance of moving to
elections and improving security in the region. It was
very clear that they have ambitious plans in that regard,
and we support that wholeheartedly.
I also want to repeat, very simply, that the United
States, as we go through this process, will support all
those who favour dialogue in the political process and
will oppose those who continue to incite violence, and
we condemn violence from whatever quarter it comes.

The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to me.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): First, Mr. President, we too
would like to express our appreciation for your able
leadership of the Council’s mission to Kosovo. We also
express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2001/565), which we found very useful as
background to the mission. We further thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Guéhenno, for his analysis of the key issues
relating to the situation in Kosovo.
Singapore’s participation in the mission to
Kosovo gave us a better understanding of one of the
more complex United Nations peacekeeping mission,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We were impressed with what has
been achieved in the two years that the United Nations
has been involved with Kosovo, and we commend Mr.
Hans Haekkerup for his outstanding leadership and his
fine work since taking up the post of UNMIK head in
January 2001. We also commend the staff of UNMIK
for their efforts and their achievements in rebuilding
Kosovo in all aspects: security, socio-political and
economic, to name just a few.
However, much more needs to be done. The
involvement of the United Nations in Kosovo and the
strict implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) must continue despite the great difficulties
facing UNMIK. The political status of Kosovo is clear
in resolution 1244 (1999); that issue should not be
allowed to create further divisions in Kosovo, with all
their adverse regional implications. In a statement
made in January of this year by the Foreign Minister of
Singapore, His Excellency Mr. S. Jayakumar, we
outlined three critical areas which we felt needed to be
addressed in Kosovo to bring it back to normalcy.
Today I would like to reiterate what we believe to
be the most critical of them at this time: the urgent
need for reconciliation amongst the Kosovar ethnic
communities. That, of course, is easier said than done.
But we have learned from our own experience that
promoting ethnic tolerance is the key to bringing
together all ethnic communities. In 1964 two waves of
racial riots broke out in Singapore. A third wave of
riots occurred in 1969, about four years after we
attained independence as a republic. Many
Singaporeans were killed in those riots. Although they
were not on the scale of what has happened in Kosovo,

7

S/PV.4335

the riots shook our nation badly. Singapore is a multiethnic society where different races have lived and
worked together for more than three decades. It was
recognized at an early stage in our history that the very
existence of Singapore would depend on maintaining
racial and religious harmony among our people. Thus,
the Government of Singapore has adopted and
continues to promote a policy of multi-ethnicity and
multiculturalism. Each Singaporean is taught from an
early age to respect other races, religions and cultures.
We therefore associate ourselves with those who
have spoken out to condemn the continuing violence
against members of ethnic minorities, in particular
ethnic Serbs, in Kosovo. We also welcome the recent
establishment of the first pillar and the initiatives taken
by UNMIK to tackle terrorism and organized crime.
We urge that all necessary measures be taken to
improve the security environment in Kosovo.
It is essential that the United Nations be clear on
the goals for Kosovo, in order to ensure that they are
achieved. Besides reconciliation, there are other
important goals. We note that the initial economic
reconstruction measures that have been taken and the
progress that has been achieved in the economic arena
have produced encouraging results to spur economic
development in Kosovo. We support the continued
emphasis on developing economic sustainability.
Economic growth is a strong incentive for the Kosovars
to work towards a peaceful, stable and secure
environment, which, in turn, is essential for the further
building of the economy.
However, progress in reconciliation and
economic development depends on the preparedness of
the Kosovo political leadership, as they take on the
responsibility of self-government, to build a
democratic multi-ethnic society and a sustainable
market economy in Kosovo. We also associate
ourselves with those speakers who stress the
importance of the full participation and engagement of
all the ethnic communities in Kosovo in developing
substantial autonomy.
In that regard, we support the position that
Kosovo-wide elections should be held only when all
the necessary conditions are in place. It is crucial to the
success of the elections that all communities, including
refugees and displaced persons — who should be
encouraged to return — participate both in registration
and in the elections themselves. Rebuilding public

8

administration capacity is also crucial to bringing
Kosovo back to normalcy. In that regard, the
uniqueness of UNMIK as a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, like that of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, stands out.
UNMIK is an interim administration in every sense of
the word, and its task must therefore be to develop
Kosovo’s ability to administer society as part of the
peace-building process.
It is clear that, while UNMIK has made
significant progress, Kosovo’s return to normalcy is
likely to take many more years. The priority tasks that
have been outlined today require the United Nations
and the international community to continue to be
actively engaged in Kosovo. It is imperative that the
United Nations, having taken on such a major
undertaking, not terminate it prematurely.
Allow me to say that we welcome the improving
relations between UNMIK and the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We should continue to
encourage it. In that regard, the establishment of the
UNMIK Office in Belgrade was a step along the right
path. Direct dialogue between Kosovar political leaders
and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should also be encouraged. We share the
view that continued dialogue with the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is important for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation thanks the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Guéhenno, for his analysis of the situation in Kosovo.
The Chinese delegation wishes also to express
appreciation to Ambassador Chowdhury for his
introduction of the report of the Security Council
mission to Kosovo (S/2001/600).
Under Ambassador Chowdhury’s outstanding
leadership, the mission completed its task in a most
efficient manner, and was successful in sending to all
sides an important message on rejecting violence and
terrorism, and on the need to respect the rights of
minority communities. The report of the mission is
balanced and frank, and points the way for the future
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR); it also sets out clear demands. In the next
phase, whether or not those demands are met will
provide a benchmark for evaluating the work of

S/PV.4335

UNMIK and of KFOR. In that sense, the mission’s visit
played a positive role.

1244 (1999) may thus be fully and effectively
implemented.

As the report notes, since his appointment to lead
UNMIK, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, along with UNMIK
under his leadership and KFOR, have done a great deal
towards carrying out their tasks, and have achieved
some positive results in a number of areas. We
appreciate their hard work.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
accomplishment of national reconciliation in Kosovo
will be a long, ongoing process and will require
sustained and indefatigable efforts on the part of the
international community.

Yet the security situation in Kosovo needs to be
further improved. We note that the security of minority
ethnic communities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, has yet
to be guaranteed; they have returned in very small
numbers, and their reintegration into society and their
participation in the UNMIK-led political process has
been minimal. The Chinese delegation has always
stressed that, without broad participation by all ethnic
communities, the outcome of elections cannot be fair
but will, to the contrary, only further exacerbate interethnic tension. In that connection, we note that the
report indicates that the top priority now is to
encourage all Kosovo communities, particularly the
Serbs, to participate in the process. It also underscores
the importance of dialogue and cooperation with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
That is crucial. We encourage UNMIK to continue and
further enhance its cooperation with the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and to create a
mechanism for regular dialogue, so as to ensure that
the views of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia are fully heard and that its reasonable
proposals are accepted.
They should together foster a multi-ethnic,
multicultural, richly diverse society in Kosovo, a
society characterized by equality and mutual
assistance.
At the same time, we hope that the minority
communities in Kosovo will actively participate in the
general elections. Needless to say, the precondition
is that the security situation must be fundamentally
improved and the plight of the minority communities,
as well as the question of their property, must be
satisfactorily addressed. In this regard UNMIK
and KFOR should take further steps, including
combating extremism, encouraging moderates on
all sides, establishing inter-communal confidence,
facilitating economic development and promoting
stability, so that the findings of the mission may be
translated into concrete action and so that resolution

However, the international community cannot
remain passive in the face of attempts to undermine
national reconciliation. Any efforts to nudge Kosovo
towards independence, or attempts to condone
extremist forces that advocate the dissolution of other
ethnic communities, are extremely dangerous and will
lead to new upheavals in the Balkans, whose ultimate
victims will be the peoples of that region.
The Security Council is duty-bound and, with the
rest of the international community, must endeavour to
stem this tendency so as to avoid history repeating
itself.
Here I should like to emphasize that our efforts to
resolve the Kosovo question must be taken in the
context of the situation in the entire region. The
political situation in Macedonia is very unsettling. The
situations in Kosovo and in Macedonia are closely
interrelated, and they will impact on each other. We
hope that the Security Council will closely follow
developments in the entire region.
The President: I thank the representative of
China for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me start with
words of gratitude to the Bangladesh presidency and to
Ambassador Chowdhury personally for the fruitful
efforts in leading the Security Council mission to
Kosovo and Belgrade. I am also grateful to UnderSecretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
comprehensive and very informative briefing.
Both reports — that of the Secretary-General and
that of the Council mission — give us a clear picture of
the situation on the ground. Thus I will briefly
highlight our major comments.
Ukraine welcomes the progress made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) in the two years since its
establishment. We believe that the recent UNMIK
efforts in pursuit of the goals of holding Kosovo-wide

9

S/PV.4335

elections, implementing a constitutional framework and
setting the stage for self-government and economic
viability will lead to a more stable and secure Kosovo.

Churchill in order to pay particular attention to, in our
view, a highly important question — whether or not the
Council belongs to those who hurry off.

But the alley of trees planted by UNMIK will be
a blind alley unless a security environment for the
elections and the participation of all Kosovo
communities, refugees and displaced persons, is
ensured. The engagement and political presence of the
Serb community is of utmost importance, and my
delegation fully supports the recent statements of
Yugoslav authorities encouraging Kosovo Serbs to
register for elections.

In fact, the truth is very difficult. After the
two years that have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999), the security, inter-ethnic and
humanitarian situation in Kosovo remains tense. We
share the view that the level of violence and crime in
the region, especially against ethnic communities, is
unacceptably high. Moreover, a general increase in
tensions in Mitrovica, Gnjilane and Pristina, as well as
brutal attacks on individuals, vividly prove that the
philosophy and practice of violence are still very much
alive.

As for interim institutions, we pay special tribute
to the activities of the Interim Administrative Council
and the Kosovo Transitional Council. The involvement
of all communities in these structures is yet another
vital element to further the democratic processes in the
region, and we call upon UNMIK to redouble its efforts
to promote this goal.
Without a doubt, the establishment of a new
police and justice pillar of UNMIK, aimed at
strengthening the fight against ethnic violence and
crime, is commendable. The general criminality in
Kosovo is one of the most dangerous security
challenges, and we are encouraged by the robust
measures UNMIK is taking to combat it and to bolster
a legislative basis for prosecuting terrorism and
organized crime.
My delegation is satisfied with the important
work done by UNMIK in the area of media regulation
and development. The establishment of an independent
Radio Television Kosovo, and promising results in the
field of media development in the minority
communities do strengthen our positive impressions.
At the same time, let me express our deep concerns
about the reported expressions of support for
extremism and terrorism by some Kosovo local press.
We are confident that any public manifestations of
inter-ethnic hatred and support for violence should not
be tolerated.
May I quote the
personality who said that

words

of

an

important

“Men stumble over the truth from time to time,
but most pick themselves up and hurry off as if
nothing happened.”
Upon the return of the Security Council mission from
Kosovo, I quote these famous words by Sir Winston

10

It is our strong conviction that the only way to
change the psychology of war lies in the more
intensified and concerted efforts of the Security
Council, European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the Yugoslav authorities and
those Kosovo political leaders who really believe in a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo. We hope that the
principal findings of the mission will encourage the
Council to hurry in, in order to improve the situation in
Kosovo.
We agree that there is need for a further
coordinated approach, particularly provided by
UNMIK, to overcome the dangerous challenges,
including inadequate physical, social and economic
security for the ethnic communities in Kosovo,
alongside a lack of freedom of movement and equal
access to public services.
My delegation is in favour of the mission’s
recommendation that a formal request should be sent to
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to regularly provide detailed
information on the origin, type and quantity of
weapons seized in the region. The work of the Security
Council committee established by resolution 1160
(1998), should also be intensified. Let me also share
our strong belief that UNMIK must continue and
enhance its dialogue with the authorities of Federal
Republic
of
Yugoslavia,
ensuring
the
full
implementation of 1244 (1999).
Concluding my remarks in a broader context, I
would like to welcome the unilateral demobilization by
ethnic Albanian armed groups in south-east Serbia and
the peaceful completion of the return of Yugoslavia
security forces to the ground safety zone. Ukraine
highly appreciates this achievement, which was made

S/PV.4335

possible by the European Union, the North Atlantic
Alliance and the Yugoslav leadership.
We would also like to align ourselves with a
position of the European Union declared at a recent
summit in Goteborg, on recent developments in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and to
reaffirm our commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that country.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ukraine for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Following our mission to
Kosovo under your efficient leadership, Mr. President,
and the most recent report of the Secretary-General,
this meeting enables us to assess developments
in Kosovo and to focus on the way forward. I am
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
comprehensive introductory comments.
As Ireland fully associates itself with the
statement that will be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, I will highlight only a few issues of particularly
pressing concern.
Despite the progress made, we see clearly the
difficulties that remain in Kosovo, and we see clearly
also the deep-rooted divisions between the different
communities. As President Putin said to us last Sunday,
the task assigned to Special Representative Haekkerup
is “Herculean”. However, we have no doubt that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) will
achieve their mandates to implement resolution 1244
(1999), and we support fully their work in this regard.
It is clear that the only possible future for all the
people of Kosovo is a multi-ethnic society based firmly
on respect for minority and human rights. As part of
the Security Council mission to Kosovo, I urged the
communities’ representatives to develop the special
courage to participate in the process towards achieving
this. In so doing, I drew parallels between the
Northern Ireland Good Friday Agreement and the
Constitutional Framework in Kosovo — both of which
provide for multi-ethnic structures, without prejudicing
the character of an eventual, final constitutional status.
Of course, both processes require courage,
perseverance and generosity of spirit on all sides.
Ireland understands very well the profound
concerns expressed by the Serbs about the security

situation in Kosovo. Most of those who remain in the
province live in ghettos. Their freedom of movement is
severely restricted, and they exist in a climate of
constant fear. We welcome the recent decision by the
Special Representative to establish a new police and
justice pillar, and the promulgation of three UNMIK
regulations. It is essential to make further early,
quantifiable progress in the security area, including
regarding the illegal importation of and trafficking in
weapons and the recovery of existing illegally held
weapons. During the course of the mission, we told the
ethnic Albanian representatives in the clearest terms
that all terrorist activity must cease. We must sustain
and reinforce that message so that they can be in no
doubt whatever as to the refusal of the international
community to countenance any form of extremism.
While we welcome the opening of the UNMIK
office in Belgrade, and the various meetings between
the Special Representative and President Koštunica, we
believe that the Mission must liaise even more closely
with the administration there, including on conditions
which could lead to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.
President Koštunica has already accepted the
Constitutional Framework and has encouraged Serbs to
register for the elections. It is now essential that he
encourage them to vote. Like many Council members, I
was impressed by the honesty and realism displayed by
the President, Foreign Minister Svilanovic and Interior
Minister Zivkovic, and I have no doubt that they will
use their influence wisely and positively. In the
interim, all parties must work to develop the essential
components of a positive climate for Serb participation
in the elections. Those components were discussed
frankly with us by President Koštunica.
I agree strongly with Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno’s earlier statement that Mitrovica plays a
central role in the political dynamics of Kosovo as a
whole. A comprehensive strategy which includes
political, social and religious elements is essential to
address the situation there. The parallel structures in
northern Mitrovica must be removed. The economic
situation and the high level of unemployment — which
serve to fuel extremism — also need to be improved
systematically and steadily, as they need to be
elsewhere in Kosovo.
The lack of progress in relation to missing
persons is clearly a source of great contention for both

11

S/PV.4335

communities, for whom it is a cause of common
suffering and disquiet. During the mission we delivered
messages to the relevant parties about this and about
the need to release remaining political detainees.
We believe the mission had a useful, practical
effect in that it underlined the full support of the
Security Council for UNMIK and KFOR; it sent strong
and unambiguous messages to all sides; and it imparted
an important signal from the Council as to the
importance of the high priority of sustained contact and
cooperation with Belgrade.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of Sweden will state the
European Union’s position later, and France of course
endorses that position. I will simply make a few
comments in my national capacity on points that we
would like to stress.
As members of the Council all noted during the
mission that you, Sir, led last week to Kosovo and
Belgrade, it is absolutely essential that the political
process currently under way in Kosovo continue. A
continuation of the status quo is neither acceptable
nor sustainable. In this regard, Mr. Haekkerup’s
promulgation of the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government, and the announcement
that general elections would be held on 17 November,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), have opened up a
political prospect that is essential to stability in
Kosovo.
It is essential to prepare carefully for the elections
so that they assist the democratic process in Kosovo,
and so that all the communities, in particular the
Kosovo Serbs, are able to participate. Everything must
be done to ensure that every community — and, to
begin with, the Serb community — is included. This is
crucial to the future of Kosovo. It is up to the Kosovo
Serbs to shoulder their responsibilities. It is in their
interest and in the interest of other communities to
participate in the elections and in the institutions of
provisional self-government that will be set up. The
provisions in the Constitutional Framework for the
representation of minorities and the defence of their
interests will enable them to exercise their rights and to
play their rightful role in the future of Kosovo. We urge
them to register and to vote.
In addition, I would like to voice our full support
for the vigorous measures taken by Mr. Haekkerup to
ensure law and order in Kosovo. The Special

12

Representative’s promulgation of a regulation on
unauthorized border/boundary crossings and an antiterrorism regulation — as urged by the Contact Group
in particular — are steps in the right direction. The
strengthening of border and boundary controls by the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) is part of this effort. The
Special Representative’s establishment of the new
police and justice pillar will make more effective the
fight against organized-crime networks and the pursuit
of extremists and will help suppress violence in
Kosovo. This is why we strongly support the request
for a new Assistant Secretary-General post to head this
new pillar. More generally, the new structure must be
urgently given both the financial and human resources
it needs to discharge its mission.
Improving security for everyone, particularly
minorities, is crucial, given the upcoming elections.
Extremists should not expect any indulgence from us.
Isolating them is in the interests of everybody.
Everyone, including the members of the Albanian
community, must strongly condemn violence and
isolate extremists who remain in or around Kosovo.
In Mitrovica, in order to encourage coexistence of
the communities, we must define and implement a
comprehensive and lasting strategy including
economic, political and security measures. I am glad
that following the Security Council’s visit to Kosovo,
UNMIK stated that it intended to prepare such a
strategy.
One recommendation in the report of the
Council’s mission relates to stepping up the dialogue
between UNMIK and Belgrade. We wholeheartedly
support this. We welcome President Koštunica’s call to
the Kosova Serb community to register for the general
elections of 17 November, and we welcome the
increase of contacts between Mr. Haekkerup and the
Yugoslav authorities, as well as the official opening of
the UNMIK office in Belgrade. The Special
Representative has offered the Belgrade authorities
proposals to encourage the organized return of
displaced Serbs to Kosovo. This is a step in the right
direction. We believe strongly that closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia on matters of common concern will be
helpful.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, first of all, to congratulate you once again for
the manner in which you led the Council mission to

S/PV.4335

Kosovo and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
follow up on and assess development in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

the civilian police unit, UNMIK has achieved
significant success in the implementation of its
mandate.

From the outset, I would like to say that this
mission, like all those the Council has taken to the
field, was a complete success because it was able to
observe first hand the level of commitment of the
various parties with regard to resolution 1244 (1999)
and also of obstacles perceived by the parties in the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolution.

The operation’s present critical phase requires
stronger political and financial support for UNMIK so
that it can be sure of providing the follow-up to and
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), which in the
opinion of my delegation remains the perfect
instrument for the resolution of the Kosovo question.

The meetings of the mission with President Putin
and President Koštunica were of particular importance
because they enabled members of the Council to hold a
fruitful exchange of views on the requirements of the
particularly sensitive phase through which the entire
subregion is currently passing. The meetings the
mission held with the various Kosovar communities
enabled those groups to express their concerns. They
also enabled the Council members to convey to them a
clear message to the effect that multi-ethnicity is a sine
qua non for lasting peace, not only in Kosovo but in the
entire subregion.
At this stage of my statement I would like to
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, the Under-SecretaryGeneral, for the excellent analysis that he has just
presented to the Council on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Kosovo. The Tunisian delegation feels that
there is no alternative in that country to tolerance and
cohabitation. It goes without saying that establishing
lasting confidence-building measures among the
various communities is the foundation of a future
multi-ethnic Kosovo. There are of course a number of
both structural and circumstantial reasons that underlie
the breach of trust and continue to fuel mistrust and
mutual rejection. This, in my delegation’s opinion, is a
predicament to which an urgent remedy must be found,
because any settlement of this question basically
depends on the support by the parties of a shared vision
of a common future.
In this context we are gratified that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has focused its activities in the field and
among all the parties concerned on the basic
prerequisite of coexistence among the various
communities and has kept them closely channelled
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). With
the help and support of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and

Tunisia feels the time has come for the Kosovar
parties themselves to undertake a direct and
responsible dialogue on the many issues of contention
that they raised in their meetings with the Security
Council mission to the region. In this context it must be
made quite clear that resolution 1244 (1999) is not
negotiable, for it constitutes the international guarantee
for a durable peace in Kosovo and among all Kosovars.
The recommendations in the mission’s report are
also unanimous messages that the Council is sending to
all the parties concerned. The political process in
Kosovo must indeed proceed in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999), and all the parties, in particular
the Kosovo Serbs, must take an active part. Remaining
on the sidelines will certainly not make it any easier for
that community to assert its concerns about security
and other issues.
The promulgation of the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government and the
decision to hold elections throughout Kosovo on 17
November are two important stages that must be
supported by all the parties concerned. We are gratified
that President Koštunica has launched a pressing
appeal to the Kosovo Serb community in Kosovo,
calling on them to commit to the electoral process. We
are convinced that it is only by supporting this process
that the Serb community in Kosovo can assert its views
and concerns and find its place in society.
The establishment of Pillar I by the Special
Representative is an additional guarantee promoting
justice and an end to impunity. Financial means are
necessary for justice and the police system to continue
to contribute to allaying fears and establishing security
for all.
It is essential that the question of the return of the
refugees and displaced persons be handled rapidly,
preferably before the forthcoming elections. The same
applies to persons who have disappeared or are in

13

S/PV.4335

detention. Finding solutions to the humanitarian
aspects of the question will promote reconciliation
among the various communities in Kosovo.
The situation in Mitrovica demonstrates the
breadth and depth of the gulf between the Albanianspeaking and Kosovo-Serb communities. Just as that
city embodies that rift, and the paranoia and even
distrust of what the international community is
undertaking for Kosovo, so must the international
partners in Kosovo maintain their efforts rapidly to reestablish trust between the main communities of the
city and encourage interaction between them in the
various spheres of social life.
The international programmes for the economic
recovery of that iconic city can be seen as a tool for
consolidating the interdependence of the two
communities. The experiment begun in that context by
the European Union has proven effective and should be
stepped up. It has the merit of helping ethnic divisions
to be healed through co-existence, which in turn will
become a condition for the stability and prosperity of
all ethnic groups. This will ultimately prove to
Kosovars of all ethnicities that it is up to them and
them alone to create the conditions to guarantee lasting
reconciliation.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a ringing tribute to
Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his commitment to the mission
with which he has been entrusted. His outstanding
leadership of UNMIK and his sense of restraint have
made him a respected interlocutor of all Kosovo
communities. My delegation also wishes to
congratulate the Commander of KFOR and all the men
and women who serve under him, as well as the
civilian police elements of UNMIK, for their
selflessness and devotion to the cause of peace.
The President: I thank the representative of
Tunisia for his kind words addressed to the Bangladesh
delegation.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): We thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for what I thought was an
outstandingly thoughtful briefing this morning and one
that we found very useful indeed.
As others have said, the representative of Sweden
will speak later on this morning on behalf of the
European Union, so I will keep my statement very brief
and make only a few points that I would like to
highlight.

14

The first is that the United Kingdom strongly
endorses the findings of the Security Council following
its mission to Kosovo. I think the mission’s report is a
very useful contribution and I hope it will be helpful to
the wider membership as well.
Secondly, I should like to endorse the point that
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno made about the
need for a clear message from the authorities in
Belgrade to the Serb community about the importance
of participation. It is in the interest of all communities
in Kosovo to participate in the elections and in the
structures being put together by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in order to secure their place in the shaping of
Kosovo’s future. I therefore think it vital that this
message of encouragement should get across from
Belgrade, particularly now that some progress is being
made on the return of refugees.
A similar consideration applies to Mitrovica,
where normalization would clearly be in the interest of
all the people of the city. This, too, is an area where we
would look to Belgrade to use its influence positively
to help resolve the situation. I noted what UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno had to say about the
importance of confidence-building measures and I take
his point.
Finally, extremism and organized crime are at the
heart of the problems in Kosovo and in the wider
region. We fully support the work being carried out by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force to tackle these issues. It
would be helpful to have a progress report from the
Secretariat on funding for the new Pillar I, including
funding for additional judges and prosecutors. It is
crucial that sufficient resources be made available
quickly and, as we have said before, the United
Kingdom stands ready to provide candidates for the
posts of international judges and prosecutors.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We consider today’s
public meeting on Kosovo to be most appropriate,
following last weekend’s visit of the Security Council
mission to the area. We thank you, Sir, for organizing
this important meeting. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing this
morning. As a member of the mission to Kosovo, I
wish to place on record my warm and sincere
appreciation and thanks to you, Sir, for the quality of
leadership you provided to the mission, which was the
first ever to include all 15 Security Council members.

S/PV.4335

The report of the mission in document
S/2001/565 broadly sums up the important work
accomplished by the Security Council mission during
the brief three-day visit to Kosovo and Belgrade. The
visit not only provided us with the opportunity to see
first hand the actual situation on the ground in Kosovo,
but also gave us clearer insight into the deep-rooted
issues that have bedevilled the territory and its people.
We have come back better informed as a result of the
discussions we had with the various parties, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hans Haekkerup; officials of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK);
the Commander of the Kosovo Force (KFOR);
members of the Interim Administration; representatives
of the Albanian and Serb communities; civil society;
and, in Belgrade, with President Kostunica and
members of his Cabinet. We hope to be able to
contribute more substantially to the efforts of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to restore
peace and stability in the area.
The Kosovo crisis has been a real human tragedy
of our time. The lives of hundreds of thousands of
innocent people have been completely shattered.
Although the conflict is largely over, the people of
Kosovo continue to live in a situation of bitter ethnic
divide, mutual hatred and fear. The minorities, both
Serbs and Albanians in many communities, remain
confined to their homes due to fear. Employment
opportunities are extremely scarce, depriving people of
the means to earn their livelihood, and hundreds of
thousands of people are living outside their normal
homes, either as internally displaced persons or as
refugees. Worst of all, children, having lived through
the trauma of death and devastation in the civil
conflict, are unable to attend school unless
accompanied by KFOR soldiers.
In such difficult circumstances, UNMIK and
KFOR are valiantly engaged in maintaining peace and
security and they deserve to be not only commended,
but also fully supported by all of us in all that they are
doing in Kosovo to restore confidence among the
people, to engage them in a political process, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and to rebuild a society based on multiethnicity and the rule of law and justice for all. This
task is as daunting as the situation is complex. The
immediate and most important challenge before
UNMIK is to organize elections with popular

participation for the administration of Kosovo as an
autonomous region within the sovereignty of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The election has to be
inclusive in order to have the credibility required in
today’s difficult situation in Kosovo.
In this regard, we have two important concerns.
First, the security situation must improve in order to
facilitate the full participation of all eligible Kosovars
— Albanians, Serbs and other minorities — in the
process. Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure
that voters, in particular Serb voters, both inside and
outside Kosovo, have the opportunity to register to
vote without any hindrance. The other important
challenge before UNMIK is to initiate the process of
economic reconstruction in Kosovo. While some work
is already being done to rebuild infrastructures, it is
necessary to start a number of small projects which can
provide employment to job-seekers from both the
majority and the minority communities. We appeal to
the international community to extend all possible
assistance for the economic reconstruction of Kosovo.
Our visit to Belgrade and the discussions we had
there with President Koštunica, the Minister of Interior
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs have convinced us
that Yugoslavia is not only prepared to fully cooperate
with the Security Council and UNMIK, but that it is
already doing so, for example, by officially
encouraging the Serbs to register to vote, in spite of its
serious reservations on certain provisions of the
recently adopted legal framework for Kosovo. We
appreciate this positive attitude of Yugoslavia.
We call upon all the people of Kosovo –
Albanians and Serbs alike — to shed extremism, which
has already brought so much misfortune and suffering
to them. The future of Kosovo lies in the multi-ethnic
coexistence of all communities, and that should be the
goal they must work for together. Indeed, almost all
nations of the world, including mine, Mauritius, have
multi-ethnic societies that have learned to live in
harmony. There is no reason why Kosovars should not
be able to do the same.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Touré (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Chowdhury of
Bangladesh, President of the Security Council, on his
the excellent leadership during our visit to Kosovo and
Belgrade. I would like to thank the Secretary-General

15

S/PV.4335

for his report of 7 June 2001 on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-SecretaryGeneral, for his very detailed introduction of the
report.
This morning’s open meeting offers an
opportunity to reiterate Mali’s full support for Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of UNMIK, for all of his
team and for all of the international personnel who
have been working tirelessly for two years now to
attain the goals of peace, security and sustainable
development in Kosovo.
Despite the many political, economic and security
problems facing UNMIK, we must recognize that
considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of its mandate. While we welcome this
tangible progress, my delegation strongly supports the
sustained efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
Commander in implementing resolution 1244 (1999)
and thus to establish democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions in Kosovo.
In view of the information given us by Mr.
Guéhenno and what I was able to see and hear during
our very important visit to Kosovo, I shall focus on the
following few highlights. First of all, at the political
level, my delegation is grateful to Mr. Haekkerup and
all UNMIK personnel for the promulgation of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional SelfGovernment in Kosovo and the declaration that
elections would be held on 17 November this year.
It is true, however, that during our visit we were
able to see that the Constitutional Framework was not
the subject of consensus among the political actors in
Kosovo. Nevertheless, we think that the Constitutional
Framework, which in no way prejudges a final
settlement for Kosovo, provides the people of Kosovo
with an opportunity to manage their daily life and
encourages moderates to advance the political process,
while keeping the extremists on the margins. Because it
is the outcome of cooperation among UNMIK, the
Joint Working Group, the political leaders of Kosovo,
international experts and the international community,
my delegation calls on all inhabitants of Kosovo to
participate actively in the structures already established
and in the future government of the territory.

16

Regarding the Kosovo-wide elections to be held
on 17 November, my delegation believes that the
electoral process can strengthen the democratic process
in Kosovo and stability in the region. Thus, we urge all
the peoples of Kosovo to participate massively in the
elections, which are essential to combat intransigent
extremism and to encourage all kinds of moderates to
take a decisive role in the affairs of the territory.
Because the wholehearted participation of all
communities is crucial to the election process, my
delegation supports UNMIK’s initiatives to establish a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. We believe that the full
and responsible participation of all sectors of Kosovar
society in drawing up a reliable electoral roll can help
ensure the free participation of all ethnic groups in the
elections. We must do everything possible to ensure
that the vote is held in conditions of security and that
the return and participation of refugees and displaced
persons is guaranteed. All communities, particularly
Kosovar Serbs, must participate in the elections and the
institutions of provisional self-government to be
established. This is a major challenge that the
international community, UNMIK and KFOR must take
up.
Secondly, in the area of security, my delegation is
deeply concerned over continuing ethnic and political
violence and organized crime in Kosovo. Without any
doubt, violence against minorities in the province is the
greatest obstacle to achieving the international
community’s goals of peace, democracy and prosperity
in Kosovo. During our visit to Kosovo, this kind of
blind violence as cited time and again as the main
obstacle to the return of refugees and displaced persons
and their participation in the democratic structures in
Kosovo. My delegation welcomes the Special
Representative’s establishment of Pillar I, and
legislation against organized crime, illegal weapons
possession and terrorism. We hope that these measures
will lead to considerable improvements in security
conditions in Kosovo. We also support specific
measures taken by UNMIK and KFOR on monitoring
boundaries in Kosovo.
Thirdly, at the economic level, we are still
concerned over the very high unemployment rate in
Kosovo and the disastrous state of the economy. Yet we
welcome the establishment of tax collection points
along Kosovo’s borders, where duties are levied on
some goods. Economic development is a major element
of stability, and my delegation recommends that the

S/PV.4335

international community make available additional
funds for the Village Economic Rehabilitation
Programme.
Fourthly, a source of concern for my delegation in
the humanitarian sphere is the situation of the
thousands of Albanian-speaking refugees from the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia who have
been in Kosovo since 3 May because of clashes
between Macedonian forces and Albanian extremists.
The international community must come to their
assistance.
The question of individuals who have disappeared
and of detainees remains crucial for my delegation.
This continues to be a major obstacle to reconciliation
among the communities. We encourage UNMIK to
make further progress in this key area, and we urge the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities to release
those who are still languishing in Serbian prisons.
Fifthly, my delegation welcomes the close
contacts between the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK and KFOR. The
opening of the UNMIK Office in Belgrade will foster
communication and cooperation between UNMIK and
the Yugoslav authorities. We thank the Yugoslav
authorities for their willingness and determination to
cooperate with UNMIK to improve inter-communal
relations, in Mitrovica in particular, and throughout
Kosovo. The cooperation of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities is crucial if minorities,
especially Serbs, are to participate in the 17 November
elections.
Finally, my delegation understands the immensity
of the task facing UNMIK, and we pay tribute to Mr.
Hans Haekkerup for his steady hand as leader of
UNMIK; we thank all the local and international
personnel of UNMIK and of KFOR for their
determination and for their commitment to
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We call on the
international community to step up its efforts to help
UNMIK at this crucial stage of its involvement in
Kosovo to enable it to attain its objectives: peace,
security and sustainable development.
The President: I thank the representative of Mali
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My thanks go to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,

for his presentation. The varied support of Mr.
Guéhenno’s department, including the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2001/565), made a most significant contribution to
the success of the Security Council’s mission to the
region.
We share the voiced in the report of the
Secretary-General that effective law and order is a high
priority in UNMIK’s work. We are pleased to see that
the police and justice pillar of the Mission has been
erected. With the cooperation of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), this will enhance UNMIK’s effectiveness. We
endorse the planned appointment of a deputy special
representative of the Secretary-General to head that
structure.
Open meetings on Security Council missions are
very useful for us, enabling us to join with all other
States Members of the United Nations in assessing the
fulfilment of mandates and in hearing first-hand views
of the consequences of conflict.
I thank Ambassador Chowdhury and congratulate
him on the excellent way in which he led the mission.
Thanks to his dedication, the mission attained its goals
in record time. The 15 members of the Security
Council reviewed compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and, with the various actors, assessed at close
hand UNMIK’s achievements and the challenges facing
it, including through meetings with President Putin and
with President Kostunica. The breadth of our meetings
enhanced our understanding of the conflict and gave us
a better perspective for taking the decisions that the
Council will have to adopt in the future.
Let me make a few specific comments about the
mission. I want to highlight the work of UNMIK and to
acknowledge KFOR’s valuable contribution. The
responsibility and commitment shown by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, and his team as they work to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) are admirable and deserve our
full support. UNMIK’s achievements over the past two
years are obvious, and constitute a realistic option for
attaining the coexistence that is necessary in a multiethnic society.
Considerable challenges face UNMIK and the
international community. It is necessary, first of all, to
guarantee the participation of all communities in the 17
November elections. We understand the concerns

17

S/PV.4335

voiced by Kosovo Serbs, both those remaining in
Kosovo and those who have taken refuge abroad, and
we consider that a priority for UNMIK and KFOR in
the coming months is to put in place security
guarantees that will provide that community with
freedom of movement within Kosovo and that will
permit the return of refugees and displaced persons. In
any event, they must be afforded full participation in
the electoral process.
We believe that the problem of detainees and of
individuals who have disappeared demands priority
attention. Its resolution is among the key elements in
building trust among the parties.
Another of the greatest challenges for the future
is the problem of the city of Mitrovica. Here we need
full cooperation from the Belgrade Government.
Necessary prudence must not stop us from resolving
the present social fragmentation and hostility. That city
is a mirror of all the problems of Kosovo. What
happens there will send a clear signal about the
possible future of the rest of Kosovo. UNMIK must
continuously work with KFOR to ensure that decisions
are coordinated and that they do not yield conflicting
effects. We call on the Belgrade Government to take a
more active and constructive position in finding
solutions for Mitrovica.
It is urgent that the population of Kosovo
speedily and fully understand the key role they must
play in their own present and future. In other words,
“kosovarization” must take place, to use a neologism
spawned by this conflict. As the findings of the mission
make clear, “the status quo is unacceptable”
(S/2001/600, para. 30). The responsibility of the
international community is limited, but it will be even
more limited without the support and cooperation of
the population. We therefore appeal to all Kosovars to
participate in the activities of the international
community, to reject all violence, and to participate in
the democratic process, especially the forthcoming
elections, which will help create the conditions
necessary for reconciliation, stability and progress in
the region.
The attainment of those objectives will be
enhanced by improved relations and dialogue between
UNMIK and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
the Security Council must continue to promote.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for the kind words he addressed to me.

18

Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open meeting to discuss
the report of the Security Council mission to Kosovo
and Belgrade, which took place from 16 to 18 June
2001. I wish also to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guéhenno, for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2001/565, and to say how
much we appreciated that report, because it provided a
very useful input during my delegation’s preparations
for the Security Council mission.
I wish also to express my personal appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for the impressive and effective
leadership you provided for our short but intense
mission as we sought to fulfil the terms of reference
provided by the Council.
Coming just more than a year after the first
Security Council mission to Kosovo, the recent mission
provided us with an opportunity to assess the critical
role played by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past two years in promoting peace, reconciliation and
stability, and in creating viable democratic institutions.
As the report indicates, the mission, in its
meeting with local leaders, conveyed a strong message
on the need to eschew violence and extremism and to
focus on inter-ethnic reconciliation and inclusion.
Our visit to Belgrade also provided an
opportunity to engage with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to listen to their
concerns and to obtain their support for progress
towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
As my delegation entirely supports the findings
of the mission, I will only make brief comments on
some issues which are of particular concern. These
include the volatile security situation, efforts to
enhance law enforcement, the return of refugees and
the issue of missing persons and of detainees.
As we were able to witness first hand, there has
been considerable progress in the area of peace and
security. While the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has tried
to develop a comprehensive strategy aimed at
improving the quality of life for all communities, the
security situation for Kosovo’s minority communities,
particularly the Kosovo Serbs, remains of great
concern. This is particularly true of Mitrovica. Unless

S/PV.4335

the security situation of Kosovo’s minority
communities improves, peace and reconciliation are
doomed to fail, and this will, in turn, reduce the
possibility of the return to their homes of substantial
numbers of refugees and displaced persons and our
ability to provide sustained economic growth and
sustainable development for the people of Kosovo.
We were, therefore, pleased that the initiative
recently undertaken by UNMIK to establish Pillar I to
improve the coordination of police and justice matters
is having success. In this regard, we welcome the
promulgation of regulations pertaining to illegal border
crossings and to the possession of illegal weapons.
We wish to emphasize the appeal made by
UNMIK for an increase in the number of international
judges and prosecutors and for additional funds to
increase detention capacity. My delegation views these
as crucial to improving the law and order situation,
especially in the light of comments that perpetrators
may have had to be released from detention due to the
lack of proper detention facilities.
I wish to take this opportunity as the Chairperson
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1160 (1998) to draw attention to
paragraphs 25 and 33 of the report (S/2001/600) and
their importance to the process of maintaining law and
order in Kosovo. These paragraphs highlight the
discussions held between members of the mission and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) on the strengthening and
monitoring of the arms embargo imposed pursuant to
resolution 1160 (1998).
We were pleased to have had very fruitful
discussions and we wish to thank the Commander of
KFOR, Lieutenant General Thorstein Skiaker for his
cooperation. We particularly appreciate the promise of
detailed information on the origin, type and quantity of
weapons seized.
We were also informed by the UNMIK Police
Commander about the quantity of weapons being
seized and the attempts being made, some successfully,
to disarm the population where appropriate.
My delegation was pleased with the political
progress being made on the preparations for elections
to be held in November. We wish to reiterate the
importance we attach to close collaboration between
UNMIK and the authorities in Belgrade, particularly in
regard to the registration and the participation of

minority communities in the electoral process itself.
For us, it is important that all communities participate
in the governance of Kosovo, as only in this way will
we be able to provide full participation in the
democratic institutions.
One issue on which all communities again,
pleaded for assistance, as they did last year, is missing
persons. We believe that further progress can now be
made on this issue with the use of DNA in the forensic
work being carried out by UNMIK.
We also wish to encourage UNMIK to continue to
promote conditions conducive to the return of refugees
and displaced persons and to commend them for the
progress already made in this area.
The report indicates that one of the greatest
challenges is the promotion of multi-ethnicity. We
believe that there is no simple or speedy solution to
this problem. With the elections approaching, these
issues become even more important, and we
unreservedly support the emphasis in the report on the
need for multi-ethnic initiatives in the social, economic
and religious areas to start building confidence
between the communities.
At your initiative, Mr. President, a representative group
of Kosovo women’s non-governmental organizations
met with members of mission, and during this meeting
a number of issues of concern were raised. The
representatives underlined the need to involve women
in peace negotiations and in the political decisionmaking process in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000). The importance of the international
community’s support for the economic empowerment
of women, tackling discrimination and providing
employment and equal opportunities, were identified as
equally important. Emphasis was placed on the need
for regular dialogue and enhanced cooperation between
local women’s groups and UNMIK.
We are grateful for the opportunity which, at your
request, Mr. President, was provided to meet with the
representatives of the non-governmental organizations
because of the importance that we attach to civil
society and the role that they play in the reconciliation
efforts.
On the surface there has been improvement in
Kosovo’s economic situation. We saw reconstruction;
we saw improved agricultural activity; we saw
economic activity taking place throughout Pristina.

19

S/PV.4335

Nevertheless, the economic situation continues to be of
great concern, with high levels of unemployment,
particularly among the youth, and the need to resolve
issues relating to property rights, which could provide
an enabling environment conducive to attracting
foreign investment.
It is important that these and other issues be
addressed, as these problems can influence the return
of refugees and displaced persons who are reluctant to
return where there is no viable source of income.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s appreciation to Mr. Hans
Haekkerup,
the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative, and to his staff, to the KFOR
Commander and his staff, and to the men and women
of UNMIK for the tremendous assistance provided to
the mission during its stay in Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of
Jamaica for the kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Under-Secretary—General Guéhenno for his briefing
and for the Secretary-General’s report. I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for leading our
mission efficiently and for presenting our report. We
found our meetings useful and important, not least our
interactions with President Kostunica and President
Putin.
For two years now, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
good progress in implementing resolution 1244 (1999).
Norway commends UNMIK, led by Hans Haekkerup,
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), led by Thorstein
Skiaker, for their efforts, together with our partners in
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union pillars, to create
conditions for a multi-ethnic democratic Kosovo. Our
overall aim must be to promote peace and stability and
to stop disintegration and extremism in the Balkan
region. And much remains to be done.
As a major provider of personnel and assistance
to Kosovo, Norway has a strong interest in the
successful implementation of self-government in
Kosovo, based on the Constitutional Framework and
resolution 1244 (1999). The single most important
challenge is the security situation. As made clear in the
Secretary-General’s report and during our mission,
minority communities, in particular Kosovo Serbs,

20

continue to suffer from ethnic violence and major
crimes. Neither do extremists shun violence against
fellow ethnic Albanians to advance political or
criminal interests.
We therefore firmly support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s initiatives to
improve law and order, including through a new police
and justice pillar and three new regulations directed
against extremists. Reports from Kosovo indicate that
the weapons amnesty programme has been a success.
Ongoing programmes providing for assessment
and destruction of small-arms stockpiles should be
expanded to other parts of the region. Norway
welcomes the endeavours of the Stability Pact for
South Eastern Europe in this regard. A main concern is
the trafficking in such weapons. Cross-border police
cooperation must be enhanced. The Macedonian crisis
shows the need for a comprehensive approach. Plans
for regional police training with a focus on all kinds of
trafficking are being developed in the context of the
Stability Pact’s police cooperation and training
initiative.
We welcome the willingness of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Government to cooperate with
the UNMIK police in addressing illegal trafficking, as
expressed to the Council mission. We look forward to
hearing from UNMIK about the follow-up and results.
It is clear to us that closer cooperation with
Belgrade is needed on a range of issues facing UNMIK
in the time leading up to elections. We count on — and
expect — Serb leaders in Belgrade and Kosovo to
support UNMIK’s endeavours to implement resolution
1244 (1999). Norway welcomes the positive attitude
of President Koštunica regarding Kosovo Serb
registration. Closer cooperation between UNMIK and
Belgrade is also crucial to resolve the fate of missing
persons of all communities, as well as the release of
remaining political and other prisoners. Judging by our
constructive meetings in Belgrade, we believe that
UNMIK can work with Yugoslav authorities to achieve
progress in the five areas highlighted by President
Koštunica, in order to encourage full Kosovo Serb
participation in the election process.
We expect Kosovar Albanian leaders to shoulder
their share of the responsibility for improving the
security situation so that a real process of return of
displaced persons can commence.

S/PV.4335

We will do our share and fulfil our commitments
to Kosovo. But this is a two-way street. All involved
must do their part. Creating security and conditions for
return cannot be left to the United Nations and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) alone. It is up to Kosovar
leaders to demonstrate in deeds the political will to
create a multi-ethnic society that is ready for
meaningful self-rule in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). We did not support a community which
had suffered repression and violence only to see
members of that same community inflict suffering on
others. Those who fought for their own rights must
now stand up for the equal rights of others.
There are obviously mutual links between, on the
one hand, Kosovo Serb security and the return of
Kosovo Serbs, and, on the other hand, Kosovo Serbs’
participation in the interim institutions. Therefore,
Belgrade leaders, for their part, should further promote
Serbs’ interests by helping UNMIK identify and
influence interlocutors committed to the integration of
Serbs in Kosovo. This is not least the case in
Mitrovica, which is a major challenge. Norway
supports the comprehensive and balanced strategy
outlined by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during our visit: a persistent
political process, involving close cooperation with
Belgrade, to replace parallel structures in Mitrovica
with confidence-building measures and security
provided by KFOR, UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Police Service, with Serb participation. This must be
carefully conducted, and another exodus must be
avoided by ensuring that Mitrovica Serbs have at least
the same sense of security as they have now.
We welcome KFOR’s efforts to deal with the
regional security situation, as outlined by the KFOR
Commander. This includes the increased efforts to
prevent ethnic Albanian extremist activities across the
Macedonian border, as well as KFOR’s contribution to
the positive developments in southern Serbia. The
international community’s successful cooperation with
Belgrade in the Presevo valley shows that more can be
achieved through political means and confidencebuilding measures than by the use of force.
The President: I thank the representative of
Norway for his kind words addressed to me.
I will now yield and, instead of making a
statement in my national capacity, give the floor to the
countries that have been invited under rule 37. First on

that list is the representative of Sweden. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.
The EU would like to thank the presidency of
the Security Council for the report on the Security
Council mission on the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), dated 7
June, and Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
briefing here today.
The European Union reiterates its strong support
for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, in his efforts to ensure
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). We welcome the promulgation by Hans
Haekkerup of the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government in Kosovo and the
announcement of Kosovo-wide elections to be held on
17 November of this year. The Constitutional
Framework is a landmark step in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and constitutes a decisive
move towards the establishment of meaningful and
democratic self-government in Kosovo. We urge all
individuals and communities in Kosovo to participate
actively and constructively in the election process
and in the future provisional institutions of selfgovernment. The EU welcomes the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Government’s support for the registration
of Kosovo Serbs, and calls upon Belgrade to continue
to cooperate with UNMIK in order to ensure their
participation in the elections.
The EU supports the mission’s findings that there
is a need for intensified efforts on issues such as
increased security for all communities, in particular for
the Kosovo Serbs; freedom of movement; the fate of
missing persons; and the return of refugees and
displaced persons. We welcome the efforts made by

21

S/PV.4335

UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in this regard
and agree with the Security Council mission’s
assessment that there is a need for continued and
enhanced dialogue between UNMIK and Belgrade in
order to ensure the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).
Both the report of Security Council mission and
the report of the Secretary-General point to the fact that
the level of violence and crime in Kosovo, in particular
that directed against ethnic minorities, remains
unacceptably high. Concerted efforts to enhance the
overall security situation in Kosovo are of vital
importance to the stability of the province and the
entire region. We support recent measures taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to counter illegal border crossings
and the illegal possession of arms, as well as the
adoption of a regulation to help combat terrorism in
Kosovo. The EU welcomes the timely establishment of
a new UNMIK pillar intended to provide greater focus
and coordination in the field of police, security and
justice. We are convinced that the new pillar represents
an important instrument in combating violence and
crime in Kosovo, and look forward to a comprehensive
UNMIK strategy for the justice sector. The EU also
supports efforts to develop a strategy to defuse tensions
and resolve the complex situation in northern Kosovo,
in particular in Mitrovica.
The EU welcomes the unilateral demobilization
by ethnic Albanian armed groups in south-east Serbia
and the peaceful completion of the return of Yugoslav
security forces to the ground safety zone, and in this
context expresses its appreciation for the constructive
efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Government. The European Union has worked closely
with other international organizations, in particular the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), to bring
the parties together and reach a peaceful solution to the
crisis. The EU encourages the Belgrade authorities and
ethnic Albanian representatives to make rapid progress
on the implementation of necessary confidencebuilding measures, including the establishment of a
multi-ethnic police force, the return of all displaced
persons and the integration of the ethnic Albanian
population into local political, economic and social
structures. The European Union Monitoring Mission
will retain its presence in the area in order to contribute
to this process.
The EU remains deeply concerned about the
serious security situation in the former Yugoslav

22

Republic of Macedonia. At its recent summit in
Gothenburg, the European Council reaffirmed its
strong attachment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the need for a political solution to the
crisis. It is important that KFOR maintain a robust
border control and take a firm stance against ethnic
Albanian extremists operating from Kosovo. The EU
calls on ethnic Albanian leaders in Kosovo and
political leaders in Albania to use their influence to
isolate extremists and prevent the spread of violence,
which constitutes a threat to the stability of the whole
region.
The European Union fully supports the
intensified dialogue on inter-ethnic relations launched
by President Trajkovski, and stands ready to engage
further in facilitation of the political dialogue. To this
end, the EU has decided to appoint a representative,
resident in Skopje, who will act under the authority of
the High Representative, Mr. Javier Solana, who is now
in Skopje himself.
The EU is firmly committed to continuing its
efforts, in close cooperation with all main partners and
organizations, to promote stability, democratic
development and prosperity in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Mr. Šahović (Yugoslavia): I would like to thank
you, personally, Mr. President, and all members of the
Council for your efforts to bring about the mission
whose results we are discussing today. I am also
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his
analysis and presentation.
We view the discussions that the mission had in
Yugoslavia, in Kosovo and Metohija and in Belgrade as
very useful. The visit provided an opportunity for all
members of the Council to acquire first-hand
information on the situation on the ground and assess
challenges that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is facing
in the very complex period that is ahead of us. This
kind of active involvement of the Council is, we
believe, important and very helpful for the process of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
Another equally significant aspect of the mission
is the Council's visit to Belgrade. The exchange of

S/PV.4335

views with President Koštunica, Minister Svilanović
and other members of our Government was in our
assessment detailed, open and constructive. Yugoslavia
is committed to continuing to cooperate with the
international community, particularly with the Security
Council, UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
resolving difficult problems in Kosovo and Metohija.
We support the position of the Security Council
mission that the political process in Kosovo and
Metohija has to be further promoted in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). That indeed requires
substantial additional efforts by UNMIK, KFOR and
UNMIK police, as well as the full attention of the
Security Council. We also agree with the assessment
that basic obstacles to the creation of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo and Metohija are the lack of physical, social
and economic security for the population, as well as the
lack of freedom of movement and equal access to
public services. Furthermore, we recognize the
importance of the establishment of the new Pillar I and
UNMIK’s recent measures to combat organized crime,
illegal weapons possession and terrorism.
Yugoslavia has repeatedly emphasized that it
supports in principle the elections in Kosovo and
Metohija and the creation of interim institutions in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), especially its
provision regarding respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yugoslavia. Therefore, we have
called on the Serbian community to take part in the
registration process for the election.
However, whether Kosovo Serbs will actually go
to the polls will depend on whether the conditions for
free and fair elections really exist at that time.
Unfortunately, so far these conditions have not been
created: there is no minimum physical safety,
particularly for the non-Albanian population; the
remaining Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija cannot go
from one place to another without an armed escort. In
such conditions, we find it difficult to expect to even
hold an election campaign, let alone vote.
It is difficult to contend that participating in an
election is a precondition for a life in safety. On the
other hand, in the absence of safety, there are no
conditions for democratic elections. Minority
protection is not contingent upon the will of minorities
to take part in self-governing institutions, but their
safety will enable their meaningful participation in
these institutions.

As the situation stands now, Kosovo and Metohija
is on the way to being totally transformed into a monoethnic community. Two thirds of the Serb population
and many members of other ethnic communities have
left for other parts of the country. Pristina has been
practically cleansed: of its 40,000 Serbs only 200 have
remained. The process of the return of displaced
persons to Kosovo and Metohija has not yet started.
Actually, flight out of the province continues on a daily
basis. The return of internally displaced persons should
begin immediately, at least to certain areas of Kosovo
and Metohija where that can be achieved in safety.
Such a step would be completely in line with resolution
1244 (1999), which calls for the return of all forcibly
displaced persons without any additional or special
conditions.
I will not elaborate on the issue of the
Constitutional Framework. Our position is well known,
and it was summarized in the letter I addressed to you,
Mr. President, earlier this month. It is our view that
relevant legislation should be enacted to improve the
content of the Framework and that additional
confidence-building measures be put in place to offer
the Serbs and other non-Albanians protection so that
they can live side by side with others in the province.
It is necessary to ensure institutional links
between Kosovo Serbs and the authorities in Belgrade.
In this context, we call for the establishment of
cooperation in the fields of education, public health
and in particular the protection of cultural heritage.
Furthermore, we believe that tax collection points
should be set up farther inside the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija, since their maintenance at the
administrative boundary with Serbia would create an
impression that Kosovo and Metohija is actually an
independent State.
Finally, we are of the view that taking into
account the good and useful cooperation existing
between the Yugoslav Army, the Yugoslav Ministry of
Interior and KFOR in southern Serbia, there is no
reason why similar cooperation concerning Kosovo and
Metohija should not be ensured. I should also like to
reiterate once again my Government's readiness and
commitment to further intensify cooperation with
UNMIK. In this connection, a status-of-mission
agreement regulating Federal Republic of YugoslaviaUNMIK cooperation is urgently required. It would
significantly facilitate cooperation and would be in line

23

S/PV.4335

with established United Nations practice for missions
of a similar nature.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
willingness of Yugoslavia to do everything in its power
to contribute to the improvement of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, for the benefit of all its
inhabitants.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Albania. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your excellent leadership and the strong
commitment that you have shown as the President of
the Security Council this month. The Albanian
Government highly appreciates the two missions of the
Security Council to Kosovo headed by you, which have
been successful and have assisted in the policy of the
international community for peace and stability in the
region.
On 12 June 1999, the first international
peacekeeping troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
were deployed in Kosovo, together with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Since then, the Albanian Government has
followed with great attention and interest the
developments in Kosovo. We think that there has been
a lot of progress in Kosovo, which is reflected in the
promotion of the democratization process, the return of
refugees, improved security, economic reconstruction
and other equally important achievements. On this
occasion, we would like to commend the great work of
UNMIK and KFOR and stand ready to support it and to
make our own contribution to this process.
The holding of the first-ever free municipal
elections in the history of Kosovo was a very
successful undertaking of the international community
and the political forces of Kosovo. Those elections
testified to the fact that the Albanians of Kosovo are
fully determined to embrace democratic values and
standards. With these elections, Kosovo undertook an
important step towards building institutions and the
democratic process.
The Albanian Government fully supports the
holding of general elections in Kosovo. These elections
will create the central institutions and increase the
responsibility of the Kosovar Albanians in the process
of self-governance. The United Nations and the

24

political forces in Kosovo should work together in
preparing the appropriate steps which will contribute to
building confidence and the achievement of a multiethnic Kosovo.
First, efforts should be stepped up to resolve the
issue of missing persons and the release of all
prisoners, a problem that continues to be an impeding
factor against the process of reconciliation among the
ethnic groups in Kosovo.
Secondly, the international community and the
Belgrade regime should try to influence the Serb
community in Mitrovica to abandon the policy of
cantonization and the isolation of Mitrovica. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) aims at creating a free
and democratic society in Kosovo in which all
members are free and equal. The solution to the
problem of Mitrovica will not only eradicate a source
of tension and conflict, but also serve to create a
feeling of responsibility among the Albanians of
Kosovo for respecting all of the democratic rules and
for living in equal co-existence with the other ethnic
groups. We welcome the recommendation of the
Security Council mission regarding the situation in
Mitrovica on the need for multi-ethnic initiatives in the
social, economic and religious areas with the objective
of rebuilding confidence between the communities, in
particular in the field of economic development.
Thirdly, in order to achieve the necessary
confidence and reconciliation in Kosovo, the Albanians
should work further to respect the rights of the
minorities. At the same time, the minorities, in
particular the Serb minority, should understand that
only by participating in the process of democratic
institution-building and in the upcoming general
elections will they contribute to the goal of a multiethnic Kosovo.
We think that there can be no discussion on the
final status of Kosovo without having in place the
central institutions, including the Government and the
Assembly of Kosovo. Only these bodies will have the
legitimate right to negotiate with the international
community on this very important issue. The will of
the people of Kosovo should be respected as a
fundamental element of the right to self-determination.
We support the continued presence of UNMIK
and KFOR in Kosovo, which are guarantees for
preserving peace and stability there. Evaluating the
situation and the great efforts of the United Nations to

S/PV.4335

achieve its goals, we believe it important that this
Organization remain in Kosovo as a guarantor of the
process in the future. As a neighbouring country,
Albania would like to establish broad cooperation with
Kosovo with the objective of Kosovo's becoming a
model for the entire region. It is in this context that the
Albanian Government has proposed and asked for
financial assistance to the structures of the Stability
Pact for the reconstruction of the road from Durrës to
Pristina.
The issue of Kosovo is as old as traditional
European policy towards the Balkans — a policy of
creating zones of influence and of solving the problem
by the imposition of force and dominance — embodied
in international treaties and agreements over the past
two centuries. The tendency of some countries today to
solve the issue in the traditional way, without
respecting the new reality in the Balkans, will surely
provoke insecurity and tension and keep the region
unstable. We think that only the continuation of the
democratic process and the integration of Kosovo into
the European Union is the right perspective for peace
and stability in the Balkans. We believe that the
contribution of the international community in Kosovo
will soon yield the necessary result of strengthening
peace and stability in the region. This process will
always be easier and fair when the will of the people
corresponds with the interests of the international
community.
The President: I thank the representative of
Albania for his kind words addressed to me.
I would now like to touch on a few points in my
national capacity.
As the Bangladesh representative, I had the
honour and pleasure of leading the Council mission to
Kosovo and Belgrade. Bangladesh agrees fully with the
findings of the mission, as contained in paragraphs 2939 of the report in document S/2001/600. We expect
that these findings will prompt concrete actions by all
concerned.
My delegation, which also joined the first mission
to Kosovo in April 2000, was impressed by the marked
improvement in overall economic activity in the area,
particularly in Pristina. I will touch on three points: a
multi-ethnic Kosovo, democracy and the role of civil
society in general and women's groups in particular.

On the first point, we believe that a peaceful
future in Kosovo — or, for that matter, in the greater
region — hinges on the greater tolerance and mutual
accommodation of different ethnic entities. Although
some progress has been made in the last two years,
wounds are still open, mistrust is widespread and
ethnically motivated violence active. The only practical
way out of this is to significantly improve the
environment so that all communities feel safe and
secure, which will contribute much to confidencebuilding and thereby lay the foundation of a truly
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. In this context,
Bangladesh emphatically reiterates its earlier assertions
that the resolution of the issue of missing persons and
detainees is crucially important for the healing process
to begin.
The Security Council mission to Kosovo last
week very appropriately carried a strong message
urging the communities to do their utmost to create
such a society. Broad participation in the political
process is a crucial step towards the creation of a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. The Kosovars should
not allow the past to pull them back and should look
ahead to the potentials of the future. Promoting a
culture of peace and non-violence, particularly
focusing on the children and young people, is crucial to
the success of these efforts.
My second point is on democracy. The
democratic process in Kosovo had a hesitant, but
positive start with the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo last year. Some success has been achieved in
the representation of different communities in the
interim institutions, although the political engagement
of the Kosovo Serbs has remained a challenge. The
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
an important role to play in this engagement. The
encouragement by President Koštunica of civil
registration for the Kosovo-wide elections in
November of this year has already had a positive
effect. The difficulties being faced in organizing broad
participation in the upcoming elections must be
pursued with all earnestness. The Council mission last
week left with the impression that it was unacceptable
to continue on the basis of the status quo.
The third point relates to the role of civil society
in general and women’s groups in particular.
Bangladesh is very pleased that it was possible for the
mission members to meet with the representatives of
women’s non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in

25

S/PV.4335

Kosovo. We believe that the international community
should increase its support to enable NGOs and
women’s groups to reach across the ethnic divide.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) provides for
greater participation in peace negotiations and in the
political process by women. Such involvement of
women’s groups and networks in Kosovo needs to be
ensured by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We hope that UNMIK
will take immediate steps to work closely with these
groups which are committed to the broader objectives
of the United Nations in their work. Bangladesh
strongly believes that civil society in Kosovo has
played a significant role in enhancing the objectives of
a multi-ethnic society and that it will continue to be an
effective ally of UNMIK and its work.

26

Let me conclude by paying tribute to all those
who are working in Kosovo, with dedication
and enthusiasm, as part of a difficult and complex
United Nations mission. Also, Bangladesh commends
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Hans
Haekkerup, for his determined leadership as the head
of UNMIK.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
