United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9036th meeting

Thursday, 19 May 2022, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis/Mr. Hunter/Mr. Mills. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Coraiola Yinde Kloss
Ms. Wang Yingtong
Ms. Lecoutre
Mr. Mibissa
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Parihar
Mr. Flynn
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ríos Sánchez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Varganov
Ms. Shaheen
Ms. Jacobs

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict and food security
Letter dated 12 May 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/391)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35511 (E)
*2235511*

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: Before we begin, I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work as expeditiously as possible.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphone will
prompt all speakers to bring their remarks to a close
after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Canada.
Ms. Joly (Canada): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Executive Director Beasley,
Director-General Qu Dongyu and Ms. Menker for their
insightful briefings.
I welcome this exploration of ways to break the
cycle of conflict and food insecurity. We have made
enormous inroads into hunger over recent decades, but
all those gains are rolling back.
Climate change, the coronavirus disease pandemic
and conflict have combined to create a hunger and
humanitarian crisis greater than anything we have
seen in recent years. Most recently, we are seeing
how President Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is directly
accelerating that trend. And let me be clear — Russia’s
invasion is to blame, not the sanctions.
Russia’s unjustifiable invasion of Ukraine is many
things. It is a naked act of aggression by a nuclear
Power against a neighbouring country. It is a blatant
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. It has also been the greatest shock
to global food systems — already fragile — in the
past 12 years. In attacking one of the breadbaskets of
the world and seeking to cut off Ukraine’s economy,
Russia is destroying Ukraine’s capacity to supply the
world with food. It is blockading Ukrainian ports,
displacing farmers and workers, ravaging its farmlands
and attacking civilian infrastructure on a massive
scale. Russia’s reckless actions are leading directly
to skyrocketing commodity prices and inflation.
That makes them a direct concern to every Member
represented here.
In my discussions yesterday with the SecretaryGeneral and with World Food Programme Executive
Director David Beasley, I was impressed by the ongoing
efforts to create a humanitarian sea corridor for food.
There is no time to waste. Canada is ready to help in
2/51

19/05/2022

making sure that Ukrainian grain gets out of Ukraine
to those who really need it.
Turning to the wider issue, we know that food
insecurity and conflict are part of a vicious cycle.
Conflict leads to hunger, while underinvestment in
agriculture and high food prices can cause political
unrest and conflict. We must act quickly to save millions
of lives. We must act in accordance with resolution 2417
(2018), which condemns the starvation of civilians as a
tactic in warfare, and resolution 2573 (2021), to protect
civilians and the goods and supplies that are essential
to their survival.
In the face of historic and untenable levels of
food insecurity, last year Canada contributed more
than $380 million to emergency food and nutrition
assistance. Since 2020 we have spent approximately
$1 billion per year in gender-responsive humanitarian
assistance to address rising global needs. We responded
to the call to action from partners and friends in Africa,
the Middle East and Asia, and we will continue to
support multilateral solutions.
(spoke in French)
Our partners can continue to count on Canada. We
are already doing a great deal, but we must and will do
more. Yesterday I spoke about what Canada can also
do directly, and I reiterate today before the Council, as
a major cereals exporter, that we are going to export
them. We hope that that the season will be better than
last year’s and that Mother Nature will be generous.
We are one of the leaders in the manufacture of
potash. Several of those present here have already asked
to receive some, and we will do everything we can to
send it to them, because we know how vital fertilizers
are currently.
We also must tackle both hunger and conflict. We
need to implement long-term solutions that break the
vicious cycle of poverty, hunger and conflict. We know
what needs to be done to fix the weaknesses of our
global food systems. We need to invest in climate-smart
agricultural solutions.
My grandparents were wheat farmers and millers,
and I know how important it is to take care of our land.
We must also strengthen our social security safety
nets and promote healthy and nutritious food. It is also
important that the decision table be more inclusive.
Women’s involvement is essential in order to find
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

lasting solutions for all. To break the cycle of conflict
and food insecurity, we must absolutely include women.

that we have to ensure that Ukrainian farmers maintain
their capacity to produce.

Finally, we need all members of our society to
build more resilient and sustainable food systems. We
all have a choice to make. We need to choose to bring
an end to conflict, and we need to choose to do more to
fight hunger. For me and for Canada, the choice is clear.

Here we, as a neighbouring country, are already
contributing. We delivered 10,000 kilograms of corn
seed, as the number-two exporter thereof globally,
and 3,000 kilograms of potatoes and 500 kilograms of
sunflower seeds, as the number-five exporter globally
of sunflower seeds, to farmers in the western part of
Ukraine who had no access to seed and could not plant.
With the seeds we delivered to them, they will be able
to complete their planting operations.

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): Hungary, the country I
represent, is a neighbouring country to Ukraine, so we
are directly impacted by the war. Every minute, hour and
day of the war in Ukraine represents a security risk for
Hungary. Hungary is not only a neighbouring country
to Ukraine but also a route for migratory flows targeting
Europe, so we are also indirectly impacted by the war
along with the direct impacts, since the foreseeable
food crisis caused by the war in Ukraine could easily
lead, unfortunately, to further migratory waves.
The Hungarian people did not want this war; the
Hungarian people do not want this war. We want peace in
our neighbourhood. We all know that the war represents
a serious risk for the safe global supply of food. We all
know that limited capacities to export basic foodstuffs
from the countries at war cause a severe shortage for
fragile regions in the neighbourhood of Europe.
Looking at the statistics, 38 regions that have been
hit with starvation were the recipients of 34 per cent
of Ukrainian wheat and corn exports. We also know
that the countries suffering from the food crisis have
been the recipients of 73 per cent of wheat exports from
Russia. I guess that we are all aware of what this food
supply crisis will cause. In already fragile regions,
there will be a spread of extremist ideologies and a
growing threat of terrorism, and we all know that those
two are the major root causes of migratory flows. That
is why we believe that the international community
should make every possible effort to prevent such a
supply crisis.
According to our understanding, that prevention
could take two different directions. First, we could try
our best to bring an additional supply, from alternative
resources, to those areas that were formerly recipients
of Ukrainian and Russian exports. We do not know
whether there are enough alternative resources in the
world. There might not be, so as a second step I think

Again, reflecting on what Ms. Melanie Joly just
said, we definitely have to take into consideration
another aspect: the tremendous increase in the price
of foodstuffs globally. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) price index
has hit a record high — a 21 per cent increase within
one year, which is enormous. There is therefore a
special responsibility for Governments to ensure that
those people who are not responsible for the war in
Ukraine should not pay the price of the war. So we, the
Hungarian Government, have already acted in a timely
and efficient manner, introducing price caps on certain
food products in order to keep prices relatively under
control and also to keep inflation under control.
Last but not least, we believe that capacity-building
in countries and regions where the standards level of
the food industry is still low is extremely important.
Hungary is taking part in those efforts as well. More
than 300 experts from such countries have graduated
from Hungarian universities in the framework of a
joint scholarship programme by FAO and the Ministry
of Agriculture.
I therefore you once again, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. We are ready to take further
part in the international efforts to successfully address
the food-security challenges that are ahead of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank the United States presidency
of the Security Council for having convened today’s
open debate at the ministerial level on a matter of
vital importance to conflict prevention and the fight
against inequality.
Food insecurity, exacerbated by the negative
effects of climate change, is a major threat to peace.

22-355113/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

It risks further destabilizing fragile societies, pushing
millions of human beings into poverty, thereby fuelling
conflicts. In this respect, the issue of food security
fully deserves to be taken into consideration by the
Security Council.
We see this today in Russia’s unprovoked and
unjustified military aggression against Ukraine, which
has plunged thousands of Ukrainians into misery and
despair. By blocking millions of tons of Ukrainian
grain for export, Russia is exacerbating the food crisis
that is particularly affecting countries and populations
in fragile situations in Africa as well as the Middle
East, where harvests are already severely affected by
the combined effect of climate change, conflicts and
economic shocks. It is war that is causing the food
crisis — not the sanctions that are the consequence of
the war.
The crisis we are facing is complex and
multidimensional: a comprehensive, multi-stakeholder
and coordinated response is imperative in order to
mitigate the impact of conflict on food security and
to eventually achieve more sustainable production and
processing systems. I agree with the Secretary-General
that there should be no restrictions on food exports.
We fully subscribe to the principles of action on
global food security put forward by the Group of Seven,
and we welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to
convene a Global Crisis Response Group on Food,
Energy and Finance to identify short, medium- and
long-term solutions. Following this logic, Luxembourg
is participating in the efforts of the European Union and
the international community by taking decisive steps
to strengthen food and nutrition resilience. We support
the vital work done in this area by our humanitarian
partners, in particular the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, and we allocate at least 20 per cent of
our annual humanitarian budget to this end.
Luxembourg strongly supports multi-stakeholder
development approaches, such as the “Team Europe”
initiatives and the Global Network against Food Crises,
which are in line with the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the principle of leaving no
one behind. We remain very committed to supporting
the Sahel region, which is severely affected by food
insecurity amplified by climate change as well as by
the effects of the war in Ukraine. Through its support
4/51

19/05/2022

for development cooperation and humanitarian action,
particularly in the areas of sustainable agriculture,
water and sanitation, and through its investments in
human capital development, my country is continuing
its efforts to strengthen food resilience, preserve social
peace and, consequently, prevent conflicts in the
countries concerned.
Immediate and collective action on a global scale
is vital to avoid the largest food crisis in history and
the social, economic and political upheaval that could
ensue. The most vulnerable populations would be the
first victims, especially women and children. Hunger
must not be used as a weapon of war, neither in Ukraine
nor elsewhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Adomėnas (Lithuania): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the three Baltic
States — Estonia, Latvia, and my own country, Lithuania.
Let me start by thanking the United States for
organizing today’s open debate and the briefers for their
briefings. On behalf of our countries, I would also like
to express the gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his consistent focus on the destructive consequences of
the Russian war against Ukraine, including the threat it
poses for global food security.
This unjust and unprovoked war has, first and
foremost, caused unimaginable and immeasurable
suffering in Ukraine. The people of the city of Mariupol
have been kept under siege for almost three months.
The Russian army turned Mariupol into rubble, leaving
thousands dead and depriving the city of food, water,
electricity, and medical assistance.
The starving of civilians and the unlawful denial
of humanitarian access as methods of warfare are
prohibited by international humanitarian law and
were condemned by resolution 2417 (2018) adopted
unanimously by the Security Council in 2018. Yet
the Russian Federation, a permanent member of the
Council, behaves as if it were above the law.
The Azovstal steel plant became the final holdout
and a symbol of resilience in the face of seemingly
insurmountable odds. We welcome the life-saving
humanitarian action of the United Nations on the
ground at the Azovstal complex, which helped to escort
hundreds of civilians who had taken refuge in the plant
to safety.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The effects of Russia’s war are reaching beyond
Europe. If Russia does not stop this war, the rise in food
insecurity in 2022 and beyond could be catastrophic,
and with far reaching consequences. Russia blames the
consequences of the war it itself started on sanctions.
This is a very poor attempt to distract attention and is
inherently false.
Hunger and conflict are tragically interlinked. The
Sahel region and East Africa have already reported
alarming increases in levels of food insecurity. After
his recent travels to West Africa, the SecretaryGeneral reported that the worldwide implications of
this war are now in full view. UNICEF emphasizes the
vulnerability of children in the Middle East and North
Africa. Not sanctions, but Russia’s war on Ukraine is
what is causing these devastating effects.
Russia is systematically targeting all aspects
of Ukraine’s agriculture: fields, farm equipment,
warehouses and markets. In addition, the Russian
Federation is blocking hundreds of ships filled with
wheat in the Black Sea. We need quick and decisive
action to ensure the food supply and minimize the
effects of Russia’s war on global food markets.
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia were among the first to
propose to help the Ukrainian Government by shipping
the wheat to global markets through our ports. The
European Union is making efforts through the so-called
solidarity lanes. However, it is impossible to ensure the
same volume of exports by means other than seaports
in the immediate future. We need Russia to unblock
Ukrainian ports and restore the freedom of navigation.
We need the safe passage for grain-carrying ships to
Ukraine’s territorial waters across the Black Sea.
Keeping Ukrainian grain blocked could result in
44 million people worldwide falling into starvation,
to quote the World Food Programme. We encourage
the Security Council and the relevant United Nations
agencies to consider ways to prevent this scenario.
Furthermore, the international community must also
consider the possibility of providing assistance to
Ukraine so it can resume agricultural production and
ensure its harvest for next year. We call on the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance
to closely monitor the situation and provide consistent
reports on the effects of Russia’s war on global food
insecurity and concrete recommendations on how to
manage them in a coordinated manner.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

The international system, based on international
law, including the United Nations Charter, must not
tolerate deliberate attacks on global agricultural supply
chains and global food markets. That is exactly what
Russia is doing by intentionally crippling Ukraine’s
agricultural sector and blocking exports.
Finally, allow me to reiterate that Lithuania,
Latvia and Estonia firmly stand for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We
stand for accountability. We stand for humanity. We
will do everything we can to support Ukraine in its
fight to defend the rules-based international order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Odawara (Japan): I would like to thank the
United States for convening this important meeting,
as well as the Secretary-General and others for
their briefings.
Japan attaches great importance to the achievement
of global food security in realizing a “society where no
one is left behind”, reflecting the philosophy of human
security, which Japan regards as an important pillar
of its foreign policy. This meeting is timely given the
dramatic deterioration of global food security caused
by Russia’s unprovoked and unjustifiable aggression
against Ukraine.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which has
exacerbated food security globally, infringes upon
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
shakes the very foundations of the international
order, which do not tolerate any unilateral change of
the status quo by force. Russia has targeted critical
civilian infrastructure, including that for agricultural
production, transportation and storage, in clear denial
of commitments made by the Security Council, such
as in resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021). Japan is
gravely concerned by such attacks and condemns them
in the strongest terms.
Japan stresses the importance of the following
three points as rapid responses to the deteriorating
global food security.
First, the international community must work
together to expand emergency food assistance, especially
in the severely affected Middle East and Africa. As
a consistent partner of the World Food Programme,
on 10 May Japan decided to extend $10 million in
emergency grant aid in response to the food crisis in

22-355115/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Yemen, where the humanitarian situation could further
deteriorate due to the impact of rising food prices
caused by the situation in Ukraine. The provision of
food aid to Sri Lanka will also be decided shortly. Japan
will continue to work with the international community
to closely consider the necessary measures.
Secondly, it is important to treat Ukrainian grain
exports as a humanitarian issue and create political
momentum to enable the smooth export of food to those
in need. Japan advocates for that approach and for the
establishment of a humanitarian food passage, which
would facilitate such exports. We would like to call on
the countries concerned, including Russia, to restore
the international distribution of Ukrainian food.
Lastly, it is important to ensure that measures that
disrupt the global food trade and affect global food
insecurity, such as export restrictions and excessive
hoarding, not be taken. In that connection, it should be
agreed at next month’s Ministerial Conference of the
World Trade Organization that food procurement for
humanitarian aid by international organizations should
not be subject to export restrictions.
Japan is determined to continue to make every
effort, in cooperation with the international community,
to address the negative impact of conflict on global
food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.
Mr. Bùcaro Flores (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the Government of Guatemala, allow me to
congratulate the United States of America on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and on the initiative to convene this open debate on
conflict and food security, which is an event of great
importance, as it is an issue that, in our view, can
constitute a threat to international peace and security
if it is not addressed in a timely manner. I also take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General and
the representatives of the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) for their briefings, which highlighted
the alarming situation of world hunger.
I wish to begin by expressing my country’s deep
concern about the impact of the Russian Federation’s
aggression against the sovereign territory of Ukraine,
which represents a flagrant violation of the founding
Charter of the Organization and is exacerbating
6/51

19/05/2022

the humanitarian and human rights situation in the
world, as well as having devastating consequences
for the economy and the already record levels of food
insecurity. We reaffirm our strong condemnation of that
unjustified attack, and we express our support for the
Ukrainian people and Government, while advocating
respect for life, peace, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and, in particular, internationally recognized borders.
We therefore call on the Security Council to
uphold international obligations under international
law, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We particularly call for compliance
with resolution 2417 (2018) and article 8 (2) (b) (xxv)
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which set out all the necessary provisions on the use of
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, as well
as the illegal denial of humanitarian access, as both are
considered war crimes.
Our fight against hunger must not stop. As a country
that is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change,
Guatemala underwent a severe hurricane season, lack of
rainfall, drought and crop failures during the pandemic.
That which affects poverty levels and household food
security and drives irregular migration.
In that regard, Guatemala makes an urgent
appeal to address the hunger crisis as a priority of
the international agenda. It is necessary to protect the
most vulnerable and act immediately to save lives,
especially in emergency, disaster and crisis situations,
by implementing humanitarian actions focused on
building more resilient communities and pooling
efforts to ensure a global food supply.
We believe it of the utmost importance that the
Security Council support early-warning systems to
provide Governments and humanitarian actors with
timely, reliable, accurate and verifiable information to
prevent and mitigate the effects of a food crisis in the
context of armed conflict.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiative to establish the Global Response Crisis
Group on Food, Energy and Finance, which brings
together relevant members of the United Nations
system, including the Security Council. We support the
recommendations of FAO on keeping trade in food and
agricultural goods open, diversifying food supplies,
boosting local production and expanding social safety
nets. Furthermore, we recall that it is necessary to
follow up on the Food Systems Summit and support
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

the implementation of the voluntary commitments
emanating from it, in which our country played a highly
active role.
I conclude by expressing the commitment of the
President of the Republic of Guatemala, Mr. Alejandro
Giammattei Falla, to prioritizing the protection of the
life and health of the population, ensuring respect for
all human beings and promoting international efforts
that are aligned with our national priorities in the fight
against malnutrition and hunger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Ohlsson (Sweden): I will try to use my time
wisely. We do not have a single minute to waste in
halting the triple food, energy and financing crisis. My
remarks are made on behalf of the five Nordic countries.
Four years ago, almost to the day, Sweden and three
other elected Security Council members put forward
resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict and hunger, which
condemns the use of starvation as a method of warfare.
The world was alarmed by the threat of famine and the
74 million people facing crisis-level food insecurity, or
worse. Since then, the number has almost quadrupled
to a staggering 275 million people. A majority of them
live in areas of conflict, and, as always, women and
children bear the brunt of the burden. If that is not
argument enough for seriously stepping up our efforts,
I am not sure what would be.
With the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
supported by Belarus, the situation has deteriorated
further. I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the other briefers both for making that very clear and
for the work that they and their colleagues have been
doing to alleviate the situation, often under extremely
challenging circumstances.
The actions needed are both immediate and
systemic. The skyrocketing humanitarian needs across
almost all continents must be met with increased
humanitarian funding. The humanitarian response
plans for countries such as Somalia, Burkina Faso,
Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are only 5 to 15 per cent funded. Regrettably, the list of
underfunded crises runs even longer. And those are not
merely statistics but a question of life and death. Those
underfunded, protracted crises create fertile ground for
shocks to escalate into full-blown crises.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Life-saving assistance must reach people in need.
Safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access must
be ensured, and respect for humanitarian principles
must be guaranteed. Equally urgent are measures to
increase the supply of food. Russia must immediately
allow the export of grain stuck in silos in Ukraine,
which is enough to feed millions. Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified military aggression against Ukraine
must stop. That is necessary for Ukraine to restart
its agricultural production and exports. In all parts
of the world, agricultural production systems should
be developed to become sustainable and resilient to
escalating climate change.
Similarly, there is an urgent need to end violent
conflict everywhere. Building and sustaining peace
improves conditions for smallholder farmers to access
land, for communities to grow crops and diversify
their livelihoods and for investment in sustainable and
inclusive food systems, enabling agriculture to thrive
rather than be destroyed. It contributes to ensuring
access to basic services and universal access to
social protection. Adequately financed peacebuilding
can enhance food security and ensure longer-term
development. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
work on the New Agenda for Peace and stand ready to
contribute to its implementation.
Finally, the Nordic countries welcome the
recommendations made in the report of the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.
We stand ready to engage in that regard, including
through the Danish Prime Minister, who is one of
the Champions of the Group. All of our countries
will co-sponsor General Assembly draft resolution
A/76/L.55, entitled “State of global food insecurity”.
We agree that this triple crisis can be addressed only
collectively and multilaterally. International financial
institutions, humanitarian actors, local peacebuilders,
regional organizations, the private sector, the scientific
community, the United Nations as a whole and all
of us Member States — all have roles to play and
responsibilities to shoulder. I would therefore like to
conclude by thanking you, Mr. President, for bringing
us together today to commit to doing more together. We
really need to do so, and we have no time to spare.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Matušić (Croatia): I would like to thank the
United States for organizing this open debate. I also

22-355117/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

thank the briefers for the information that they have
provided today. It is important for the Security Council
to keep this matter high on its agenda.
Croatia is deeply concerned about the current state
of global food security and of malnutrition. According
to the World Food Programme, conflict, climate shocks,
the economic consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the spiralling cost of food and energy
could drive at least 50 million people to the edge of
famine this year. Conflict is the single-most important
driver of hunger, with 60 per cent of the world’s hungry
people living in areas affected by conflict and violence.
The unprovoked war in Ukraine adds yet another
dimension and has already resulted in serious global
implications. Ukraine and the Russian Federation are
both critical to global food systems. Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine has led to a dramatic surge in food,
fertilizer and energy prices, with incalculable human
consequences being felt most notably in societies that
are already exhausted by conflict.
As we continue to provide full support to Ukraine
and Ukrainians, we must also consider the global impact
of the war. In that regard, we welcome the preliminary
recommendations of the Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, established by the
Secretary-General.
Conflict and hunger are mutually reinforcing; food
insecurity fuels conflict, and conflict exacerbates food
insecurity. Generations can remain prisoners of that
vicious circle. The Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2417 (2018) acknowledged the link between
conflict and hunger and its impact on global peace
and security. The resolution was conceived as an
instrument to break the vicious circle of armed conflict
and food insecurity.
However, what we are missing is more efficient
action aimed at conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as ensuring accountability for the use of starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare, which is prohibited
by international humanitarian law. Croatia supports
General Assembly draft resolution A/76/L.55, on
the state of global food insecurity. In that regard, we
sincerely hope that the adoption of the draft resolution
will contribute to improving coordination among
all relevant stakeholders in support of the countries
affected by the food security crisis. Today no one needs
to go hungry. Doing nothing in the face of harm and
8/51

19/05/2022

hunger is not a sustainable option. We must take a strong
and principled stand to protect vulnerable populations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Gordón-Owen (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
The Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine is
claiming a massive number of lives, destroying critical
civilian infrastructure and causing a humanitarian crisis
on a scale not seen since the end of the Second World
War, including the internal and external displacement
of millions of people.
One of the most visible consequence of this
situation has been a rapid deterioration of food security
globally, owing to the importance of both countries as
producers and exporters of essential raw materials. Food
production, access to energy and essential agricultural
inputs have all declined significantly. Supply chains and
prices have been affected. The impact of the conflict has
spread, with the consequences being felt most strongly
by low- and middle-income developing countries and
the most vulnerable segment of populations, women
and children. There was already a critical food security
situation before the conflict emerged, in connection
with the coronavirus disease pandemic, from which we
are still recovering.
Food insecurity has deepened as a result of the
conflict. It is crucial for us to act quickly and jointly
to identify actions to strengthen food production
development in our countries, as well as financial and
technical cooperation in countries with a higher degree
of technological development in the food industry,
including in international organizations and the
private sector.
We support the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the Committee on World Food
Security in their initiatives to maintain market access
and establish mechanisms for dialogue with different
social groups as an agile way to develop joint actions to
counteract risk situations.
Four years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2417 (2018), which noted the link between
armed conflict and food insecurity. The resolution also
highlighted the importance of responding effectively
to the humanitarian needs that emerge as a result of
such situations, ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. Armed conflicts do not help efforts
to mitigate food insecurity, especially when the parties
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the conflict do not fulfil their responsibilities
with regard to the protection of civilians, ensuring
that civilians receive the care they need and that the
parties respect their obligations under the universal
instruments of human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Panama reiterates that the only way to restore
international peace and security is through dialogue
and negotiation based on respect for the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the interests of
peaceful coexistence and respect for multilateralism.
We reaffirm our support for the joint call from the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Trade Organization and the World Food Programme to
develop coordinated action to supply food and provide
financial support to increase agricultural production
and keep trade open, as well as the call of the Group
of Seven to form a global partnership for food security.
Finally, we thank the United States for convening this
much-needed open debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Alam (Bangladesh): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely open debate
on conflict and food security. I also want to thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
insightful remarks on this very important issue.
The global efforts to achieve a world without
hunger have gone seriously off track. The coronavirus
disease pandemic (COVID-19) has reversed decades
of progress. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s
most recent report on The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World provides a sobering picture.
Staggeringly, at least 720 million people in the world
faced hunger in 2020, approximately 118 million more
than in 2019. The war in Ukraine has made the situation
worse. It has disrupted exports of food grains from
Ukraine and Russia and fuelled an alarming rise in
food prices in the global market.
Nearly 14 per cent of Bangladesh’s gross domestic
product comes from the agricultural sector, which
also employs the biggest share of our labour force.
Our Government has adopted many bold policies to
transform the agricultural sector and achieve food
self-sufficiency. In turn, it has helped to promote rural
development, empower marginalized people and protect
smallholding farmers. And that has had a transformative
impact in terms of creating diversified value chains

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

in the food industry, generating employment and
eradicating poverty. My Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, is one of the Champions of the Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance, set up
by the Secretary-General. We stand ready to share our
good practices in agriculture and food security with
countries that are in a comparable situation.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
promises a hunger-free world. We must work together to
fulfil that vision and ensure that everyone everywhere
has access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food. Allow
me to share some specific thoughts in that regard.
First, we need increased investment and targeted
technology support from the developed countries in the
agricultural sector to enhance productivity and ensure
an effective food storage and distribution system. To
achieve that, it is crucial that we leverage existing
international cooperation frameworks, including
science, technology and innovation collaboration and
effective South-South and triangular cooperation.
Secondly, we need global solidarity to keep critical
food-delivery infrastructure, such as farmer’s markets
and food-processing and storage facilities, out of harm’s
way during conflicts. We encourage a cross-pillar
approach within the United Nations system involving
peace, development and humanitarian actors to advance
that agenda. The Peacebuilding Commission, with
its overarching mandate, as well as its convening and
advisory roles, can play a critical role in that regard.
Thirdly, we must create a more efficient and reliable
global food system that can deliver safe, nutritious and
affordable food for all. It is imperative for developed
countries to eliminate trade restrictions and export
subsidies in order to foster an open, functional and
rules-based trading system.
Fourthly, climate change and environmental
degradation have detrimental effects on agricultural
and nutrition sectors. It is therefore imperative to fulfil
our climate commitments with a view to creating a
more resilient agriculture and food system.
Finally, we support the provisions in resolution
2417 (2018) condemning the starvation of civilians
as a method of warfare and ensuring unimpeded
access for humanitarian personnel, including during
armed conflict. It is now more important than ever
for us to demonstrate global solidarity through real

22-355119/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

action to tackle the triple crisis of COVID-19, climate
and conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank the United States for
convening this debate as part of an important week
dedicated to this topic. We also want to thank the
briefers for their valuable contributions.
Conflicts, the climate crisis, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and soaring food and fuel prices have
created a perfect storm. Those were the words that the
World Food Programme used to sound the alarm in its
2022 Global Report on Food Crises. And this crisis
will affect us all. The number of people in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance could reach 323 million
this year. Switzerland is particularly concerned about
people living in the most precarious circumstances and
who are exposed to global market shocks.
Armed conflict remains one of the main factors
for hunger and malnutrition. The global projections
for food insecurity resulting from Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine should therefore be a greater
incentive for us to end that armed conflict and others
around the world, all of which bring death, destruction,
forced displacement and hunger. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s efforts and use of his good offices
to silence the guns. To that end, Switzerland would like
to highlight three areas for action.
First, it is urgent that we redouble our efforts,
including within the Security Council, to facilitate
humanitarian access without delay or hindrance, ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and prevent
armed conflict.
Secondly, the international community must speak
with one voice on food security. The Council has
been united on the fundamental humanitarian norms
and principles outlined in resolutions 2417 (2018) and
2573 (2021), which should be implemented in all the
situations on the Council’s agenda and translated into
legislation for all States.
We hope that next week the General Assembly will
adopt draft resolution A/76/L.55, on the state of global
food insecurity, which Switzerland has sponsored.
We also welcome the recommendations of the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
launched by the Secretary-General to respond in a
10/51

19/05/2022

coherent and coordinated manner to the consequences
suffered by the most vulnerable countries as a result
of the aggression against Ukraine. We look forward to
listening to the second briefing on local actors. Valuing
the skills of local actors, especially women and young
people, is key to addressing the causes of food crises.
Thirdly, accountability is essential for deterring
potential violators and rendering justice to victims.
The Council can now refer situations of internal or
international armed conflict to the International
Criminal Court when crimes involving famine appear
to have been committed. Switzerland encourages
the States parties to the Court to ratify the relevant
amendment and United Nations Member States to
criminalize such acts in their national legislation.
While the world produces enough food to feed
everyone, equal access to it is lacking and hostilities
and violations of international humanitarian law make
that worse. Finding political solutions to armed conflict
must be part of our overall approach to ending hunger,
ensuring that all people have access to sufficient
and adequate food and promoting resilient, inclusive
and sustainable food systems. As a candidate for the
Security Council, my country remains committed to
preventing and resolving conflicts in order to break the
vicious cycle of hunger and armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the United States
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and thank it for convening this important
open debate.
Food security is one of the major challenges facing
the Middle East, particularly in the light of the ongoing
conflicts, which are worsening human suffering and
hampering access to food and medicines. In addition,
these conflicts greatly hamper humanitarian agencies
and make it difficult for them to access people in need.
The issues of food security and conflict are closely
interlinked. Therefore, they need solutions based on
a coordinated international approach for preventing
a global food shortage crisis, which could occur if
we are not prepared to face upcoming epidemics
and challenges.
The repercussions of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic have led to a significant rise in
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

food insecurity, particularly in the poorest and most
vulnerable countries. There are also a number of serious
challenges facing food security that existed before, such
as climate change, potable water shortages throughout
the world, global economic crises, regional troubles
and an unprecedented migratory crisis worldwide.
All of that has affected food supply for refugees and
vulnerable communities alike, a challenge that is wellknown in Jordan.
The crisis in Ukraine has revealed the extent
to which the food security situation and the supply
chains are also weak. It has also multiplied the already
existing difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic in
the world, particularly in the Middle East. Indeed, the
effects of the pandemic have multiplied and affected the
economic performance and social welfare of countries
in the region, especially because of an increase in food
prices, particularly for wheat and grain, and an increase
in local production costs in the agricultural sector.
A World Bank report has also explained that
this crisis will have disastrous repercussions on
certain countries if humanitarian and development
aid is not increased. It is worth noting that, while the
Middle East represents only 6 per cent of the world’s
population, the region is home to 20 per cent of people
facing acute food insecurity. It is necessary that food
security be addressed in volatile and conflict situations
where certain factors are intertwined and hamper
development, such as reducing the risks of conflicts,
strengthening social cohesion and developing the
private sector and the job market. That would further
improve food security. It is also necessary to focus on
climate change while also working to address the threat
of global food shortages, which has been a permanent
threat since the pandemic began.
Jordan’s agrifood sector provides sustenance for
about quarter of the population, and it is also one of the
largest sources of employment for refugees and women
in rural communities. Since the beginning of the
pandemic, that sector has been heavily involved in the
global supply chain, and thanks to greater investment
and improved technology, there is a possibility for it to
expand significantly. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
reiterates its readiness to employ all its capabilities in
food and pharmaceuticals sectors to become a regional
hub for supply and storage.
In conclusion, we cannot return to a pre-COVID-19
situation. We should seize this opportunity to build a

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

better, more efficient and more united global system.
We must work together to promote the adoption of
sustainable farming technology. In turn, that could
increase the resilience of our global food systems in
order to ensure access, reduce costs and improve
quality, while also protecting our environment. We
also need to protect the resilience of supply chains and
support developing countries in these efforts. Farmers
in developing countries must be supported so that they
can access better funding and training to serve their
communities. We must cooperate to address all the
drivers of food insecurity, namely, conflict, climate
change, poverty and inequality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Ms. Ache Batlle (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay welcomes this opportunity to consider the
relationship between armed conflict and food crises,
as well as the possible measures to be taken by the
international community to alleviate the circumstances
that we all currently face. Nevertheless, we must
not forget the health and economic crises that the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused,
from which we have yet to recover. In addition to that,
we must also take into account the conflicts persisting
in various parts of the world, especially in the Middle
East and various parts of Africa, as well as the recent
conflict in Ukraine, which has caused unprecedented
upheavals in global supply chains and trade relations
between countries, testing the limits of global food
supply lines.
Uruguay views that situation from the point of
view of a food exporting country. With a population
of 3.5 million people, our country produces food for
approximately 30 million people and trades with more
than 160 countries around the world. And since we
produce significant amounts of certain foods among
global suppliers, we can therefore contribute to
mitigating the effects of the world food crisis through
our exports.
Most significantly, as a result of the COVID-19
crisis and the conflicts I have mentioned, especially
the one between Russia and Ukraine, there have been
disruptions in food and fertilizer supply chains, and
food commodities prices, especially those of grains,
have increased exponentially, endangering both food
security and sustainable development. Rising prices
and supply chain problems put at risk countries that

22-3551111/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

depend on imports to meet their food needs and create
situations of extreme vulnerability for those that
depend on food aid. Moreover, although the current
situation may favour exporting countries, to respond to
the rising prices resulting primarily from higher fuel
and fertilizer costs, they may have to alter their public
policies to increase production costs — mainly due to
fuel and fertilizer costs — in order to control inflation
and its impact on people’s purchasing power.
According to the most recent report of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
submitted to our Organization on 27 April, several
countries in our region share the same challenges. In
that regard, we believe it is imperative that we deepen
international cooperation, whether North-South,
South-South or triangular cooperation, so that together
we can prevent the food crisis and hunger in general
from worsening and enable the free flow of food around
the world.
Facing this crisis will require us to take every
necessary effort to put an end to ongoing situations of
conflict, especially through the appropriate use of the
mechanisms and powers of the Security Council. But
it will also require that all countries act collectively
to keep trade flows for food and other supplies open,
keep supply chains running and avoid applying
sanctions and banning trade, while also working in
cooperation with the entire international community
and the international financial institutions to provide
the necessary assistance to developing countries in the
direst circumstances.
Regarding my point about keeping trade open, in
terms of policy, history has taught us that resorting to
applying trade restrictions exacerbates situations and
leads to deeper economic and political crises. That
is what happened in the 1930s and on several other
occasions during other periods. Our region of Latin
America and the Caribbean has resorted on several
occasions to such policies and the outcomes were
tremendously negative in terms of the development and
welfare of our populations. We must therefore learn
from our past experiences and not repeat them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Starvation and
hunger have no place in today’s world. Some seven
decades after the Charter of the United Nations
committed us to better standards of life and greater
12/51

19/05/2022

freedom for all, humankind has the technological and
financial means to help ensure better food security, but
that has been difficult to achieve.
That is, in part, because we live in a time marked by
compounded crises, with food insecurity being just one
of them. Global food prices are being pushed upwards
as a result of rising agricultural prices, in tandem with
rising energy costs; the challenges of climate change
and their impact on the environment, including water
scarcity; trade disruptions owing to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic; and geopolitical
tensions and conflict in various parts of the world.
That has impaired food security and is jeopardizing the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The most affected countries are low-income, fooddeficit countries, and the most vulnerable groups are
women and children, particularly girls.
As several delegations mentioned earlier, 1.7 billion
people in 170 economies are severely exposed to one
of the three crises, including rising food prices, as
referred to by the Secretary-General. Meanwhile, the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations have identified
organized violence and conflict as the primary drivers
of hunger, both in hunger hotspots and globally, with
weather extremes, including drought and floods, being
another driver.
Against that backdrop, Thailand believes that some
actions could be considered as part of multi-stakeholder
efforts to help ensure better food security. Those
actions are anchored on three ideas: sustainability,
supply chains and science and technology.
The first idea is to take action on sustainability
by encouraging sustainable agriculture and food
production in order to generate sufficient food supplies
for the long term, both regionally and globally. As one
of the world’s leading food producers, Thailand pursues
a food strategy based on food safety, food security, the
sustainability of natural resources and agroecology.
That is part of our bio-circular-green economic
model, which seeks to promote sustainable, balanced
and inclusive growth and development. And because
sustainable development with food security is so
critical to sustainable peacebuilding, our peacekeeping
contingents provide training in sustainable agriculture
to local communities.
The second idea is to take action on supply chains,
promoting secure and resilient global and regional
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

supply chains and distribution channels, especially
for agricultural and food products. An economic
landscape conducive to such supply chains is necessary
to promote world food security. The relevant rules and
regulations under multilateral trade forums need to be
more supportive and facilitative towards international
trade in food products. Meanwhile, in countries and
regions affected by disaster and conflict, priority
should be given to transporting humanitarian supplies,
including food, to people in affected areas. And as
some delegations have mentioned, food should not be
part of United Nations sanctions.
The third idea is to take action by mobilizing science
and technology to help increase supplies, improve food
storage and minimize food waste. To that end, leading
Thai food companies, academic institutions and local
farmers have been cooperating with international
partners to develop alternative seafood and meats,
including plant-based proteins, which have high-feed
conversion efficiency, emit relatively few greenhouse
gases and have innovative storage capabilities.
International cooperation in that area should be
further advanced. An example of that is the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations-United States Special
Summit, recently concluded in Washington, D.C., at
which partners committed to enhancing collaboration
in both precision and climate-smart farming, smart
agriculture and food science, among other things.
In conclusion, it is vital to enhance practical,
regional and multilateral cooperation, backed by strong
political will. That is why today’s Security Council
meeting is so timely. We commend the United States
announcement this morning on increasing its food
assistance. Thailand therefore looks forward to the
General Assembly’s adoption of a draft resolution to
address global food insecurity in the near future.
For all those reasons, as host economy of the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC) this
year, Thailand is committed to achieving APEC’s goal
of sufficient, safe, nutritious, accessible and affordable
food for all through the APEC food security road map
and developing an implementation plan in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): I wish to start by thanking
the United States for initiating this critical discussion
on conflict and food security. I would also like to

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their remarks.
In adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we collectively committed to ending
hunger and all forms of malnutrition. Yet multiple
integrated factors have caused serious setbacks. Among
them are the pandemic and related economic shocks,
the climate crisis and extreme weather conditions,
armed conflicts and now the war in Ukraine.
In adopting resolution 2417 (2018), the Security
Council recognized for the first time the inherent
connection between conflict and food insecurity. Since
then, that resolution’s effective implementation remains
essential, particularly in humanitarian settings such as
in Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan and parts of Africa and
in Ukraine.
Figures speak loud and clear in each setting. In
Syria, the humanitarian situation is as grave as ever.
Some 14.6 million people across the country are in
need of humanitarian assistance. The use of starvation
continues to be a frequent tactic of war in Syria. For
too long, the Syrian regime has left civilians without
access to food and made them suffer. Under those
conditions, the United Nations cross-border mechanism
has proven to be a life-saving instrument. The members
of the Security Council have a job to do: renewing the
Council’s mandate on Syria. The Council should take
action to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
Food insecurity in parts of Afghanistan has also
reached catastrophic levels. Almost 20 million Afghans
are facing high levels of acute food insecurity, according
to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. Conflict remains the primary underlying
driver of hunger in Yemen. Some 17.4 million people in
the country are now in need of food assistance. Across
Yemen, 2.2 million children are acutely malnourished.
Members can imagine what that means for the future
of that country. As many as 15 million people in the
Horn of Africa suffer from severe drought and need
life-saving assistance.
And now, with the war in Ukraine the world is
faced with a severe crisis. Our position is clear and
firm: this war is an unjustified, illegal and illegitimate
act of aggression against a founding Member of the
Organization and a blatant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, and it needs to end.

22-3551113/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Since the outbreak of the war, we have been working
on two tracks, the first of which involves actively
supporting efforts to ease the humanitarian situation.
We are working together with the United Nations on
establishing a humanitarian contact group.
The second track involves facilitating the efforts
for a negotiated settlement. Unfortunately, the atrocities
in Bucha, Irpin and Mariupol have complicated the
diplomatic process. The momentum has been lost, but
the talks have not fully collapsed. We cannot give up on
the hope of peace. Diplomatic channels need to remain
open. Keeping dialogue alive is necessary to save lives
and prevent further destruction.

19/05/2022

most to leverage science and technology to innovate
our way out of food insecurity.
Fifthly, the international community must place
global food security at the top of its agenda. That is
why we welcome today’s initiative. We also welcome
and will co-sign the new global initiative that the
United States launched yesterday. We will continue to
back inclusive and multilateral efforts to find solutions
to the worsening crisis. We have been supportive of
the Group of 20 multilateral declaration as well as the
Food Systems Summit. We also welcome the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
established by the Secretary-General.

The war in Ukraine is likely to lead to significant
import shocks and disruption of global agricultural
supply chains, further driving up food prices. Fortyfive African countries import at least one third of their
wheat from Ukraine or Russia, while 18 of them import
more than half their wheat from those two countries. If
the war drags on, many countries will face immediate
food shortages, and we will all be affected by the rising
food prices. And that is why we are discussing with
the World Food Programme and United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs how to
move forward on the passage of ships carrying grain
out of Ukraine.

Finally, we support the strengthening of financial
and in-kind assistance mechanisms for the benefit of
vulnerable countries and conflict areas. Yesterday
Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey, announced a package of measures in support
of the Global Food Security Call to Action. Turkey will
continue to work to strengthen peace and eradicate
global food insecurity. We look forward to working with
our partners on delivering what needs to be delivered as
the international community.

Ongoing armed conflicts are a major cause of the
current risks of famine. Global food insecurity, for its
part, is planting the seeds for destabilization and unrest
across the globe. We need to find ways to break this
vicious circle.

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Allow me, at the outset,
to express my delegation’s deep appreciation for the
initiative of the United States, current President of the
Security Council, to hold this high-level open debate on
conflict and food security. Egypt is fully cognizant of
the severe impact that hunger and the failure to achieve
food security have on human livelihoods as well as their
contribution to the increased risk of conflict, especially
in countries that suffer from economic vulnerability.
Hence, we stress the strong and deep links between
food security and conflict.

First, we need to pursue all possible avenues of
diplomacy to prevent and end armed conflicts. Turkey,
with its trademark role in mediation for peace, aims to
do just that.
Secondly, we need to respond to humanitarian
needs, including through effective measures to combat
conflict-driven food insecurity. That requires respect
for international humanitarian law and unhindered
humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, we need to ensure transparency
in agricultural commodity flows and combat
protectionism. Preventing speculative food prices in
marketing and trade and supporting the continuation of
supply chains will be essential.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the agricultural
capabilities of the countries facing hunger. We want
14/51

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

The world is currently witnessing an unprecedented
food insecurity crisis as a result of our failure to achieve
Sustainable Development Goal 2, on ending hunger.
That failure was exacerbated by the implications of
the coronavirus disease pandemic as well as conflicts.
Failure to achieve food security and end hunger will
pose a threat to the security and stability of countries
and will further fuel ongoing conflicts.
The challenges of achieving food security are further
deepened by other factors, such as the ongoing impacts
of climate change, which exacerbate risks related to
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

energy production, food security, the availability of
water, economic development and social inequalities.
Water scarcity in several regions in the world, especially
in Africa, has a severe impact on agricultural activities
and on efforts to achieve food security.
In the light of what I just mentioned, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, it is important to address the challenges facing
countries affected by, and emerging from, conflict.
Special attention should be paid to food security and
providing health care to the civilian population, based
on the principles of international humanitarian law
and in accordance with national sovereignty. It is also
important to ensure access to food aid for the civilian
population in conflict areas and to protect them from the
risk of famine, including through the provision of food
for forcibly displaced persons. We would also stress, in
that regard, the responsibility of the Security Council to
protect civilians at risk from armed conflicts, including
the risk of famine.
Secondly, the United Nations system plays an
important role. The Security Council should develop
a proactive approach that enhances early-warning
capabilities to monitor the regions that are most
vulnerable to famine resulting from armed conflict.
In that connection, we would like to highlight the
importance of resolution 2417 (2018), which requests the
Secretary-General to report swiftly to the Council when
the risk of conflict-induced famine and wide-spread
food insecurity in armed conflict contexts occurs.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight that Egypt is
the most densely populated water-scarce country in
the world. Currently, water scarcity affects 2.5 billion
people around the globe, and it is expected that
climate change will result in putting half of the world’s
population under severe water stress conditions by
2050. Moreover, water scarcity could displace up to
700 million people by 2030. Those figures are clear
proof of the negative impacts of water scarcity on
peace and security, the achievement of sustainable
development and the fulfilment of human rights. In
that context, we urge the international community to
address the needs of the most vulnerable water-scarce
countries and promote transboundary cooperation, in
accordance with the applicable international law, to
preserve water for life, agriculture, peace and security.
Fourthly, food security and conflict must be
addressed in a holistic and comprehensive approach

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

that takes into consideration humanitarian and
development factors. Immediate action must be taken
to alleviate hunger, while also implementing plans to
assist developing countries, especially food-importing
developing countries, in achieving food security
through sustainable agriculture.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgency
of addressing the challenges of food security and its
direct linkage to conflicts in a comprehensive approach
that aims to achieve the sustainable development of
developing countries while at the same time ensuring
their stability and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Mr. Antony Blinken, Secretary of State of the
United States of America, for having convened this
important meeting on conflict and food security during
the United States presidency of the Security Council.
The interest of the Kingdom of Morocco in the issue
of international peace and security, the eradication of
hunger and the promotion of sustainable agriculture
emanates from a keen awareness of the challenges posed
by food insecurity throughout the world, in particular
on the African continent, as clearly stipulated in
resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict and food insecurity.
Currently, more than 800 million people throughout
the world suffer every day from food scarcity, and in
Africa one out of every five individuals is affected by
malnutrition — more than 281 million Africans. Thirty
years from now, the African continent will have to
feed double its current population. Unfortunately, the
continent continues to import more than $43 billion in
net food products every year and remains dependent on
imports to feed its growing population.
Food insecurity is also exacerbated by the effects
of the coronavirus disease, climate change and armed
conflict, which have a real impact on food supply
chains at the global level. That situation has resulted in
increased prices in international markets and has major
consequences for the stability of the most vulnerable
countries, since the scarcity of resources and sudden
increases in food prices fuel civil unrest. A sustainable
change in the global food and agriculture system is
necessary if we want to be able to feed the 800 million
people who suffer from hunger today, and the 2 billion
additional people who will be undernourished by 2050.

22-3551115/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is also our responsibility to prevent conflict
that might break out as a consequence of hunger and
disruptions in food supply chains. In that regard, the
Kingdom of Morocco has always invested in agriculture,
specifically through South-South cooperation in
Africa, which is home to more than half of the world’s
non-cultivated arable land. Under the direction of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, my country continues to
strengthen its development strategy, the Green Morocco
Plan, which was launched more than a decade ago.
Food insecurity is a strategic priority for Morocco and
lies at the heart of our new 2035 development model. A
series of sectoral strategies, specifically the Generation
Green 2020-2030 plan and the national blue economy
strategy, also buttress that ambition.
Moreover, Africa has a young population and a vast
continental market of more than 1 billion people. In that
regard, we support the African free-trade zone, which
has the potential to stimulate food product exchange
among African countries at lowest cost, improve
agricultural revenues, foster agroindustry and develop
agricultural industry in Africa.
The Moroccan approach heralds an integrated
method of rural socioeconomic development and
investment in agriculture, a sector that generates
tremendous opportunities for wealth creation and the
employment of young people and women. In order to
strengthen resilience, there is a vital need to invest in
sustainable food systems and foster new opportunities
for female farmers and young people in this sector.
Strengthening the agricultural sector can generate
employment, strengthen self-sufficiency, stimulate
local production and ensure food security and
sovereignty within each national context.
In that regard, Morocco has signed more than 38
agreements and conventions in the agricultural area
with 18 brotherly African countries. The partnerships
recently launched with Ethiopia and Nigeria for the
production of natural fertilizers are testament to that.
My country has initiated rich and diversified
triangular cooperation, with the support of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO). A number of tripartite agreements were signed
in that regard, specifically with Mali, Senegal, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Eswatini and Cameroon.
It was in that same vein that, during the twentysecond session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
16/51

19/05/2022

Change, the Initiative for the Adaptation of African
Agriculture to Climate Change was launched, which
to date has supported no less than seven countries in
Africa and enjoys the support of 25 African countries
as well as the Framework Convention and the FAO.
The Initiative on Sustainability, Stability and
Security, which was launched in 2016 with the Republic
of Senegal, also aims to support sustainability, stability
and security in Africa through agriculture.
More recently, Morocco and the United Nations
jointly organized the Africa regional dialogue
prior to the United Nations Food Systems Summit,
bringing together more than 40 African ministers and
decision-makers to shed light on priorities, opportunities
and paths of action for a successful transformation of
food systems in Africa in a manner that reflects the
constrained global context.
In conclusion, Morocco remains convinced that
innovative partnerships in this area can help to deepen
and build promising synergies. Effective cooperation
among the United Nations, Member States and the
private sector is vital if we wish to achieve that
goal. It is through innovative partnerships among
all those stakeholders that we can aspire to eradicate
hunger throughout the world, strengthen agricultural
sovereignty within countries, generate quality food
locally, effectively and sustainably, and confront the
multiple, interdependent challenges to food security
and international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Food insecurity and conflict are inextricably linked.
Disruption in supply chains, mass displacement of
people, increased pressure on limited natural and
economic resources and decreased resilience of affected
populations constitute long-term effects of conflicts.
According to the Global Report on Food Crises for
2022, acute food insecurity has increased significantly
over the past six years. In 2021, nearly 193 million people
in 53 countries were acutely food insecure and in need
of immediate assistance, including nearly 40 million
people in 36 countries who were in emergency or worse
conditions. According to the same report, conflict is
still the leading cause of food insecurity for 139 million
people in 24 countries who faced a crisis or worsening
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

conditions in 2021. Those figures point to a rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation around the world.
Food insecurity, climate change, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the negative effects of various
international conflicts all affect many countries,
including Iran, which has also been suffering from
United States sanctions for more than four decades.
Furthermore, hosting several million refugees has put
a strain on Iran’s economy, including its food supply. It
is incumbent upon the United Nations, the international
community and international donors to honour their
commitments and provide refugees based in Iran with
the required technical and financial assistance.
The entire world is being affected by food shortages;
however, there is no doubt that Africa is suffering very
much from food insecurity.
Let me say a few words about the situation of
food security in our region. In Afghanistan, there
are 22 million people who are food insecure and in
desperate need of assistance. Iran is collaborating with
international organizations to address Afghanistan’s
specific food security situation. Under the current
challenging
circumstances,
the
international
community is expected to assist the Afghan people in
overcoming its current difficulties.
In another hotspot in our region, acute food
insecurity in Yemen worsened in early 2022, with
an 8 per cent increase in the number of people in
need as compared to early 2021. Equally important
is the humanitarian situation in Palestine, which has
deteriorated due to decades of occupation and apartheid
policies under the Israeli regime. The illegal blockade
of Gaza, which severely limits the Palestinian people’s
right to food, must be lifted as soon as possible.
In Syria, continuing occupation, terrorism and
unilateral sanctions have displaced millions of people,
disrupted trade and the supply of food and agricultural
inputs, damaged infrastructure and limited access to
vital resources.
Unilateral coercive measures violate basic human
rights, including the right to food, resulting in food
insecurity. Unfortunately, certain States continue to use
those unlawful actions, prohibited under international
humanitarian law, as a weapon to starve the population
of targeted countries. We believe that food supply and
chain processes must not be disrupted in any way, even
during armed conflicts.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

In that context, full adherence to international law,
particularly the 1949 Geneva Conventions, is essential.
Furthermore, United Nations sanctions should not be
imposed in such a way as to jeopardize global food
security. All parties to a conflict must respect and
protect all medical and humanitarian personnel. When
providing humanitarian assistance, the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
must also be observed.
Finally, we support the efforts and leadership of the
United Nations in addressing the problems related to
food insecurity. We stand ready to assist in those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely open debate on
conflict and food security.
The growing attention being paid to this issue is
indeed justified. Food insecurity is at an all-time high,
and the number of people requiring urgent life-saving
food assistance is rising at an alarming rate. On a planet
where we have enough food to feed everyone, last year
193 million people were considered as being in crisis
or as having a more serious food security designation
by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
Liechtenstein is particularly concerned about socalled hunger hotspots, including Yemen, Nigeria,
South Sudan and Ethiopia, as well as the many countries
at risk of an acute hunger crisis. Without concerted
action, the devastating impact of hunger will soon be
felt by millions more people.
The war in Ukraine continues to have devastating
humanitarian consequences, not only for the people
of Ukraine and of the region but indeed around the
globe. The people of Ukraine, one of the world’s largest
food producers, have seen their lives and livelihoods
destroyed. And although Ukraine’s grain silos are
full, as reported by the World Food Programme, their
supplies cannot reach the millions of people worldwide
who depend on them.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Group of Seven to highlight the urgency of the
issue and hope for a solution that unblocks food supplies
while guaranteeing the safety of the port of Odesa. In
addition to this acute crisis, the massive displacement
and destruction of infrastructure, as well as rising grain

22-3551117/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and fertilizer prices, are disrupting Ukraine’s planting
season, which will lead to even more catastrophic food
shortages in the future.
The unprovoked, unacceptable aggression against
Ukraine must end immediately, and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions must be implemented,
including with regard to the immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Russian military
forces from the territory of Ukraine as a matter of
urgent priority.
Food insecurity is also a crisis in the area of the
protection of civilians. While hunger is an appalling
side effect of many armed conflicts, it is in fact often
not just that. Starving people, and civilian populations
in particular, into submission has become a shocking
pattern of warfare. The intentional starvation of civilians
is a grave violation of international humanitarian law
and must be prosecuted as a war crime, including
through the International Criminal Court.
The
challenges
the
world
faces
today — food insecurity, climate disaster, displacement
and conflict — are interconnected. Their causes
and effects are interlaced and felt widely. Without
immediate actions to address human contributions to
climate change, extreme weather events will become
even more frequent and bring further disruptions to
the global food supply, displacement and social and
political instability.
Relevant United Nations bodies and agencies
must work together closely to reverse those trends.
We welcome the establishment of the Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance and the
publication of its first brief. However, more holistic
action to uphold human security is needed by the
international community. This is the time to work
together urgently to ensure that no one starves today
and to achieve zero hunger by 2030, in line with the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): This debate is being held
in a particular setting, as the month of May marks the
fourth anniversary of the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 2417 (2018), which not only recognized
the link between armed conflict and conflict-induced
food insecurity, including the threat of famine, but
also enabled the Council with the tools to respond and
18/51

19/05/2022

act when conflict-induced famine or risk of famine is
taking place.
Sadly, at this time we also observe a sharp increase
in global food insecurity — a trend that threatens to even
further destabilize societies that are already fragile, as
well as to exacerbate armed conflicts and regional and
global instability. We would therefore like to thank the
presidency and the members of the Security Council for
bringing the topic of conflict and hunger to the agenda
of the Security Council.
Alarming reports from the United Nations system
as well as civil society highlight the need for the
international community to act and to reverse the current
trends, which could turn out to be one of the most foodinsecure years on the global scale. Food systems are
complex and interconnected, depending on a variety of
factors, including the environmental, social, economic
and political surroundings, as well as the rising number
of severe and protracted conflicts, such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, Haiti,
Yemen, Afghanistan and other places — to name a few.
Furthermore, the unprovoked Russian military
aggression against Ukraine introduces yet another
layer of extreme food insecurity on a global level, and
it is crucial that that aggression end as soon as possible.
At the beginning of April, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
estimated that the potential direct damage to Ukrainian
agriculture assets was about $6.4 billion. The damage
to Ukraine’s agricultural capacities is increasing by the
day. Slovenia is deeply concerned about the Russian
blockade of Ukrainian ports, which prevents vital
shipments of agricultural products from Ukraine. As
a result, millions of people around the world who are
already experiencing dire circumstances will also face
the shattering consequences of food insecurity. Slovenia
is ready to assist in the consideration of alternative
logistics routes for the export of agricultural products
from Ukraine.
Remembering the words of the SecretaryGeneral — if you do not feed people, you feed conflict
(see S/2021/250) — it is our hope that the international
community will act together in order to halt and
reverse global food insecurity and prevent even further
destabilization of fragile environments, with the most
vulnerable, including women and girls, often suffering
the most. In that context, we welcome the efforts by the
Group of Seven, the Group of 20 and the FAO. Slovenia
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

is actively supporting the variety of measures and help
provided by the European Union and its member States.
We also support the whole-of-United Nations
approach when discussing the causes and impacts
of food insecurity. Each United Nations body has a
specific role to play in solving this complex challenge.
Improved coordination and response systems, better
data and decision-making processes, as well as
strengthened multi-stakeholder partnerships, are
our collective targets. Including civil society can
help not only to better understand local contexts but
also to find better solutions. So can capacity- and
resilience-building among the vulnerable. Immediate
help to the most vulnerable should go hand in hand with
resilience-building, wherever possible.
We will eventually all feel the consequences of the
current conditions on the food markets. Yet the least
developed and low-income food-deficit countries, as
well as persons in vulnerable situations, will probably
bear the heaviest immediate burden. Since 2014, Slovenia
has doubled its contribution to food security. Addressing
food insecurity and hunger presents a priority in our
disaster risk reduction and resilience activities as well
as our humanitarian activities in general. We support
the efforts of the World Food Programme and the FAO
in protracted and under-financed humanitarian crises
in all regions — from Yemen and Afghanistan to the
Horn of Africa and the Sahel.
In conclusion, Slovenia is of the firm belief that
effectively addressing the issue of hunger is a foundation
for stability and peace. The interconnected nature of
food security and the fragile state of the current global
system demand that we all show solidarity and renewed
commitment to multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to offer my sincere thanks and
appreciation to the presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on food security and
conflict, which undoubtedly is of extreme importance
due to the state of malnutrition and starvation resulting
from conflicts throughout the world. Millions of
persons every day face the danger of famine in the
light of the lack of immediate measures, which further
diverts us from achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 2, namely, to eliminate hunger by 2030.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

In that context, I would like to express to you,
Mr. President, and to the United States Government
our sincere thanks and great appreciation for the
announcement of additional aid that will be offered to
African States through the urgent and comprehensive
food aid pledged in order to alleviate the impact on
recipient countries of the crisis in Ukraine and the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The alarming reality, as indicated by the report
on the status of food security and nutrition in 2021,
confirmed that the past 10 years have witnessed a
notable increase in conflicts and their severity, as well
as in climate impacts and economic decline, which
worsened due to the COVID-19 pandemic. All of that
has led to an increase in the levels of hunger and has
undermined much of the progress that was made in
eliminating various forms of malnutrition, especially
in low- and middle-income States.
There are disparities from one region to another.
Africa is one of the most vulnerable regions, as most
of its peoples suffer from the scourge of conflicts and
related crises, placing many African States outside the
category of those countries in which less than 25 per
cent of their total population suffer from malnutrition.
That was indicated by the World Food Programme for
the period 2018 to 2020 and shows that malnutrition
has become endemic in the region and requires a
comprehensive approach.
Moreover, the instability in the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa regions greatly impacts the food security of
the countries of those regions and their populations and
is the cause of rising food insecurity there, as attested
to in reports of the United Nations. Those conflicts not
only impact agricultural productivity but also limit
the ability of institutions to deal with malnutrition
and deliver the necessary humanitarian aid to those
who need it. Algeria spares no efforts in offering the
necessary food aid to neighbouring countries in the
Sahel, and we are implementing development projects
that aim to improve the living conditions of the
population and guarantee their food security.
It is important to adopt comprehensive measures to
break the link between conflicts and food insecurity
by guaranteeing the delivery of food to everyone
and addressing the root causes of food insecurity,
especially those related to sustainable development and
the elimination of poverty, as well as by strengthening
production and supply chains. The suffering of a certain

22-3551119/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

region due to the escalation of violence makes the fight
against starvation more difficult but at the same time
more urgent. In that context, I wish to underscore the
following basic issues.
First, we must respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law in preventing
food insecurity and famine, while facilitating the safe
and unobstructed access of humanitarian workers to
those who need humanitarian assistance, in accordance
with resolution 2417 (2018), which underscores the
need to guarantee the delivery of food products to areas
of conflict. Therefore, civilians must not be deprived
of humanitarian assistance and basic supplies. The
necessary funding for humanitarian operations must
also be guaranteed.
Secondly, it is necessary to build lasting peace
through permanent solutions that put an end to
the vicious cycles of violence that some States are
experiencing. That must be done in a manner that
facilitates the establishment of strong governmental
institutions that are able to meet the basic needs of the
population, especially in terms of nutrition. Dealing
with malnutrition requires the actions of many sectors,
including the health care, education and water sectors,
and also requires a coordinated response among all
of those sectors in order to address the main points of
weakness and remedy them in a comprehensive and
sustainable way.
We must build partnerships to meet increasing
needs by giving a role to all stakeholders, including
the private sector and civil society organizations, in
order to alleviate the humanitarian burden imposed
by crises and deal with the factors that limit States’
ability to guarantee food security. We must develop
local agricultural and nutritional systems so that they
become an engine for economic growth, while giving
them due attention and importance.
We can build on this year’s Food Systems Summit,
and its recommendations could be a means to establish
stronger and more resilient food systems that take
into consideration the specificity of every State and
guarantee collective food security. We must support
developing countries, especially those in conflict areas,
by offering them funding, technological assistance
and capacity-building in order to enhance their food
production abilities and to assist them in achieving as
much self-sufficiency as possible, as a guarantor of
security and stability.
20/51

19/05/2022

All must meet their pledges to fight the impact of
climate change, which is directly linked to, and one
of the main causes of, food insecurity throughout the
world. Therefore, it is important to implement all the
obligations resulting from the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. Furthermore, we must enhance the
capacities of countries, especially developing countries,
to deal with the impacts of climate change and achieve
food security.
In conclusion, we believe that the only way to
break the link between conflicts and food insecurity
is by putting an end to crises and achieving sustainable
development, as provided under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 2, on eliminating hunger. We call
on the Council to work more closely with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in order
to further promote humanitarian solutions that meet the
basic needs of persons in situations of conflict. We also
call for a comprehensive approach to deal with the real
and root causes of these conflicts so that the United
Nations can achieve its noble goals for lasting peace
and sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mr. Kuymizakis (Malta): Malta thanks the United
States for organizing this timely debate on conflict and
food security. We also thank Ireland for organizing
the Arria Formula meeting in April, which gave us
another opportunity to discuss this important matter.
We are firm in our belief that the Security Council must
continue to give this issue the attention it deserves.
As we have seen in various conflict areas around
the globe, conflict has grave and lasting consequences
for food security. Compounded by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the increasing frequency and
intensity of extreme weather events resulting from
climate change, that can lead to serious long-term
repercussions that can also spill over to other countries
of the region and beyond.
Food insecurity reinforces and exposes inequalities
that exist among and within populations. Up to
811 million people are known to be undernourished,
with 60 per cent of the world’s most hungry living
in areas of conflict. This year alone may produce an
additional increase of 13.1 million undernourished
people as a result of war. A look at the situations in
Afghanistan, Syria, Yemen, Ethiopia, Somalia, South
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sudan and Haiti clearly illustrates the gravity and
urgency of the situation.
Food insecurity also highlights the evident
disproportionate impacts borne by women and girls,
especially in agricultural areas, where rural women
account for nearly half the agricultural workforce in
developing countries. Furthermore, it is not uncommon
for children to find themselves becoming the head of a
household and taking on the responsibility for acquiring
food and water, which may be extremely challenging,
including due to security issues.
The unjustified and unprovoked aggression by
the Russian Federation against Ukraine continues
to negatively impact food systems worldwide, with
alarming cascading impacts on import-dependent
countries. The sharp and sudden increase in the
price of staple commodities threatens our collective
achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goal 2, and more broadly the survival and livelihood of
millions of people worldwide.
Malta is fully committed to coordinating efforts
for mitigating the current food crisis, which is why we
welcome the recent establishment of the United Nations
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance upon the initiative of the Secretary-General.
We believe that multilateralism, accompanied by a
multistakeholder approach, is our best option.
Let us recall the importance of resolutions 2417
(2018) and 2573 (2021) to ensure that the narrative on
the nexus between conflict and hunger remains on our
agenda. Those tools must also be supported by our
commitment and political will, based on the most up-todate data and evidence-based policy recommendations.
Should Malta be entrusted to serve as an elected
member of the Security Council for the period 2023
to 2024, we will continue to stress the importance
of slowing and reversing the consequences of global
food insecurity, especially in fragile communities and
conflict-affected countries. We will also continue to
call on all parties in conflict areas to ensure the rapid
and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid, including
food, to those in need.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Ecuador greatly appreciates that the decision

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

was made under the current presidency to organize
this meeting in an open and inclusive format, allowing
concerned delegations to contribute to the debate on
the maintenance of international peace and security,
including civilian protection efforts, which the Security
Council will also focus on next week.
During the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) Regional Conference for
Latin America and the Caribbean, which was held in
Quito from 28 March to 1 April, the Director-General
of the FAO warned about the increase in hunger and
food insecurity in my region. That brings me to a
subject that requires greater efforts from the Council.
According to the report of the Secretary-General of
15 February (S/2022/117), this year more than 40 per
cent of Haitians will need humanitarian assistance,
with 4.4 million experiencing food insecurity and
more than 19,000 displaced by gang violence. That
contrasts with the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/66) on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, which reflects a decline in official development
assistance. The same report acknowledges that
conflict-induced food insecurity and hunger are the
main drivers of humanitarian needs, and that according
to estimates by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 84 million people have
been forcibly displaced because of violence or conflict.
Desertification, drought and the loss of biodiversity also
exacerbate food insecurity. The fact that those issues
are interrelated means that they require a coordinated
international response that includes the involvement
of the United Nations system, Member States and
other stakeholders.
Ecuador continues to be concerned about the
situation in Yemen, Syria and South Sudan, to cite only
a few cases. On 11 March 2021, owing to its global
impact, the coronavirus disease pandemic added a new
dimension to the issues before the Security Council
and to the Council’s discussions of them. And despite
expectations created for humankind through so-called
awareness-raising and the Secretary-General’s call for
a global ceasefire, food security throughout the world
continues to deteriorate because of protracted and
new conflicts.
With the adoption of resolution ES-11/2, on the
humanitarian consequences of the aggression against
Ukraine, at the General Assembly’s eleventh emergency
special session, we recalled the links between conflicts
and the threat of famine, while stressing that food

22-3551121/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

insecurity can lead to forced displacement and,
conversely, that forced displacement in countries
in armed conflict can have devastating effects on
agricultural production and the means of subsistence.
The impact of the military aggression against Ukraine
has led to an increase in global food insecurity, and
its repercussions are being felt in Ecuador, too. We
call for an end to it and to all conflicts. We further
condemn and reject the practice of starving civilians
as a method of warfare. We reiterate the importance
of protecting civilians in armed conflict, in line with
presidential statement S/PRST/2020/6 of 29 April 2020
and resolution 2417 (2018), whose fourth anniversary
we will commemorate on 24 May.
The protection of civilians and peacekeeping are
two major goals that Ecuador would like to see achieved
in the Security Council, to which we hope to be elected
as a non-permanent member for the 2023-2024 term,
and we will therefore prioritize the issue of hunger and
food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I am honoured to be delivering
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Pacific Islands Forum with a presence here at the
United Nations. I want to express the Pacific Islands
Forum members’ appreciation to the United States and
to Secretary of State Anthony Blinken for convening
and presiding over this high-level open debate, and
to thank our briefers from the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World
Food Programme for their excellent contributions
this morning.
The invasion of Ukraine has fuelled a grave
humanitarian crisis. It has dangerously increased
the pressure on global food markets, which were
already struggling with soaring prices, supply-chain
disruptions and an uneven recovery from the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Our Blue
Pacific continent, of which we are all members, is
already facing substantially higher fuel, fertilizer and
food prices. All of that is contributing to a growing
problem of food shortages. A prolonged conflict
will derail our tenuous economic recovery and pose
a significant threat to our sustainable development
efforts. Most Pacific island countries are importers
of food and energy. Rising prices for both inflicts
significant hardships on families and communities that
22/51

19/05/2022

are already suffering from the effects of COVID-19 and
recent disasters, especially those who lost jobs during
the pandemic.
The conflict in Ukraine is exacerbating supplychain disruptions. The relentless increases in energy
prices and shipping and manufacturing costs have
hit small island States especially hard. Tonga, Fiji,
Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and several other Pacific
countries have seen the price of fuel and essential food
products increase several times over since the beginning
of the conflict. That hurts Pacific island countries in
another way, through higher transportation and fuel
costs and the impact on their fisheries, which many
Pacific countries rely on heavily for food security and
their economic development. The western and central
Pacific Ocean accounts for almost 60 per cent of the
global tuna catch, around two thirds of which is taken
from the waters of Forum member countries — and
on behalf of which I am making this statement — and
makes a significant contribution to the diets of people
in other parts of the world, as well as being a critical
part of our island economies.
Our primary concern must be an immediate
cessation of hostilities in Ukraine, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to the areas affected and a
withdrawal of military forces in accordance with
internationally recognized borders as soon as possible.
We must make every effort to promote resilience in
global food-supply networks. In doing so, however,
we cannot afford to limit resources and attention to
our other major challenges, including COVID-19
recovery and climate change, which remains the single
greatest threat to the livelihoods and security of Pacific
island peoples.
I would now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity as the Permanent Representative
of Fiji.
The world is facing a volatile cocktail of COVID-19,
climate and food security crises. The skyrocketing
prices of essential items are a gut punch to our importdependent island State. The war in Ukraine is having an
intense impact on small island States such as ours, and
all of that is coming at a time when we are struggling
with the devastating effects of climate and COVID-19.
Since signing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
Fiji has faced 14 cyclones that have collectively wiped
out close to 50 per cent of our gross domestic product
and decimated the livelihoods of a large proportion of
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

our population. We have used every fiscal resource
we can muster to respond to those challenges, but the
global food crisis has also exposed something we have
known for a long time, which is that the global financial
architecture is largely broken. It does not work for
States. We need a global financial architecture that can
respond at the speed and scale appropriate to a global
crisis such as the one that we are discussing today.
Sadly, we are also witnessing fractures that are
similar to what we saw in the early phase of COVID-19,
when many countries locked in supplies, prohibited
exports and added a slew of restrictive trade practices.
Once again, those hit small States the hardest. As
a reminder, with regard to climate change, even at
an increase of 1.2°C, where we are now, large food
exporters are facing devastating heatwaves that are
having an adverse impact on food exports. We have
been reminding the Security Council and the global
community that a temperature rise above 1.5°C poses
a threat to the global food supply, and that increases
beyond that level could lead to irreversible changes in
food security.
During earlier discussions on climate and
security, many countries have argued that there is
growing evidence that repeated climate catastrophes
are transforming stable regions into ones that face
heightened instability and fragility. We are witnessing
new threats to peace and security, and this one comes
from food. The way in which the Security Council takes
forward the advice of so many Member States will
shape the world’s ability to come up with an effective,
substantial response to more diverse security threats.
The United Nations cannot permit and must not
accept the weaponization of food that is under way.
It must be called out and condemned. Unfair trade
practices that restrict a country’s ability to access food
and other essential commodities must be called out.
We support the Secretary-General’s efforts through
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy
and Finance, which we hope and expect will lead to
a substantial, speedy and coherent global response at
the scale needed to tackle this most urgent challenge
of our time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: Conflict remains the main driver of
food insecurity. Russia’s war on Ukraine has caused

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

an unprecedented surge in global food prices, on top
of the already devastating effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and climate change. It is therefore
crucial to put an end to Russia’s aggression and to
the suffering of the Ukrainian people, as well as to
avoid the consequences for global food security of a
protracted war. And we should be clear that blaming
sanctions for increased global food prices is a weak
attempt to conceal the truth and divert action from
where it is needed. Our sanctions target the Kremlin’s
ability to finance the aggression against Ukraine and its
people and are carefully crafted to ensure that they do
not affect the agricultural sector. What we heard today
from Russia about some supposed grain-for-weapons
scheme by the West is yet another item to add to a long
list of disinformation.
It is now more than ever time to show solidarity.
The world can count on the support of the European
Union (EU). Whenever and wherever our solidarity
is needed, we will deliver. We support the work led
by the United Nations Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, and our 27 member
States have sponsored the draft resolution on food
security submitted by Lebanon (A/76/L.55) to draw the
attention of the international community to the food
crisis and identify ways to address it. We are taking a
number of short- and medium-term actions to alleviate
food insecurity.
First, we are doing everything in our power to ease
the pressure on global food markets. Last week we
launched an action plan on EU-Ukraine solidarity lanes
to create alternative logistic routes and make sure that
much-needed grain can be exported from Ukraine to
the rest of the world while the Black Sea routes remain
blocked by the aggressor. All alternative transport
modes are being mobilized to maximum capacity. We
support all efforts aimed at finding ways to unblock the
sea routes. And restoring well-functioning markets is
also key. Within the Group of Seven, we have committed
to keeping our food and agricultural markets open and
we urge other large producing countries to do the same.
We advocate against export restrictions and for an
open, transparent and predictable trade environment.
Secondly, we are ramping up our humanitarian
assistance. Our responses are tailored to country and
regional needs. In our efforts to help, we must ensure
that local production and livelihoods are safeguarded.
That is why, where feasible, we prefer cash-based
programmes to shipments of food from other areas.

22-3551123/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

In April we pledged more than €1 billion to address
food insecurity in the Sahel and Lake Chad regions,
and €644 million to address acute food insecurity and
strengthen resilience in the Horn of Africa.
For our Southern Neighbourhood partners, the EU
foresees nearly €1 billion in grants to strengthen food
security and social protection. Food affordability is
another short-term priority, especially for middle- and
low-income countries, 60 per cent of which are already
in debt distress or at high risk of such distress. The
impact of the war in Ukraine on food and commodity
prices will further exacerbate that trend, which is why
we need to identify solutions to address their situation
as quickly as possible. The EU response will support the
fiscal and macroeconomic stability of those countries
and prop up their international reserves to enable them
to pay for crucial food and energy imports, while
providing the fiscal means and capacity to put in place
adequate social transfers. More specifically, we are
looking at rechannelling advanced economies’ special
drawing rights, making use of existing International
Monetary Fund instruments.
Thirdly, in the medium and long term, we are
supporting countries in developing resilient and
sustainable agricultural and aquatic food systems.
As part of the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the EU will invest in family
farmers and small-scale food actors, local and regional
supply chains and ecosystem-based approaches.
We all have to step up our humanitarian assistance,
but humanitarian aid alone is not a sustainable solution.
It is an emergency step. For long-term recovery, the
EU’s development aid is ready to pick up the baton
and address the root causes of food insecurity. The
EU Green Deal and our farm-to-fork and biodiversity
strategies continue to guide our response.
In conclusion, I want to stress again that the world
can continue to count on our support. Our actions are
anchored in the multilateral system. We strongly support
the leadership of the United Nations in responding to
the global food security crisis in a comprehensive way.
Together with our partners, we will continue to ensure
a coordinated and unified response.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): My delegation is
grateful for this timely debate on the issue of conflict
24/51

19/05/2022

and food security, and I would like to add some remarks
to those made by the observer of the European Union.
While the conflict-hunger nexus is a longstanding one, with millions having been affected for
decades by hunger resulting from conflict, the Food
and Agriculture Organization and the World Food
Programme have reported a significant increase in
acute food insecurity in recent years, confirming at the
same time that conflict is its main driver. The challenge
before us is two-pronged. First there is hunger that
threatens civilians in armed conflict, including as
a tactic of warfare, and secondly there is hunger
that affects populations beyond a particular conflict
situation owing to disruptions in the food production
and supply chains caused by that conflict.
Through its resolution 2417 (2018), the Council
condemned starvation as a weapon of war, reflecting
the relevant obligations of States under international
humanitarian law, while other related developments
include the 2019 amendment to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court that designated the
intentional use of starvation of civilians as a war crime,
including in non-international conflict.
The second challenge remains unaddressed. The
conflict in Ukraine, in addition to affecting its own
population, has exacerbated food shortages in other
conflict and non-conflict situations. It comes on the
heels of the disruptions caused by a severe pandemic and
the worsening impact of climate change, compounding
disruptions to supply chains and increasing pressure
on natural resources. In the first instance, the
Council must act to stop the conflict while ensuring
that its humanitarian impact on other conflicts is not
exacerbated and that the food insecurity it generates
does not create new conflicts or unrest. Given the
significant reliance on Ukraine’s grain and wheat, we
support efforts to reintegrate its agricultural production
into world markets for the benefit of the producing
country and the populations most at risk.
Our planning, however, must incorporate solutions
for a scenario in which food production comes to a
halt as a result of conflict — something that cannot
be excluded. Contingency planning could also seek to
align grain stocks with countries’ needs, with particular
allocations made to existing conflicts afflicted by food
crises. In addition, the Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, whose establishment
and work we welcome, could go beyond the task of
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

alleviating the current crisis and extrapolate lessons
learned to create a blueprint for a comprehensive
strategy to prevent and tackle similar situations.
The Group’s analysis that 1.7 billion people live
in countries whose economies are severely exposed
to at least one of the three crises — food, energy or
finance — shows how precarious the global situation
is. The fact that a third of those people are already poor
and 215 million are already undernourished points to a
particular failure to account for multiple vulnerabilities.
We therefore support a global call for collective action
on food security, based on solidarity and the primacy of
humanism in international cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): While aligning itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, Italy would like to add a few remarks in its
national capacity.
We appreciate the initiative of the United States
presidency of the Security Council to convene today’s
open debate at a time of increased food insecurity,
aggravated by the direct impact of conflicts and now,
in particular, by Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine,
with its clear global effects on the food security of
so many countries in the most vulnerable regions or
the world.
After decades of promising trends, progress towards
Sustainable Development Goal 2, on zero hunger, has
reversed and we now see millions of people affected
by food insecurity, hunger and famine. We are far from
reaching the goal of zero hunger. We need urgent action
to reverse the trend and preserve our 2030 horizon.
Today, against the pre-existing incredibly fragile
global context, challenged by the effects of the pandemic,
climate change and extreme weather conditions on
food systems, Russia’s war against Ukraine poses
an extraordinary and additional threat to global food
security. The impact of the war on global food supply
chains now directly threatens at least 50 million people
in the most vulnerable countries, not to mention the
wider effects of record high prices of food in the global
markets. This situation requires urgent and decisive
action on multiple fronts.
First, we need to ensure that food currently
blocked in Ukraine can flow and reach its destinations,
especially in Africa, the Mediterranean and Central

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Asia. The blockade of ports, such as the port of Odesa,
is a matter of a very serious concern, and we urgently
need to find cooperative solutions to ensure the safe
passage of food to the world. We condemn attacks on
key infrastructure, the looting of food destined for
abroad and attacks on agriculture and civilian facilities.
Italy calls for and supports the creation of food
corridors to be agreed among the parties, with the
support and coordination of the United Nations,
including in the context of the United Nations Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy, and Finance,
in order to allow maritime and land routes to work and
deliver in the interest of millions of people.
In same vein, we support the initiative of the
European Commission to establish solidarity lanes in
order to facilitate the shipping of Ukrainian goods to
the rest of the world by using alternative routes through
European Union member States. Starving millions of
people in the world and risking further socioeconomic
disruption or the destabilization of fragile countries
and regions is in no one’s interest.
Food security remains a fundamental priority
for Italy and a key objective of our foreign policy
and international cooperation action. Yesterday
Italy’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, Luigi Di Maio, announced an additional
financial contribution to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and its Food
Coalition to support Ukraine’s food production
capabilities. We also signed the Road Map for Global
Food Security — Call to Action, in which we reaffirmed
the commitment to acting with urgency at scale and in
concert to respond to the urgent food security needs.
We are actively contributing to the Group of Seven
initiative to launch a global alliance for food security,
including building on pledges made at last year’s
United Nations Food System Summit and focusing on
supporting the most vulnerable countries, including in
particular in Africa and the Middle East. In that context,
as announced yesterday, on 8 June Italy will convene a
Mediterranean ministerial dialogue on food crises to
engage all stakeholders and address key vulnerabilities
within the region. We also need to work for long-term,
sustainable solutions and solve the root causes of
hunger and food insecurity. We need to forge effective
partnerships with all stakeholders to address the short-,
medium- and long-term effects of food insecurity.

22-3551125/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

We call on all relevant United Nations organs
and entities to increase action on food insecurity, in
particular along the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus and in close synergy with the leading action of
the Rome-based agencies. We will continue to support
the United Nations system and its multilateral action at
this complex and challenging juncture. We stand ready
to intensify our collective work in our capacity Chair
of the Group of Friends of Food Security and Nutrition
here in New York.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The issue being debated today
suffers from a structural contradiction caused by
those who convened today’s meeting. There is a clear
contradiction in raising the issue of growing global
food insecurity while also imposing unilateral coercive
measures on more than 20 Members of the Organization,
which represent a third of the planet’s population. It
is not possible to propose solutions to the global food
crisis and at the same time contravene the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, threaten
international peace and security and violate the human
rights of entire peoples, in particular the right to food.
Unilateral coercive measures are a planned and
deliberate violation of human rights and the right
to food. They are a policy of aggression that has
worsened during the global economic recession and
the humanitarian emergency caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Those measures are part
of a hostile strategy that applies maximum pressure and
is aimed at the economic suffocation and international
isolation of States. The goal is to inflict the greatest
possible suffering, exacerbate the living conditions of
populations and cause internal upheaval that facilitates
regime change within sovereign States. They are a tool
used to achieve geopolitical domination to advance the
selfish interests of a Power bloc with global ambitions.
Unilateral coercive measures are weapons of
economic warfare that obstruct access to financial
systems, literally steal the international reserves of
entire nations, violate the supply chains of national
and international food systems and increase global
food instability. Contrary to what the offending States
say, food and medicines are not exempt from so-called
sanctions, and the so-called humanitarian exemptions
are actually non-existent and ineffective, as independent
26/51

19/05/2022

United Nations experts have acknowledged. In that
context, we recall that, at its second International
Conference on Nutrition, the World Health Organization
acknowledged that
“trade is a key element in achieving food security
and nutrition for all, through a system of fair and
market-oriented global trade”.
Furthermore, it underscored
“the need to refrain from imposing measures that
are not in line with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, and that endanger
food security and nutrition”.
The adverse impact of unilateral coercive measures on
global food security is therefore clear.
Several countries can help increase the stability of
international food security if they are allowed to fully
develop their capacities. Venezuela is one example.
The African continent is another example. Africa is
one of the most vulnerable continents in the current
crisis and, at the same time, has enormous productive
potential that could be unleashed under the right
conditions. However, that is an impossible plan under
the oppression of coercive measures. The truth is that
today there are at least eight countries in Africa on the
list of States on which the Government of the United
States of America illegally imposes unilateral coercive
measures. It is impossible to promote the fight against
hunger while at the same time punishing the economies
of the most vulnerable countries to obtain geopolitical
advantages. And neither is it possible to purport to
express concerns about food security when at the same
time food is disregarded as an inalienable human right.
Climate change, economic crises, armed conflicts
and the COVID-19 pandemic are factors that exacerbate
global food insecurity. The conflict in Eastern Europe
is a new disturbing factor. The response to that new
crisis must be to unleash the food production potential
of the entire world, as well as to increase international
trade, in order to reduce the risk of food shortages in
the coming months and years. However, in complete
contradiction to that aim, the largest set of unilateral
coercive measures since the Second World War has
been imposed. The planned isolation of the Russian
Federation to worsen the living conditions of its
people, with the aim of provoking regime change, is an
unacceptable proposal from every point of view: be it
moral, legal, economic, rational or simply human.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Worse still, the coercion exerted on the rest of the
world to prevent legal trade with Russia and cruelly
sacrifice its peoples is not only illegal, but also imposes
unacceptable risks to the food, social and political
security of hundreds of millions of people in developing
countries. That is not the way to resolve the looming
global food crisis.
Global food security is complex, and many steps
must be taken to avoid the most pessimistic predictions.
Therefore, it is necessary to emphasize that any plan
to face the food crisis that overlooks the destructive
impact of unilateral coercive measures and does not
propose their complete and immediate elimination is
neither sincere nor credible and, above all, doomed to
failure. It will be yet another manoeuvre to take selfish
national advantage of an international crisis.
For all those reasons the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela proposes the lifting of the unilateral coercive
measures illegally imposed against States Members of
the United Nations, as an urgent step and as part of the
global plan that must be adopted to face the imminent
food crisis that we are all going to suffer, whether as a
result of shortages or inflation.
It is time to strengthen our national food systems
as essential parts of a larger global economic fabric
that allows access to capital, technology, energy, seeds,
fertilizers, transportation and distribution to thereby
increase our capacity to resolve this new crisis. It is time
for cooperation, solidarity and joint action — without
exception — to put an end to world hunger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
United States for the timely organization of this open
debate on an issue of global significance, namely, food
security. I would also like to thank all the briefers who,
unfortunately, painted a reality that is so devastating
that it defies even the worst nightmares. The statistics
on affected people are so shocking that they stop
making sense.
As it was highlighted, we have been facing the
“perfect storm”, to use the words of Executive Director
Beasley, for a while now — Yemen, Sudan, Afghanistan,
Syria, Ethiopia — the list is not exhaustive — have all
been experiencing food insecurity and, in some cases,

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

famine. Conflict, with all its devastating consequences,
remains the key driver in exacerbating the food
crisis, both as a cause and effect. Every conflict has a
disruptive effect on vital infrastructure, including on
agricultural infrastructure; limits the ability of people
to move freely, to trade and to access markets; and
forces people to flee their homes, their livelihoods and
to abandon their land.
Climate change and the coronavirus disease
pandemic have also significantly exacerbated food
insecurity and have unfortunately left the most
vulnerable furthest behind.
Against that already bleak backdrop, the
unprovoked, illegal and unjustified military aggression
of the Russian Federation against Ukraine has added a
whole new dimension. In its war of choice, the Russian
Federation has made food insecurity its weapon
of choice. By blocking access to the ports, thereby
preventing exports of Ukrainian grain, it is effectively
sentencing to hunger several hundred million and is
affecting the livelihoods of 1.7 billion people globally,
according to the report of the Global Crisis Response
Group. That should stop now.
As an immediate step, it is essential that the
Russian Federation lift the blockades of the ports, so
that Ukraine can export its grain and prepare for the
next harvest. In that regard, we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to ensure food corridors.
More broadly, food insecurity should be tackled
by means of a significant increase in investment in
agricultural production. Innovation and technological
advancements coupled with the right allocation
of resources would make the agricultural sector
more resilient.
Supporting the most vulnerable is an essential
element in fighting food insecurity. The speed and
efficiency of emergency supplies to those at risk
of hunger and malnutrition will determine whether
political stability in many parts of the world will
be maintained.
Last but not least, underpinning the global effort
to avert a food crisis should be a multi-stakeholder
approach. We need civil society and the private sector
to work alongside public authorities in addressing the
challenges associated with food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.

22-3551127/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We welcome the presence of His Excellency the
Secretary of State of the United States this morning.
We commend the initiative to convene this important
meeting. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme and the Director-General
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations for their valuable participation.
The factors affecting food security are multiple
and varied. They include armed conflict, economic
challenges, the energy crisis and the disruption of the
supply chain, as a result of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, in addition to the effects of climate change.
The effects of conflict are not limited to conflict areas,
but they extend beyond them, especially in the light of
trade globalization.
Developing countries are always vulnerable in
emergency situations, and that often leads to lower
levels of food security. Currently, 69 developing
countries are affected by food insecurity, as well as
other factors, including the energy crisis and difficult
financial conditions. Most of those countries are in the
Arab region, where most of the population suffers from
some form of food insecurity.
The State of Qatar is committed to meeting its
humanitarian responsibility in response to famine
and food insecurity. Hence, we have directed much
of our international humanitarian assistance towards
addressing hunger and lack of food. That is done through
cooperation with the United Nations, as we believe the
Organization plays a central role in addressing crises,
including food insecurity. We also believe that those
efforts will contribute to reducing risk of instability,
lack of security and peace.
In November 2021, the Qatar Fund for Development
signed an agreement with the World Food Programme
to provide $90 million in financial contributions for
food security assistance to more than 7 million people
in need of food in the brotherly country of Yemen.
In Afghanistan, the State of Qatar has contributed
since August 2021 to the provision of urgent
humanitarian aid, including food, through an air bridge
from Qatar to Kabul transporting hundreds of tons
of humanitarian aid. And we are currently working
28/51

19/05/2022

on the rehabilitation of the Kabul airport, which will
contribute to facilitating the entry of food commodities.
The State of Qatar has recognized the importance
of ensuring food security and has given it the priority it
deserves, both at the national and international levels,
through deliberate and continued measures by the
Government, including significant investment in food
research, agriculture policies, irrigation infrastructure
and market updates, as well as the rehabilitation of roads,
ports and strategic storage reserves. Consequently, the
State of Qatar ranked highest among the Arab States
in the Global Food Security Index last year. And we
have shared our experience with other countries. In
February, Doha hosted the Strategic Commodities and
Food Safety Forum in cooperation with the Islamic
Organization for Food Security.
At the international level and within the framework
of the State of Qatar’s commitment to cooperation
and collective action to face common challenges, His
Highness the Amir of the State of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim
bin Hamad Al Thani, has launched an initiative to
establish the Global Dryland Alliance, a mechanism
aimed at filling gaps in research, strategies and policies
to enable dryland countries to achieve food security
and to share knowledge and best practices to help
develop countries’ abilities to prevent food crises and
to exchange assistance. The Alliance was established
in Doha in 2017, and the General Assembly has granted
the Alliance observer status.
Recognizing the important role played by non-State
actors in strengthening flexibility and addressing food
insecurity worldwide, the Qatar Fund for Development
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation announced
recently a strategic partnership, called “Nanmo”,
or “growing together” in Arabic. Nanmo invests in
technologies and agricultural tools capable of adapting
to climate change in order to find resilient food markets
that help to provide nutrition, income and economic
opportunities to small-scale productive farmers
and their communities in African countries. Up to
$200 million have been pledged for targeted projects. In
addition, the Qatar Fund for Development has signed an
agreement with the Food and Agriculture Organization
to help Somalia improve its resilience to climate change
and take proactive and deliberate action to respond
to crises.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue
to give priority to addressing challenges affecting
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

international peace and security and the factors
exacerbating humanitarian crises, including the issue
of dealing with food security.

Nigeria, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen, among others,
are facing catastrophic levels of food insecurity due to
armed conflict and violence.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

Humanitarian action in response to the food
crisis must be based on the principles of neutrality,
independence, impartiality and humanity, without
political conditions. In that regard, allow me to
recall the need to renew the cross-border assistance
mechanism in Syria to alleviate the acute food needs of
the population in the north-west of that country.

Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of
the European Union.
At the beginning of 2022, the world was facing
multiple crises that made it difficult to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Sustainable
Development Goal 2, on zero hunger. The coronavirus
disease pandemic exposed structural deficiencies in
the global food system and pushed 161 million people
into extreme poverty. Distortions in supply chains,
increased demand for raw materials and increased
public spending triggered a worldwide price spike. That
is coupled with major local and regional crises such as
prolonged droughts, desert locust plagues, increased
violence and terrorism and conflicts. Russia’s recent war
of aggression in Ukraine has exacerbated pre-existing
crises and has provoked an increase in grain, oil and
fertilizer prices. These essential Ukrainian products
are of vital importance to third countries. Spain once
again condemns, in the strongest terms, this unjustified
aggression. Russia’s actions are damaging the
international order, security and the global economy.
It is a priority to facilitate the export of Ukrainian
agricultural products and support the Ukrainian
economy in order to help stabilize the international
agricultural market, and thus global food security. This
is vital for developing countries, particularly those that
are 50 to 75 per cent dependent on grain imports from
Ukraine and Russia — especially when the Food and
Agriculture Organization’s forecasts point to additional
future food price increases of between 8 per cent and
22 per cent. Preventing speculative measures and a
resurgence of protectionism, as well as ensuring an
effective multilateral response to food insecurity, must
therefore be a priority for all of us.
Famine is a humanitarian tragedy of the first order
that recalls times we thought we had left behind. A
new crisis should not divert essential contributions
from other forgotten and prolonged crises. Food
insecurity causes social and economic tensions that
increase humanitarian needs. The case of the Sahel
is paradigmatic. The number of food-insecure people
has quadrupled in three years. Ethiopia’s Tigray area,

Let us give priority to cooperation projects linked
to food security and livelihoods. In 2021, Spain’s
humanitarian action allocated more than €15 million to
food needs in contexts such as the Sahel, Syria, Latin
America and the Caribbean and the Sahrawi refugee
camps, in support of the World Food Programme, Action
Against Hunger and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
The triple crisis — food, energy and finance — has
resulted in a “perfect storm” that requires coordination
among the humanitarian, development, peace and
security pillars. The Global Crisis Response Group
can do a great deal in this area. We must act quickly,
with emergency interventions that contribute to peace
and preserve the structural work of strengthening the
agricultural sector of the least developed countries.
Coordination with the World Trade Organization, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank,
among others, is essential. So too is the strengthening
of global governance of the crisis and the coordination
of responses through the Committee on World
Food Security.
The international community has the tools to
reverse these trends. Let us use them. Let us agree on
global solutions. Let us immediately support small
producers and family farming using the instruments
of the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development. Let us promote efficiency
and innovation in the use of agricultural products. Let
us work on transforming food systems to make them
more sustainable, inclusive, resilient to climate impacts
and less dependent on fertilizers.
Food insecurity and conflict represent a vicious
cycle, in which the former exacerbates the latter and
the latter, in turn, causes the former. Food insecurity
continues to be used as a weapon of war in conflicts,
despite it being a violation of the basic rules of
international humanitarian law. Conflict-induced

22-3551129/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

famine deepens vulnerabilities and entrenches the cycle
of violence, as recognized in resolution 2417 (2018).
Spain supports the collection of reliable and impartial
data to provide the necessary evidence for the proper
implementation and enforcement of that resolution.
Finally, it is crucial to hold accountable those who
violate international norms, not only as a means of
prevention and pressure, but above all because of the
need to repair the damage caused to the victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Ms. Andújar (Dominican Republic): We are
pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the
members of the Group of Friends of Action on Conflict
and Hunger — Estonia, France, Germany, Ireland,
Mexico, the Netherlands, the Niger, Norway, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, the United States of America and
my own country, the Dominican Republic.
We would like to thank the United States for
convening this meeting and our briefers for their
presentations. As members of the Group of Friends of
Action on Conflict and Hunger, we are committed to
ensuring that the issue of conflict and hunger remains
high on the Security Council’s agenda and beyond.
In 2018, the Security Council showed clarity and
solidarity by unanimously adopting resolution 2417
(2018). The resolution underscored the imperative
of the Security Council to address conflict-induced
food insecurity, including famine. Resolution 2417
(2018) asks the Secretary-General to report to the
Council when the risk of conflict-induced famine and
widespread food insecurity is taking place. While the
threat to international peace and security caused by
conflict-induced hunger has dropped over the past year,
the Council has not held an open debate on the topic
since the United States presidency in March 2021.
At that time, 139 million people were experiencing
a food crisis. Today, according to the 2022 Global
Report on Food Crises, that number has jumped to
193 million, of which around 40 million people are
facing emergency level or worse conditions across
36 countries.
Indeed, 577,000 people are facing catastrophe-level
starvation and death. With conflict and climate change
already increasing the price of agricultural products
and causing upheaval in global food-supply chains, and
with the world’s most vulnerable economies recovering
30/51

19/05/2022

from the coronavirus disease, Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine will exacerbate the already severe
2022 acute food insecurity and malnutrition forecasts,
as highlighted in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral’s Global Crisis Response Group. We are deeply
concerned that the report highlights the fact that food
and oil price hikes are increasing the Group’s monthly
operational costs by up to $71 million each month
compared with 2019, effectively reducing its ability to
respond to hunger crises around the world.
In September 2020, the Council received a report
and briefing, triggered by resolution 2419 (2018),
concerning food security risks in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Yemen, north-eastern Nigeria
and South Sudan. We are deeply concerned that over
the last 18 months, the United Nations has not issued
any follow-up report despite worsening conditions.
The Group of Friends called for an update on the
September 2020 white note on food security risks and
for a briefing of the Security Council by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, with clear information on where
the risk of conflict-induced famine and widespread
food insecurity is taking place. We need to know the
root causes of the recent deterioration in the levels of
hunger driven by conflict as well as who is blocking
access and how in conflict settings. That needs to be
followed by decisive action to spare civilians from
the scourge of conflict and hunger and to hold those
driving it accountable.
We also call on all parties to armed conflict to
ensure full, safe, unimpeded humanitarian access to
uphold international humanitarian law and to protect
the lives and livelihoods of all civilians whoever they
are, wherever they are.
In addition, we welcome various international
initiatives such as the Food and Agriculture Resilience
Mission, which is a robust operational road map to avoid
further spikes in prices, ensure market transparency,
enable a robust and efficient solidarity mechanism and
enhance sustainable production.
The current rise in conflict-induced famine and
widespread food insecurity is a man-made, unjustified
and preventable tragedy. Let us act now, before it is too
late for too many, especially women and children.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would now like to say a few words in my
national capacity.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the outset, I would like to thank the United States
for having convened this very timely debate. As we
have heard today, we are facing a critical test. Evidence
has shown time and time again that armed conflicts,
violence, economic crises and extreme climate events
are undeniable drivers of food insecurity and threats to
international peace.
The Dominican Republic believes in multilateralism,
concerted action and respect for international law. That
is why we are here today. The Dominican Republic also
believes in early intervention to mitigate the effects
of conflict.
To prevent famine, we not only need to adopt an
inclusive approach to policies and investments in food
systems but also to act urgently to build peace. That is
the responsibility not only of the Security Council but
also of all the States Members of the United Nations.
We stand ready to work closely with all those
involved to promote the necessary and coherent global
response to this tremendous challenge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): We thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for this month for
having organized this open debate. We also thank
Mr. David Beasley of the World Food Programme; Mr. Qu
Dongyu of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations; and Ms. Sara Menker of Gro
Intelligence for their insightful briefings this morning.
Food insecurity is one of the biggest challenges
to humankind and requires collective efforts to tackle
its clear and preventable causes. Conflict undermines
food security and exacerbates vulnerabilities, thereby
curtailing the ability of people to have access to
sufficient food for an active and healthy life.
As underscored by many delegations, peace and
security is a necessary condition to alleviate that
challenge. In that regard, the peaceful resolution of
disputes and addressing the underlying causes of
conflicts is imperative.
If we are to provide a sustainable solution to
food insecurity, the risk of global trade recovery and
increases in the price of food should not be confused
with the more embedded problem of food insecurity. We
raise this important distinction in order to encourage a

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

proper look at the broad spectrum of this grave problem
by separating it from spontaneous incidents.
With the rise in the price of food, which is seriously
straining our national capacity, we are compelled to
engage in serious introspection as to its impact on our
own national efforts to ensure self-sufficiency and
minimize import dependency. We are confident that our
tireless efforts and unwavering commitment to achieve
our national development objectives will enable us to
attain those goals.
But on a much larger scale, we believe that the
situation calls for concerted action towards improving
production and productivity; rectifying the prevailing
unbalanced international trade system; providing urgent
debt relief, restructuring and cancellation; eradicating
poverty; and fostering resilience to mitigate the adverse
effects of climate change.
It is against that backdrop that I would like to
underscore the following three brief points.
First, while we recognize conflict as one of the
factors contributing to food insecurity, we believe that
it is the primary manifestation of extreme poverty and
underdevelopment. Accelerating economic growth and
sustainable development and addressing the challenges
surrounding the agricultural sector is extremely critical
to overcome poverty and food insecurity and hence
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Secondly, it goes without saying that we cannot
bring about sustainable peace without development
and development without sustainable peace. Tapping
into our potential through economic transformation is
paramount to ensure sustainable development. Africa
is a continent that is endowed with a vast amount of
land, water and labour, the potential of which, if
harnessed adequately and fully, can feed not only its
population but also the world. With concerted national
and regional efforts, supplemented by international
support to enhance our ongoing initiatives to invest in
and utilize our natural resources for the benefit of our
people, we can achieve that lofty objective.
Thirdly, fair international trade practices that
yield sustainable development and encourage African
countries to enhance their domestic food production
is critical. We believe that increasing productivity
and production on the continent and strengthening
intracontinental trade is imperative to make a dent in
addressing food insecurity.

22-3551131/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, while we should scale up our efforts
towards the resolution of conflicts, the timely and
adequate provision of humanitarian support to those
in need of food assistance is also critical. That should
be coupled with our collective efforts in committing
to address the effects of climate change, which is
causing huge calamities. Providing the necessary
support to African countries in their efforts to adapt to
and mitigate the effects of climate change is therefore
extremely crucial.
We believe that the debate on food security at the
level of the Security Council should take those important
components into account if we are to enhance the
impact and achieve results in tackling food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has always been attentive and
responsible when it comes to the issue of food security,
at both the national and international levels. Modern
Belarus is fully self-sufficient when it comes to food
production and also contributes significantly to
international food production.
The things that stand in the way of ensuring food
security have been very well known to everyone for
a long time. It is food waste — up to 40 per cent in
developed countries. It also has to do with an ineffective
distribution system and aggressive trade policy. These
first two categories are very complex issues, which
require time and coordinated efforts to be rectified,
whereas for the issues of trade policy in the context of
food security, there is a quick and effective mechanism,
which is the kind of mechanism that unfortunately is
frequently abused by countries when they introduce all
kinds of sanctions and bans.
The Secretary-General, as well as such competent
international bodies as the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme, the World Trade Organization, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund do
talk with one voice about the nefarious effect that
unilateral restrictions and sanctions have on food
security internationally. Already in November 2021
the World Bank was already talking about the negative
consequences stemming from the sanctions by the
European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom
and Canada against Belarussian potassium fertilizer.
The President of Belarus, Mr. Aleksandr Lukashenko,
32/51

19/05/2022

has warned the international community many times
about the negative effects of sanctions against Belarusproduced food and potash, and we have voiced those
warnings in both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. But the sponsors of sanctions were not ready
then, nor are they ready now, to listen to the international
institutions or experts or the representatives of those
countries where famine and malnutrition are a threat to
whole nations.
As a result, the World Bank tells us that agricultural
prices in 2022 are 43 per cent higher compared to last
year, and each percentage point of increase in food prices
will lead to an additional 10 million people finding
themselves in abject poverty. Today the SecretaryGeneral, in this very Chamber, talked about the 30 per
cent increase in the prices of staple foods, which is a
direct threat to people in Africa and the Middle East.
We regret the fact that even under current conditions,
the sponsors of restrictions are busy looking for reasons
for introducing ever-new sanctions, while in parallel
they state that the conflict in Ukraine is a source of all
the ills of humankind, forgetting the many conflicts in
other regions of the world.
We recall that long before the conflict in Ukraine
Belarus was subjected to sanctions imposed because
the West did not like the outcome of our presidential
elections, and one of the reasons offered was the
alleged demand by the people of Belarus for sanctions.
It was said that the sanctions would bring freedom
to the people of Belarus because the “sanctions are
freedom” and “sanctions liberate”. We had heard
statements like that before when the word “work” was
used instead of “sanctions”. It was said that work makes
people free, and I am certain that this phrase, which
was placed at the entrance of Nazi concentration camps
is remembered by one and all in this Chamber; we
certainly will never forget it. The sponsors of unilateral
restrictive restrictions should give serious thought to
their policies, which they should start to rectify in a
comprehensive and flexible manner by giving up their
political prejudices. We think that there is still time to
make the right decision.
We agree with the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral to lift the sanctions and reintegrate into world
markets food produced and fertilizer manufactured
in Belarus. This will be an important step towards
ensuring international food security.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

We in Belarus stand ready to work with all
interested parties and will consider any and all
constructive proposals without any political prejudices.
We will continue doing everything possible to support
what was started by the President of Belarus, namely, a
dialogue to make sure that the conflict in Ukraine ends
as soon as possible, and we stand ready to contribute
to ensuring global food security. We once again call
upon the sponsors of sanctions to heed the voice
of the international community and stop using this
destructive mechanism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, we wish to
express our sincere appreciation to the United States for
convening today’s timely open debate.
Viet Nam understands first-hand the critical role
of food security as a foundation of peace, stability and
development. We are therefore deeply concerned about
the sharp rise in food prices and other commodities in
recent months, which resulted in the all-time high record
in the March 2022 index of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO).
The current drivers of food insecurity are
manifold. While the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is still raging, economic shocks,
disruptions in supply chains and extreme weather
events have further aggravated strains in the world
food system. Such interwoven challenges risk putting
developing and conflict-affected countries into further
instability and insecurity, particularly those on the
agenda of the Security Council.
In the light of the current situation, we wish to
emphasize the following points. First, it is high time that
the international community commit to ensuring food
security as a key element to guaranteeing sustainable
peace and development. Along with strengthening
the humanitarian response, sustained actions must
be made to bolster the capabilities of developing and
conflict-affected States in ensuring the food supply for
their own populations, as well as in improving their
living standards.
Securing and diversifying food supplies is also a
way forward. In the longer term, food systems need
to be transformed into green, sustainable and lowemission models that are resilient and responsive to food
security challenges. Furthermore, resolving conflicts

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

and preventing their relapses are critical in breaking
the vicious cycle between conflict and hunger. It is
equally important that international partners, including
the Security Council, look into further initiatives to
help address the root causes of conflicts and promote
peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
Secondly, global solidarity is needed more than
ever to resolve the current crisis. The international
community should work together in a more coordinated
manner. Stronger cooperation and partnership between
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
the private sector can also complement such efforts. We
commend the tireless efforts of United Nations agencies,
particularly FAO and the World Food Programme,
as well as international donors, in combating hunger
and delivering supplies to people in need during this
challenging time. We encourage the United Nations
and partners to provide timely, appropriate updates on
food insecurity induced or exacerbated by conflicts,
especially in areas on the agenda of the Security
Council, so as to better ensure timely responses.
Thirdly, it is imperative that all parties to conflicts
adhere to the United Nations Charter, international law
and international humanitarian law. This includes the
prohibition of attacks on and destruction of objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population,
especially those related to food supply. These principles
were stipulated in resolution 2417 (2018) and again in
resolution 2573 (2021).
As one of the world’s top exporters in major
agricultural products, Viet Nam has actively contributed
to efforts aimed at ensuring a stable food supply in
order to safeguard food security of the region and of the
world, particularly during the past two years in which
the world faced the COVID-19 pandemic. We aspire to
becoming a food-innovation hub in the region through
innovative and sustainable agricultural models. To this
end, we will continue to contribute meaningfully to
joint efforts to address global food security challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium): Belgium thanks the
United States of America for organizing this important
debate at a time when the world is facing its most
serious food security challenge in decades. I would
also like to thank Mr. Beasley and Mr. Qu Dongyu,
as well as Ms. Menker, for their compelling briefings
this morning.

22-3551133/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Resolution 2417 (2018) recognizes the link between
armed conflicts and food insecurity — a link that, in the
current context, cannot be understated. On the one hand,
we are seeing food prices reach all-time highs in many
parts of the world. Sixty per cent of the world’s hungry
people live in areas of conflict, and armed conflict
has exacerbated hunger in many parts of the world,
including in Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa, Yemen,
Syria and South Sudan. On the other hand, a sharp
increase in global insecurity threatens to destabilize
fragile societies and further exacerbate armed conflicts
and regional instability. In an environment that is still
recovering from the stress caused by the pandemic,
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression against
Ukraine has further disrupted tight food, energy and
financial markets, with a long-lasting and adverse
impact on global food security.
As stressed by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) on 8 April,
nothing other than the immediate cessation of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine will make it
possible for markets to stabilize. Nothing other than
the immediate cessation of that aggression will make
it possible to avoid famine and restore hope for the
millions of people on the brink of starvation in many
parts of the world, including in Afghanistan, Somalia.
Yemen, South Sudan and Ethiopia.
In that context, Belgium is grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for putting together the Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance. We welcome
the recommendations issued by the Group and its
comprehensive reports on the global impact of the war
in Ukraine.
The international community needs to act
without delay to break the cycle of conflict-induced
food insecurity and make global food markets more
resilient to crisis and systemic shocks. A coordinated
and robust global response, under the leadership of the
Global Crisis Response Group and relevant partners
organizations, such as the World Food Programme
and FAO, will be essential to stabilizing markets
and avoiding further degradation of livelihoods and
development gains. The humanitarian, development
and peace dimensions of the food and nutrition crisis
will need to be addressed to enhance the sustainability
of food systems. Advancing the triple-nexus approach
and strengthening coordination at the United Nations
and country levels will also be key to ensuring resilient
and sustainable solutions.
34/51

19/05/2022

Furthermore, a renewed focus on anticipatory
action will be critical, along with the diversification of
stock concentration and production sources. Enhanced
support to the most vulnerable, including through cash
assistance, will also be instrumental in enhancing social
protection and social cohesion and alleviating hardship.
Finally, it is important to stress that access to food
is a human right. Belgium calls on all to raise awareness
of this issue by supporting the work of civil society and
social movements, including small-scale farmers, in
claiming the right to food.
These are all emergency solutions to alleviate the
crisis, but none will bring about robust and sustainable
change if the international community does not start by
putting a halt to Russia’s illegal and unjustified war on
Ukraine for the benefit of the millions of civilians on
the verge of starvation today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Oh Hyunjoo (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening us here today around this
pressing agenda. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their informative and comprehensive presentations.
Every day we now see dire new warnings about
expanding risks from rising food and fuel prices,
as well as the pressure for nearly every ordinary
household worldwide. There are increasing fears that
the world may be on the verge of a hunger catastrophe.
Indeed, the war in Ukraine has created a crisis on top
of a crisis, and that is a resulting in a massive setback
for the global economy. This latest obstacle could not
have come at a worse time when Governments were
beginning to address the social and economic legacies
of the pandemic.
Korea has already joined the collective calls for a
coordinated and focused action to mitigate the impact
of the current food shortages and higher food prices
in a variety of forums. Today I would like to highlight
the following three areas, which Member States and
the international community, including the Security
Council, should prioritize and actively engage with.
First, targeted assistance should be immediately
provided to the most vulnerable people, who have
been hit the hardest by surging food and fertilizer
prices, along with the significant cuts in global
supplies. Expediently improving access to emergency
financing for farmers and small businesses would help.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

International action to respond to the increasing risk
of a food crisis in fragile and conflict-affected States
is also critical.
My delegation welcomes the fact that United Nations
and other agencies, alongside multilateral development
banks, have developed real-time analysis to carefully
monitor price developments and fiscal space and call for
expanding support and mitigating balance-of-payment
pressures for low-income countries. Korea will further
coordinate with the international community to step
up humanitarian and development assistance for the
hardest-hit countries in that regard.
Secondly, Governments and the international
community must ensure a sufficient and stable
agricultural supply, both within and across countries.
Financial tightening, high debt and the frequent and
wide-ranging lockdowns in some countries have caused
further bottlenecks in global and regional supply
chains. In order to enhance resilience to future crises, it
is essential to back up social safety nets to help ensure
more seamless social transfers.
In the longer term, we must catalyse change to
secure sustainable and balanced diets by transforming
our agrifood systems. For its part, Korea has pledged to
contribute $900 million in special drawing rights to the
Resilience and Sustainability Trust of the International
Monetary Fund and has suggested that the Trust be
established within this year to assist countries in
need of better adapting agriculture to a world of more
frequent and severe climate shocks.
Lastly, we must maintain open regional and global
trade markets. My delegation has urged regional
cooperation to ensure a free and rules-based trading
system and to respond to the negative spillover effects
caused by individual countries’ export restrictions.
That will help us build resilience to future shocks
by raising predictability in the global food supply.
My Government endeavours to do more to create an
enabling environment with a view towards fairer and
more resilient trade investment in order to catalyse the
requisite boost in private financing for the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Our immediate hope must be for the war to end.
That would have the single most positive and immediate
effect on global recovery and fast-rising food prices. In
the meantime, we must do everything that we can to
help heavily affected countries. We need fast and wellcoordinated actions now more than ever before.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank the briefers
for their insightful remarks and for bringing these
worrisome realities to our attention. Today’s theme
is closely aligned with the African Union theme
for the year 2022, “The Year of Nutrition”, aimed at
addressing the scourge of malnutrition through political
commitment and investment.
South Africa is deeply concerned by the increasing
number of people suffering from malnutrition and food
insecurity globally, including on the African continent
and in other parts of the world. The global outlook
on food insecurity is bleak, putting many millions of
people at risk of malnutrition and hunger.
In conflict settings, hunger is a consequence
of war. In some instances, it is used as a weapon of
war, which is of great concern, particularly as that
continues with impunity. We therefore call on all
parties to conflict to comply with resolution 2417
(2018) and ensure that civilian populations have access
to humanitarian assistance.
Civilians are the primary victims such vicious
cycles of food insecurity in armed conflicts, particularly
women, children, the elderly and disabled persons. We
are concerned about the plight of internally displaced
persons, refugees and migrants who are subjected to
difficult living conditions during conflict situations
and who are fully reliant on humanitarian assistance. It
is therefore crucial to ensure the swift, unimpeded and
impartial delivery of humanitarian aid to all those who
require it, in line with the provisions of international
humanitarian law, and ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian workers.
Food insecurity is a human and economic
development issue that necessitates the involvement
of the relevant agencies of the United Nations, which
have a better grasp of the gravity of the global situation
and are best placed to identify sustainable solutions
to the global food crisis. In that context, South Africa
welcomes the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance, which
is intended to ensure a comprehensive and coordinated
response to the current food crisis and is underpinned
by multi-stakeholder partnerships.
We acknowledge that food insecurity is a reality
that should be addressed. However, in terms of armed

22-3551135/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflict, where, as a consequence of war, global food
supply chains are disrupted and where that may lead to
food insecurity and hunger, it would be the imperative
of the Security Council to address the root causes of
the conflict and prevent food insecurity. Economic
sanctions and unilateral coercive measures imposed
on countries in conflict settings may inadvertently
exacerbate hunger in conflict situations, as civilians
may have less access to nutrition and medical supplies
and be faced with higher prices for food items, owing
to failing economies. We therefore reiterate our call for
the lifting of such sanctions.
We reiterate and emphasize the importance of full
compliance with the Geneva Conventions, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by all parties to conflict. States and parties to conflict
have the responsibility to protect civilians. Therefore,
those responsible for violations of such international
law should be held accountable. Humanitarian
assistance provided in conflict areas should be genderand age-sensitive and remain responsive to the different
needs of the population, while ensuring that they are
integrated in humanitarian responses.
Let me conclude by restating what we said
yesterday: that we all need to commit to finding
peaceful solutions to conflict. Armed conflict has a
devastating impact on livelihoods. It disrupts food
systems, causes the displacement of people and triggers
food insecurity. Working towards ending conflict by
prioritizing political dialogue, rather than fuelling
conflict by creating divisions and resorting, to war
must be prioritized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of New Zealand,
which welcomes the decision by the United States to
choose conflict-driven food insecurity as the theme
for today’s open debate. We also thank Ireland for its
work as the Security Council’s focal point on conflict
and hunger. New Zealand is committed to working with
partners to advance international efforts to address
food insecurity.
Hunger has no place in the twenty-first century.
When the Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018),
four years ago, it was amid a resurgence in global food
insecurity, driven primarily by conflict. Resolution 2417
(2018) reminds us that conflict contributes to hunger
36/51

19/05/2022

both directly through the effects of war and indirectly
through the disruption of markets. Sadly, the situation
we face today is even more dire. Conflict, the climate
crisis, the coronavirus disease pandemic and surging
food and fuel costs have created a perfect storm.
This year is forecast to be the most food-insecure
year on record globally. We heard from today’s briefers
about the extreme scope of the insecurity. The Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
has reported that 193 million people in 53 countries
or territories will experience acute food insecurity at
crisis or worse levels this year. That is a sharp increase
of nearly 40 million people from 2020.
There is no question that conflict is a key driver
of food insecurity. New Zealand has watched with
concern as the prices of key food commodities and
fertilizers have increased rapidly. Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified attack on Ukraine is the primary driver
behind those price spikes. Sanctions are not the cause
of the price spikes or food shortages; Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine is.
The impact of Russia’s actions are being felt
beyond Europe. They are hurting countries that already
face dangerous levels of food insecurity. New Zealand
is concerned about the potential domestic unrest in
countries affected by price increases and shortages of
essential items. The most efficient way to mitigate the
worsening global food crisis is for Russia to silence its
guns, withdraw its troops and end this pointless war.
New Zealand is collaborating with its international
partners to respond to the growing food security crisis.
That includes providing flexible and multi-year funding
to the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We are also providing support to specific
humanitarian crises to alleviate food insecurity. Now
is not the time to lose focus on long-running conflicts
or humanitarian crises. Now is not the time for
Member States to reduce or divert their development or
humanitarian funding.
New Zealand strongly supports the call for countries
to resist actions that hinder trade in essential foods
and agricultural commodities. Export restrictions,
hoarding and similar trade-distorting measures only
worsen global food security. More than ever, we
must keep global agricultural markets open and trade
flowing stably.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Earlier this month New Zealand signed onto the
United Kingdom-led joint statement committing to
open and predictable trade in agricultural and food
products, delivered to the World Trade Organization
(WTO). We urge Member States to ensure that any
emergency measures not distort or restrict trade and
are temporary, designed with the utmost restraint and
consistent with WTO rules.
Climate change also contributes to food insecurity.
This is a serious concern for New Zealand and our
Indo-Pacific region. We are experiencing the effects
of climate change on food security in our region,
which is evident through an increase in extreme
weather-related events, including drought, wildfire,
extreme temperatures and flooding. Extreme weatherrelated events are predicted to increase in frequency
and magnitude, threatening the safe production and
distribution of food in our region and around the world.
We encourage the Council to take unified action
on the worsening food security crisis and, in doing so,
demonstrate collective leadership for the benefit of all
in the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Murphy: The Holy See would like to
thank you and your delegation, Sir, for organizing this
open debate.
Today, among the more than 800 million people
who face hunger, no less than 60 per cent live in
areas affected by violence. That data underscores the
timeliness and importance of this discussion.
In its resolution 2417 (2018), the Security Council
rightly points to the link between armed conflict and
violence and conflict-induced food insecurity and the
threat of famine, as well as to the fact that the impact of
conflict on food security can be both direct and indirect.
The ongoing war in Ukraine has vividly illustrated that
reality, with rising hunger on the ground and several
countries near and far experiencing shortages of
cooking oil, fertilizers, corn and wheat due to reduced
production and export. The situation threatens to
destabilize States that rely on food imports. In States
that are affected, many are going without their daily
bread even as the world produces enough food for all.
That is a genuine scandal that has the potential to trigger
further conflict and violence. Escaping that cycle calls
for a more integral approach to security. My delegation

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

would like to take this opportunity to highlight four
points in that regard.
First, the dignity of the human person must be at
the centre of all our efforts. That requires respecting
and complying with international humanitarian law,
which prohibits the starvation of civilians as a method
of warfare and the creation of obstacles to humanitarian
access. Additionally, we must recognize that treating
food merely as a commodity supplied through the
cold logic of the market will not be enough to ensure
that everyone has access to safe, uncontaminated and
sufficient food.
Secondly, committing to and advancing gradual
and systematic disarmament remains crucial if we are
to curb hostilities that contribute directly to increased
social unrest and food insecurity.
Thirdly, other factors that further exacerbate
conflict-induced hunger should be monitored and
addressed. They include the effects of climate change,
whose consequences are more than just environmental,
as they affect the economic, social and political arenas,
with significant repercussions for food security and
food systems.
Finally, the Holy See continues to emphasize the
proposal of Pope Saint Paul VI to establish a global
fund to assist those most impoverished peoples, drawn
partially from military expenditures. As noted by Pope
Francis in his encyclical Fratelli Tutti, such a fund
would contribute to putting an end to hunger and favour
development in the most impoverished countries so
that their citizens will not resort to violent or illusory
solutions. In doing so, the fund would address the root
causes of conflicts in order to increase integral security
for us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I would like to thank the
United States presidency for organizing this timely
and critically important debate. I also thank all of the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
Ending hunger is one of the most fundamental
development goals of humankind. Hard-fought gains
in economic development and poverty reduction have
recently been shattered by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The pandemic’s devastating socioeconomic
consequences, combined with the ongoing climate
crisis, are worsening food insecurity, particularly

22-3551137/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

among already vulnerable populations around the
world. However, conflict is the dominant root cause
of food crises throughout the world, according to the
World Food Programme’s 2022 Global Report on
Food Crises.
The ongoing aggression in Ukraine is now
jeopardizing food-supply chains and has pushed food
prices to record highs. Its negative impact is being
felt globally, especially by developing countries. The
adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) was an encouraging
moment in the Security Council’s efforts to counter
conflict-driven hunger. But while such resolutions give
us an opportunity to tackle the issues of conflict and
hunger, what we need are collective efforts to seize
that opportunity and take action now, together and
in solidarity, to avert an even more unprecedented
hunger crisis.
My country, Myanmar, has been experiencing
the impact of the nexus of the key drivers of food
insecurity, that is, conflict, climate change and poverty.
As a country that is highly vulnerable to the effects
of climate change, Myanmar had been undertaking
climate-change mitigation and adaptation policies under
its democratically elected Government. Economic
recovery plans were under way at the time of the
Myanmar military’s attempt at an illegal coup, in which
elected civilian leaders were kept incommunicado
as hostages.
Since then, the illegitimate military regime
has been inflicting great suffering on the people of
Myanmar through repeated brutal massacres, torture
and mass displacement. According to the United
Nations Development Programme, half of Myanmar’s
population is now living below the national poverty
line. Humanitarian organizations have estimated that
6.2 million of our citizens are now in need of life-saving
support. Basic food prices have risen by 30 per cent.
Millions of families have been driven into desperation
and hunger. Internally displaced persons (IDPs),
especially children, are being hit the hardest by the
instability inflicted by the coup. People have lost their
homes and livelihoods. That instability, the persistent
threat of military violence and a lack of resettlement
and rehabilitation assistance have confined them to
IDP camps indefinitely and are preventing their return
home. That has led to a significant disruption of their
livelihoods and agricultural production.
38/51

19/05/2022

Moreover, the junta has spared no effort in its
attempts to control access to humanitarian assistance
for those in critical need, in violation of international
humanitarian law. The military’s ongoing inhumane
policy has directly impacted food security in the
country. There will be no peace or stability in Myanmar
as long as the illegal military junta’s failing coup drags
on. The people of Myanmar, with their elected civilian
National Unity Government and National Unity
Consultative Council at the forefront, have therefore
been doing everything they can, and with ever-greater
determination, to end the current military-made
catastrophe and build a fairer, democratic future that
ensures fundamental human rights for all.
What Myanmar’s situation tells us is that the impact
of conflict on food insecurity is not necessarily the
inevitable result of collateral damage. In most cases, it
is deliberate. Hunger and the blockage of humanitarian
assistance are tactics employed intentionally to control
a particular population in order to serve military
objectives. That is exactly the case with the Myanmar
military, which has enjoyed a sense of blanket impunity
for past atrocities and has no regard for international
human rights or humanitarian law. The Security
Council should act whenever the tactic of deliberate
starvation is used by any party to a conflict.
In conclusion, it is essential to respond to hunger
everywhere. However, the ultimate answer lies in
addressing the root causes of food insecurity. We must
strengthen multilateral cooperation to tackle climate
change and eradicate extreme poverty. In order to
resolve conflicts, the key driver of food insecurity, or at
least alleviate their impact, we must not only enhance
the credibility and effectiveness of our multilateral
institutions, especially the Security Council, but also
promote strict adherence to international law, including
international humanitarian law, without which we
would be living in a very dangerous world.
I therefore urge us all to work together as we
explore all available options to end hunger and conflictinduced food insecurity for the sake of all vulnerable
populations — not only in Myanmar, but all over the
world — as well as for international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the United States for convening today’s important
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

debate, and we thank the briefers for their briefings
and accounts.
As other States, Chile is concerned about the current
global situation, marked by a clear spike in the prices of
basic food items and other products and food shortages.
According to the World Food Programme, there is the
likelihood that acute food insecurity will worsen in 20
countries, and predictions are that this year we will
see the highest levels of food insecurity ever recorded
globally. We are concerned about the fact that, between
2018 and 2021, the number of people experiencing food
insecurity, caused primarily by conflict, increased to
139 million people from 73 million. Food insecurity
deals the heaviest blow to countries with the highest
levels of poverty, more fragile political institutions or
weak rule of law. Worsening conflict-induced hunger
and the identification of conflict-related food insecurity
crises, which either already exist or have the potential
to occur, are key issues for the Council, as they all have
a direct impact on the lives of the most vulnerable and
on their livelihoods.
Addressing the issue of food security in conflict
not only means that States must ensure that trade in
food and fertilizer continues; it also means that States
must not join others to impose sanctions or other
measures that might hinder international trade or the
movement and availability of or access to food, as that
would violate food security principles.
Guaranteeing ongoing humanitarian access,
protecting humanitarian workers and ensuring that
parties to conflict are held accountable for depriving
civilians of food or for attacking production or food
systems are all essential. It is also crucial that parties
to conflict respect international law and international
humanitarian law. Chile condemns the use of
starvation as a method of warfare and reaffirms that
it is important for States to conduct comprehensive,
independent, impartial and effective investigations,
within their jurisdiction, on violations of that kind in
order to strengthen preventive measures, guarantee
accountability and address the grievances of victims.
Looking ahead, Chile believes that tangible
solutions will be required to foster international
cooperation among States and other specialized
actors in the international system. For example, we
can harness the knowledge of scientific groups that
worked for the Food Systems Summit in 2021 in order
to address the various aspects of the food crisis. We

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

would like to recall that we are in the United Nations
Decade of Family Farming 2019-2028 and the United
Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition 2016-2025.
We therefore underscore that action taken to address
the global food crisis should have a direct impact on
improving access to, as well as the availability and
quality of, food provided to the most vulnerable groups,
while ensuring that priority is given to children, women
and the elderly, in particular those in humanitarian
emergencies or conflict situations.
Multilateralism must provide joint and coordinated
responses to the serious food, logistics and humanitarian
crisis we now face. Global issues require joint solutions.
The Council can count on the support and cooperation
of Chile to achieve that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime and the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
First of all, I would like to thank the United States
for organizing today’s important debate and all the
briefers for their briefings.
The looming food crisis was the focus of yesterday’s
ministerial meeting at the United Nations, and we align
ourselves with the Chair’s statement. As a reliable
contributor to global food security and one of the main
food suppliers, Ukraine fully shares the commitment to
acting with urgency in this area. Over the past few years,
the food security situation has deteriorated for the most
vulnerable, in particular due to the coronavirus disease.
Regrettably, instead of recovery, the world emerging
from the pandemic has faced a new threat — Russia’s
full-fledged war on Ukraine. Along with international
law and the rules-based order, Russia has also dealt a
hard blow to global food security, as approximately
400 million people throughout the world depend on
grain supplies from Ukraine. Now, due to the blockade
of Ukrainian seaports, exports of Ukrainian grain
have almost stopped. In pre-invasion times, Ukraine
exported 5 million tons of grain per month. In March,
exports decreased to approximately only 200,000 tons;
in April, to some 1.1 million tons. Large areas in the east
and south of Ukraine remain places of combat action or
are under occupation. That is why we expect the harvest
in 2022 to be just 50 per cent of last year’s yield.

22-3551139/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Another threat is Russia’s actions to seize
Ukrainian grain for its own consumption or in an
attempt to illegally sell it on international markets. The
Russian occupiers have already stolen at least between
400,000 and 500,000 tons of grain. Ukraine has already
warned consumer countries that grain consignments
exported by Russia could contain stolen Ukrainian
grain. Any country that knowingly purchases that grain
will be considered complicit in the crime. We demand
that Russia stop the grain stealing, unblock Ukrainian
seaports, restore the freedom of navigation and allow
trade ships to pass.
As was already said here more than once, this war
is a war of choice — the choice of President Putin. It
will also be his choice with regard to the food crisis.
There should be no doubt about who will be responsible
for the possible starvation of millions of people.
We strongly reject any manipulative narrative that
sanctions against Russia would make it impossible to
effectively address the issue of agricultural exports. All
required exclusions have already been made. As soon
as Russia is compelled to stop the war, the looming
threat of hunger will be over. Otherwise, the famine
and suffering of millions will be blamed completely on
President Putin.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity of observer.
Conflict is still the single most important driver
of humanitarian needs. The war in Ukraine is a case
in point, as was so clearly explained by my Ukrainian
colleague just now. In addition to causing displacement
and disruption in local food markets, the war has ripple
effects on humanitarian needs worldwide, driving
up food and humanitarian needs in countries, such
as Afghanistan and Somalia — countries that are
already vulnerable.
Let me be frank: we continue to hear arguments
that European and other sanctions are to blame
for increasing food insecurity. That is simply not
true. European restrictive measures are targeted in
accordance with international law and, indeed, aim to
uphold and strengthen respect for international law. It is
large-scale armed conflict that disrupts food markets.
40/51

19/05/2022

Besides the ripple effects of the war in Ukraine,
there are deeply concerning reports from Yemen.
Objects indispensable to the survival of civilians were
attacked even when there were no military targets in
the vicinity. Water wells were bombed, and agricultural
land was extensively mined to the point of rendering
it useless. Such actions further worsen an already dire
humanitarian situation and may constitute violations of
international humanitarian law.
We should take the following steps to help minimize
the impact of conflicts on food security.
First of all, we must ensure reporting. Resolution
2417 (2018) calls on the Secretary-General to report to
the Security Council in instances where conflict leads
to severe food insecurity. We support the proposal
made by the United States at the Arria Formula meeting
held a couple of weeks ago to submit such reports twice
a year, and we call on all members of the Security
Council to give their full attention to those reports, as
agreed under resolution 2417 (2018).
Secondly, reports of hunger-related violations
of international humanitarian law should be taken
seriously,
and
incidents
should
investigated.
Accountability is key if we want to put an end to grave
violations of international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we need to work towards more resilient
food systems. Last year’s United Nations Food Systems
Summit laid the groundwork.
In conclusion, resolution 2417 (2018) was the first
time the Security Council recognized the direct link
between conflict and hunger. With humanitarian needs
across the world increasing, we need to act, and we
need to act together. The Netherlands stands ready to
do its part and looks forward to the continued global
cooperation to break the vicious link between conflict
and hunger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I thank the
presidency of the United States for convening this
timely debate on conflict and food security.
The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights
recognized the right to food as a human right. However,
even today, hundreds of millions of people go to bed on
an empty stomach each night. The report of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations stated
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

that the coronavirus disease pandemic alone deprived
320 million people of access to food in 2020. Around
2.37 billion people do not have access to adequate food
and, tragically, 60 per cent of the world’s hungry people
live in conflict zones.
Today the global Food Price Index has reached its
highest level ever, accounting for a 30 per cent rise. The
World Bank estimates that, for every percentage point
increase in food prices, 10 million people are pushed
into extreme poverty worldwide. The mounting food
and oil prices have already hit the net food-importing
developing countries, such as Nepal. In the face of the
worst global pandemic, many developing countries are
under the pressure of debt, eroding purchasing power,
depleting foreign currency reserves and creating
exchange rate stress.
Resolution 2417 (2018) recognized the links
between conflict and food insecurity. Compliance with
the resolution is necessary to mitigate conflict-induced
food insecurity, as well as barring starvation as a
weapon of war, alongside the importance of ensuring
access to humanitarian aid.
While prioritizing conflict-affected zones, we need
to address food insecurity by building a sustainable,
resilient and inclusive food system at the national
and global levels. In that context, let me submit the
following points.
First, we need to advance political solutions for
conflicts, thereby promoting peace and security and, in
doing so, mitigating the food crisis. While short-term
humanitarian relief is urgent for vulnerable populations,
we need to promote a long-term sustainable agrifood
system with the involvement of rural and small-scale
farmers to ensure the food and livelihoods of vulnerable
sections of societies.
Secondly, we need to strengthen regional and global
cooperation to keep a rein on economic shocks, inflation
and supply chain disruptions. We must maintain a
seamless trade flow of food, fuels and fertilizers
through open markets, while discouraging hoarding
by one or few countries and checking speculation by
big traders.
Thirdly, international financial institutions should
support developing countries, which are facing fatal
financial and monetary crises owing to inflation, limited
fiscal space and depleting foreign currency reserves.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Fourthly, short-term solutions should lead to
sustainable, inclusive, climate-compatible agriculture
and food systems to deliver for people and the planet.
Finally, more than anything else, we, the Member
States, should work as a collaborative community with
a higher level of political determination to settle the
conflicts and political differences to maintain peace
and tranquillity and to avoid conflict-driven famine
and food insecurity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The report
on the global impact of the war in Ukraine on food,
energy and finance systems, published on 13 April
by the Secretary-General’s Global Crisis Response
Group, has alerted us to the perfect storm on the
horizon of the limited food availability and rising food
prices, disruptions in energy production and upheaval
in trade and finance. All of that is occurring in a world
that has not yet recovered from the terrible economic
and social consequences of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
It is particularly alarming that the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Food
Price Index recorded a 34 per cent increase in April since
last year, reaching its highest level since its creation
in 1990. The conflict between Russia and Ukraine is a
factor that explains the increase, considering that both
countries supply 30 per cent of wheat, 20 per cent of
barley and 50 per cent of sunflower oil to global markets.
Several countries, including Peru, were already
foreseeing and preparing to face that three-sided
crisis. Consequently, on 19 March, the Peruvian
Government officially declared a state of emergency
in the agricultural and irrigation sector, precisely
because of the adverse effects of COVID-19 and a
series of external threats that have triggered a constant
increase in fertilizer prices worldwide, among which
the Russian-Ukrainian conflict stands out. Russia is
our main source of fertilizers.
That situation has caused a 0.2 per cent reduction
in planted land in Peru for the 2021 to 2022 agricultural
year. That jeopardizes the smooth development of
agricultural activities and their value chain, which has
a negative impact on the agricultural sector and the
Peruvian economy, with the consequent repercussions
for end consumers and food security.

22-3551141/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The situation in Ukraine also has a socioeconomic
impact owing to the rise in food prices, which will have
an increasingly severe effect on developing countries,
especially on the poor, who spend most of their income
on food. That, in turn, entails a risk of increased global
conflict owing to widespread social unrest.
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the primary responsibility of the Security Council is
to maintain international peace and security. Its States
Members have the responsibility to fulfil that mandate.
For that reason, the Government of Peru expressed its
support for the presidential statement issued on 6 May
by the Security Council regarding the maintenance of
peace and security in Ukraine (S/PRST/2022/3). The
statement recalled the obligation of all Member States
to settle their disputes by peaceful means and expressed
its firm support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
in the search for a peaceful solution.
COVID-19 taught humankind that no one is safe
until everyone is safe. No country has guaranteed peace
and stability until we all live in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
As other colleagues have pointed out before, climate
change, inequalities and conflicts are the biggest
drivers of hunger. Food insecurity had been on the rise
before the pandemic, but Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine has exacerbated the situation, destabilizing a
region that is crucial to the global supply of agricultural
commodities. That aggression has caused severe
damage to storage infrastructure and agriculture
processing facilities, prevented farmers from tending
their fields and impeded the export of goods already
harvested following the blockade of Ukrainian ports.
And we must be clear that those disruptions are caused
by war and not by sanctions.
The higher prices faced by global food markets
put those most vulnerable at particular risk, namely, in
developing countries. The people in the Mediterranean
basin, the Sahel and the Horn of Africa are especially
threatened by those effects. We must deliver immediate
assistance to those in need, while supporting partner
countries in their transition to sustainable agrifood
systems. We should prioritize keeping trading food
and fertilizers open, exploring alternative sources of
42/51

19/05/2022

food supplies, supporting agricultural production at
acceptable costs and promoting access to short-term
credit and to markets. Yesterday, at the United Nations
Global Food Security Call to Action, the SecretaryGeneral acknowledged the importance of engaging in
ongoing dialogue in that connection, and we welcome
such discussions.
In the meanwhile, humanitarian actors have
made extensive efforts to promote resilience among
vulnerable communities, strengthening local production
in countries at risk of food insecurity. We commend
and support those initiatives. The private sector can
also play a role in that regard, helping small farmers
increase their productivity and improving sustainable
value chains.
Food is a human right. It derives directly from the
right to an adequate standard of living, as enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. Food-related policies must be
embedded in a human-rights approach. States have a
core obligation to take the necessary action to mitigate
and alleviate hunger in situations of conflict and are
required to refrain from all discrimination in access
to food, on any grounds. We encourage the Security
Council to collaborate closely on the protection of
human rights in this conflict with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Special Rapporteur on the right to food.
We all know that we can only be effective in
tackling this crisis if we work together. That is why
we support the General Assembly draft resolution
promoted by Lebanon on the state of global food
security, to be adopted on 23 May. It is also why we
welcome the work of the United Nations Global Crisis
Response Group and look forward to its next steps
in accordance with other relevant initiatives like the
Group of Seven Global Alliance for Food Security. The
Group will be crucial — not only to addressing foodsupply disruptions and spiking energy prices, but also
to ensure that the measures that are now put in place do
not undermine long-term stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to express
our appreciation to all briefers for their valuable and
thought-provoking remarks.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I would like to make
the following remarks in my national capacity.
Let me start by saying that Poland is very proud
to recall that, almost exactly four years ago, during
Poland’s presidency of the Security Council, the
Council voted unanimously to adopt resolution 2417
(2018), mentioned so often today, on conflict-induced
food insecurity. The resolution calls on all parties to
armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and
“strongly condemns the use of starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare” (resolution 2417
(2018), para. 5).
It also strongly condemns
“the unlawful denial of humanitarian access and
depriving civilians of objects indispensable to
their survival, including wilfully impeding relief
supply and access for responses to conflict-induced
food insecurity in situations of armed conflict”
(ibid., para 6).
Unfortunately, this particular appeal needs
to be added to a long list of regulations that
have been broken by a member of the Security
Council itself — Russia — through its aggression
against Ukraine.
In recent weeks, food security has been raised in
multiple forums. Let me share three ways in which
Poland works to counter this crisis.
First, the repercussions of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine on international food insecurity was
one of the main themes of the Regional Conference for
Europe of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO), which took place in Poland
this week.
The thirty-third session of FAO for Europe adopted
a decision — almost unanimously — condemning
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. It called upon
Russia to immediately cease hostilities in order to allow
for the full resumption of agricultural production. It also
requested FAO to prepare and implement recovery plans
to ensure food security in the countries most affected
by the conflict. In the adopted decision, the Conference
expressed its solidarity and support for Ukraine, as well
as recognition for the countries supporting Kyiv and
accepting refugees. It also stressed its deep concern

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

about the threat of the Russian authorities to limit food
supplies to countries supporting Ukraine.
Secondly, Poland, in close cooperation with
Ukraine, works on facilitating the export of Ukrainian
grain and food products by means of our transport
infrastructure, including railroads and seaports. With
that in mind, the agriculture ministers of Poland and
Ukraine met this week in Warsaw, along with their
United States counterpart, to sign an agreement on the
transport of Ukrainian grain through Poland.
It is estimated that by using Polish transport
infrastructure Ukraine can export up to 2 million tons
of grain a month, while a capacity of 5 million is needed
to avoid a severe crisis. We therefore remain open to
further cooperation and will comprehensively support
the Ukrainian side in this difficult situation.
Thirdly, we call on the international community
to provide immediate support to Ukraine in its
efforts to expand its storage and logistics capacities
for agricultural and food products damaged by the
Russian aggression. Meanwhile, we are convinced that
arranging for additional storage capacities in countries
neighbouring Ukraine could provide a temporary
solution to that problem.
Poland is ready to continue its cooperation with
the international community in the global fight against
the food crisis through Polish development assistance.
We are convinced that it is necessary to protect the
countries most threatened by famine, namely, in
Africa, the Middle East and Europe’s neighbourhood.
That is why Poland contributed financially to World
Food Programme initiatives in Kenya and Syria in 2020
and to World Food Programme actions in Afghanistan,
Tajikistan and Yemen in 2021.
Poland is not only an important food producer, but
it can also store and process large amounts of food and
food products. We are ready to cooperate and share
our experience, and extend an offer to help process,
preserve and store food. The development and prudent
management of such capacities worldwide is crucial in
order to avoid food waste, another factor contributing
to hunger and food shortages.
Poland also contributes to bilateral development
projects that increase the food production capacity
of local partners. In Kenya, we support a project that
aims at creating an efficient irrigation system that is
independent of weather conditions. Moreover, in 2021

22-3551143/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Poland joined the School Meals Coalition because
it understands that school meals programmes help
to combat child hunger, poverty and multiple forms
of malnutrition.
The current food security crisis is not the result of
the sanctions imposed on Russia. It is a ripple effect
of the ongoing Russian aggression that from day one
aimed at disrupting the production and export of
agricultural products from Ukraine. Russia might have
hoped that the negative consequences felt by many
countries would prevent the international community
from providing support to Ukraine. The result they
achieved was just the opposite, and once again the
international community has proved Russia wrong.
In general, Poland is against imposing sanctions
on food production, as in the past we were actually
targeted by Russian sanctions in that area. On many
occasions, Russia used such instruments as weapons
in political conflicts, imposing prohibitive tariffs on
Polish food products or simply banning them from their
markets. Such methods are not acceptable in times
of peace, let alone by a country waging a bloody war
against its neighbour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I would like to thank the
briefers for their update earlier today.
We are gathered for a clear reason — Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine is threatening global food security
and is compounding the devastating impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the conflict and climate
change. It has had a great impact on fragile food systems,
causing further disruption to global food production
and exports, inflating already high commodity and
food prices.
It must be said that the numbers are alarming.
Forty-three million people were on the brink of famine
before the invasion of Ukraine. Now the World Food
Programme estimates an additional 33 to 47 million
people will fall into acute food insecurity as a direct
result of the invasion. That demonstrates the causal effect
of conflict on hunger crises, including in Afghanistan,
Myanmar and Yemen, among other examples.
I should also like to call out yet again the
disinformation that we have heard today and in recent
weeks, and that is the disingenuous claim that the
food security crisis that we are discussing has been
44/51

19/05/2022

caused by Western sanctions. That is incorrect. The
food security crisis is occurring because global food
prices are now at record high levels — record highs as a
result of Russia’s war in Ukraine; record highs because
Ukraine is preoccupied with defending itself against
Russia’s unprovoked, unjust and illegal invasion rather
than shipping grain; record highs because more than
7 million Ukrainians have been displaced by the war
and agricultural land and civilian infrastructure has
been damaged, significantly disrupting the growing
season and access to markets.
Let us be clear. One way to rapidly improve food
security is for Russia to immediately end its war in
Ukraine. Another useful response to growing food
insecurity is to focus on humanitarian needs, including
through organizations such as the World Food
Programme. Famine can be averted with early action,
but that requires unhindered humanitarian access and a
well-resourced rapid response.
Australia calls on all actors to allow access for
humanitarian agencies to reach those most in need.
International trade should also support food security.
The most critical short-term global response to curtail
the food price increases is maintaining open, transparent
and predictable agricultural trade. Experience and
evidence clearly showed that domestic protections such
as trade barriers and subsidies make economies weaker
and more costly in the long run.
Despite that, the scale of the current restrictions
being imposed on food and fertilizer trade surpassed
those enacted during the last major food crisis of 2007 to
2008, according to the World Bank. Those restrictions
will reduce the amount of product available for global
trade, bringing up prices and causing supply chain
issues as countries compete for alternative supplies.
Australia urges all countries to keep agricultural
trade open, improve access to food, lower import
barriers and cut export restrictions.
Our highest priority should be to ensure that food
can make its way to the most vulnerable. Australia will
always remain a reliable open supplier of food products
to the world. But the greatest and most immediate
improvement, and let us all say it again, will come
from the immediate withdrawal of Russian forces from
Ukrainian territory.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Adam (Maldives): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the founder
and Chief Executive Officer of Gro Intelligence for
their briefings and the invaluable insights that they
have provided.
Nothing is more fundamental to our human
existence than food, water and clean air. Yet multiple
crises, from conflict to climate change, threaten the
fish, forests and fields that we have relied upon to
sustain us for generation upon generation. We welcome
this opportunity to share our reflections on food
security, conflict and the maintenance of international
peace and security.
We live in extremely challenging times. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues
to pose a threat. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change reports on climate change are alarming. The
state of our ocean is dire. Fires rage. Desertification
intensifies. Farmers face unprecedented droughts.
Those conditions had already created a significant
increase in food prices, and conflict situations have
intensified that already troubling situation.
Navigating the COVID pandemic required
Maldives to make unprecedented State expenditures
to secure vaccines and supplies and to provide support
to workers, families and businesses. As we began
2022, we had a sense of optimism that the worst of the
pandemic was behind us and that we could begin the
work of stabilizing under this new normal. Instead, this
year began with the challenges caused by rising energy
and food prices.
That is a particularly acute problem for Maldives
and other small islands that rely on imported staple
foods, cooking oils and other agricultural commodities.
Our Governments, which already face funding
challenges associated with COVID expenditures, must
now consider supports to soften and stabilize foodprice shocks, creating further demands on fiscal space
that is in already dire short supply.
There is little that Maldives can do alone to address
the situation directly. At best, we can increase our
stockpiles of foodstuffs, but that is no substitute for
the free flow of food and goods through our global
supply chains, which we have come to rely on to feed

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

and provide for our people. Changes to the system at
this point would be imprudent given the significant
investments necessary to re-engineer supply chains
and ensure that the required storage and transportation
infrastructure is in place.
We must also heed the lessons from the COVID
pandemic. That means that we should avoid situations
in times of scarcity where we retreat inward when the
moment demands greater global solidarity, engagement
and support. We must avoid trade and other measures
that disrupt the flow of food that is so vital to not just
Maldives but to all countries around the world.
Conflict is nothing new. There are many parts of
the world in conflict situations, and every effort must
be made to bring them to an end through durable
diplomatic solutions. Today’s interconnected supply
chains are such that a conflict anywhere in the world
can have far-reaching consequences.
However, it is not just conflict that undermines our
food security. Conflict exacerbates the situation, but
climate change, unsustainable patterns of consumption
and environmental degradation are foundational threats
to our food security and our very existence. We must
ensure that we work to address the root causes of food
insecurity, conflict and associated challenges, as that
is the only way to ensure enduring international peace
and security.
Food cannot be weaponized as a tool of coercive
diplomacy. For us to ensure international peace and
security, we must work with all actors, including civil
society, business and others, to address not only food
security but also the wider system risks that undermine
our planetary health and food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Niger.
Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): The Niger
congratulates your delegation, Mr. President, on having
assumed the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I should like also to thank our eminent briefers,
Secretary-General António Guterres, Mr. David
Beasley and Mr. Qu Dongyu and Ms. Menker for their
enlightening briefings. The participation of a high
number of ministers in our debate today shows, as if it
were necessary, the importance of holding a discussion
on the impact of conflicts on food security.
While the world has just begun to see the light
at the end of the tunnel in terms of the fight against

22-3551145/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

the coronavirus disease pandemic, at the same time,
regrettably, we are seeing a growing number of
conflicts and violence in various regions of the world,
with tragic consequences, in particular for food security
and nutrition for those peoples that are the victims of
those conflicts.
It is not a mere coincidence that a study was
published by the World Food Programme showing
that 60 per cent of those who are suffering from food
insecurity and malnutrition live in regions of violent
conflict and insecurity, as is the case in Yemen, in
Syria, in the Horn of Africa, in the Lake Chad basin
and in my own region, the Sahel.
In all those conflict situations, the supply chains
have been disrupted, as have commercial transactions
between communities, as people had to flee their homes
and abandon their livelihoods. In fact, violence in the
Sahel, where agriculture is the main economic activity,
has led to millions of people being displaced. They had
to abandon their crops and their cattle and seek refuge
in other communities or even in refugee camps.
With no crops to harvest, no animals to raise,
and rural markets having become no-go areas,
displaced people have found themselves food insecure
and dependent on humanitarian aid for survival.
Unfortunately, in many cases, access to populations
trapped in remote areas or under the control of violent
extremist groups is difficult and risky for humanitarian
workers, who are themselves targeted, or taken hostage
for ransom, by terrorist groups.
The adverse effects of climate change are another
factor that exacerbates food insecurity. Indeed, even
before the advent of insecurity and the intensification
of the activities of armed terrorist groups, regions
like the Sahel were already weakened by extreme
climatic phenomena such as droughts, floods and soil
degradation. With the resulting scarcity of natural
resources, difficulties in accessing these resources
have led to conflicts between farming and herding
communities that had previously lived in symbiosis.
This is why, during its recent Council mandate, the
Niger constantly drew attention to the link between
the negative impact of climate change, insecurity and
food security.
If there are still sceptics as to the link between
food security and conflict, the current crisis in Ukraine
serves to prove them wrong. It is now clear that a
conflict in any part of the world can affect the supply
46/51

19/05/2022

and accessibility of food and such agricultural inputs
as fertilizer, owing to the disruption of supply chains
associated with that conflict area. My delegation calls
on the international community to make every effort
to end the hostilities in Ukraine in order to create an
environment conducive to the free flow of goods to
and from that area, in order to alleviate and eventually
alleviate the current food shortage.
In conclusion, while urgent measures are needed
to end conflicts and break the cycle of food insecurity
and famine that they generate in affected areas, the
Niger believes that, in countries facing the scourge of
terrorism and violent extremism coupled with climate
change, only sustainable solutions supported by
significant funding can break this vicious cycle. To this
end, the implementation of projects and programmes
aimed at mitigating the adverse effects of climate
change and land degradation on farming and herding
will undoubtedly help boost food production. Building
basic infrastructure to provide essential services and
good governance will undoubtedly help to build the
peace and resilience of populations in these conflict
zones, particularly the Sahel.
As many of the speakers have said this morning,
arable land exists and the world has sufficient funds to
finance agriculture, especially with the help of science
and technology. To refuse to feed people is therefore
to choose to fuel conflict. We have the technical and
financial capacity to change the course of history. Let
us do it now. Let us do it while there is still time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate. We also thank the
briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
For Indonesia, food security and national security
are two sides of the same coin. From our own past
experiences, uncontrollably high prices of staple food
and supply-side constraints have resulted in great
political instability. We therefore share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that if we do not feed the people, we
feed conflict.
Today a combination of conflict, the coronavirus
disease and climate change are contributing to food
insecurity as well as humanitarian crises in many parts
of the world. The war in Ukraine is exacerbating this
situation, as it and Russia are important producers of
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

food, commodities and agricultural inputs. We reiterate
our call for stopping the war.
Addressing global food insecurity requires both
short-term and long-term actions. In the short term, and
most immediately, we need to scale up humanitarian
assistance to people living in conflict areas. Also
important is humanitarian assistance for people whose
food-commodity supplies have been disrupted, owing
either to conflicts or such natural phenomena as
droughts or floods.
The limited fiscal space of developing countries as
a result of two years of pandemic requires us to increase
support for humanitarian aid and United Nations
humanitarian agencies. A key strategy in the short term
is to bring available stockpiles of food commodities and
agricultural inputs from Ukraine and Russia to market.
While agriculture products are not subject to sanction,
this understanding must be well coordinated with the
international banking system so that product delivery is
not delayed owing to payment issues. We also welcome
the Secretary-General’s effort to work on an agriculture
corridor in Ukraine and Russia.
In the medium and long term, there must be a
global strategy that supports agriculture, production,
trade and governance and which allows countries to
achieve resilience in staple-food commodities. For this,
we must invest in innovative and sustainable farming,
climate-resilient crops and an agile supply chain that
can quickly adjust to disruption.
Food security must also be given a special place
in international trade agreements. Indonesia has long
been a strong advocate for food security and special
agricultural products being given special treatment by
the World Trade Organization.
Developing countries must also be given the
ability under international trade rules to support
smallholder farmers that produce food-securityrelated commodities. This is important not just for the
food security and the livelihood of the smallholder
farmers, but also for the rural development of regions.
Furthermore, strong cooperation and collaboration
with the private sector is crucial. They are key partners
in ensuring greater food access to the public.
On Indonesia’s palm-oil-exports policy, which was
mentioned in the briefing this morning, we emphasize
that this was an emergency temporary measure. It was
a temporary response to the spike in price and to the

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

scarcity of cooking oil in our domestic market. It was
a temporary policy designed to safeguard the food
security of around 270 million people in Indonesia. It
has been announced that this temporary response will
be lifted on 23 May, which is next week.
Finally, everyone has the right to access to safe and
nutritious food and to be free from hunger. For this, we
cannot afford division, nor can we afford a “take it or
leave it” attitude when addressing a life-or-death issue
such as food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank the United
States for convening this important meeting and our
briefers for their excellent briefings.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
I refer to Foreign Minister Baerbock’s statement
at the Ministerial meeting on global food security
yesterday: by blocking Ukrainian ports, by destroying
silos, streets and railroads, and especially farmers’
fields, Russia has launched a grain war, stoking a global
food crisis.
This aggravated global food crisis is not as
Russia wants us to believe, namely, the consequence
of sanctions that target those responsible for Russia’s
war of aggression. The responsibility, in fact, lies
with Russia, whose military actions have destroyed
part of Ukrainian agriculture and whose Government
deliberately blocks the export of grain much needed
in other parts of the world. Together with its partners,
Germany will support Ukraine in exploring alternative
ways of exporting its grain to where it is so badly needed.
Russia’s war of aggression exacerbates an already
dire situation, as we all know. Even before Russia
started its war against Ukraine on 24 February, the year
2022 had been forecast to be the most food insecure
year on record. The first victims are, as always, the most
vulnerable ones — women, children and the elderly,
especially in less developed countries, in particular in
the global South. These people have our full solidarity
and support.
The interlinkages between hunger and conflict
are clearly recognized by resolution 2417 (2018). As
members of the Security Council in 2019 and 2020,

22-3551147/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Germany and the Dominican Republic consistently put
this topic high on the Council’s agenda and called for
more decisive action. In our view, the Security Council
should use the means of its resolution 2417 (2018) more
often. Building on resolution 2417 (2018), we must
become better at preventing conflict, on the one hand,
and at addressing the alarming incidence of hunger
and global food insecurity, on the other. I must stress
three points.
First, we must increase humanitarian assistance
to the World Food Programme and other humanitarian
organizations, particularly with flexible funding, in
line with the Grand Bargain commitments. Germany
has already announced substantial additional funding
for this year in the area to support the Sahel region,
the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan and Syria. At the
same time, we must also help to increase the long-term
resilience of vulnerable countries. We must strive for a
coordinated triple-nexus approach among the different
pillars of peace and security, humanitarian assistance
and development cooperation.
Secondly, we must strengthen the resilience of
populations and food systems to climate-induced shocks
in conflict-affected areas. including through early and
anticipatory action. That is also a key priority during
our presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7), as the G-7
Foreign Ministers’ statement of 13 May underlines.
Thirdly, we all have to step up our commitment to
helping to counter the devastating global repercussions
of the war in Ukraine. In total, the German budget
plan foresees providing more than €4 billion for food
security-related activities in 2022. Our Global Alliance
for Food Security, launched at the meeting of the
G-7 development ministers this week, is open to the
participation of further actors. It reflects the need to
redouble efforts for resilient, sustainable and diversified
food systems in the medium- and long-terms.
Hunger is human-made. It is therefore our choice
to prevent it. We are convinced that, together, we can
achieve that goal. For that. we must do better and take
concrete steps to collectively tackle the root causes of
conflict and hunger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritius.
Mr. Nayeck (Mauritius): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting on conflict and food
48/51

19/05/2022

security — an issue that is of the greatest importance
to many of us.
Mauritius is a small island developing State,
a pluricultural nation, with a strong belief in the
peaceful coexistence of all societies and countries. It
is, however, highly dependent on the import of food and
commodities for the survival of its people. Surviving
the pandemic during the past two years was a challenge
in itself, during which we saw a race for protective
equipment and vaccines. With long-lasting conflicts,
especially in regions that are primary producers of
basic commodities, we run the risk of seeing a similar
situation. We are already witnessing a hike in prices,
causing social unrest in some countries. If there is no
food, no peace can prevail, and there will be no future
for any one of us.
Food insecurity affects the lives of millions. It
does not exist in isolation and should not fall under the
influence of global geopolitics. The spectre of famine
caused by climate-induced droughts has resurfaced in
some parts of the world and has increased the number
of people living without enough to eat. Small island
developing States, such as Mauritius, which have inherent
vulnerabilities due to their geographical dispersion and
distance from main markets, find themselves in a yet
more difficult situation. Climate change is already
threatening our food security by reducing crop use
and disrupting the systems and infrastructure that our
people use for access to food. We are struggling with
inflation, rising interest rates and debt burdens, which
were already affecting the fragile economies of small
island developing States. Restrictions will only have a
multiplier effect that accelerates food inflation. This is
not the time to impose protectionist trade policies.
We should promptly address the causes of conflicts
and find creative ways to resolve them peacefully
through diplomacy and mediation, while respecting
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all parties
concerned. Otherwise, we will allow a bad situation to
only get worse, thereby having a much bigger and more
serious crisis. In this new era, where space tourism is
hitting the headlines, poor and vulnerable people should
not have to face a burden of anxiety created by food
shortages. Food insecurity perpetuates poverty, and we
should not let the virus of indifference afflict us. We
need to uphold, promote and respect international law,
which is a bedrock of our universal values, to achieve
freedom from fear or want. It is only through greater
global cooperation and a peaceful world free from
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts that we will also be able to ensure and attain
our Sustainable Development Goals of zero hunger and
achieve food security.
We all know that global problems require global
solutions. There is no more representative entity than
the United Nations. Let us therefore join hands and
redouble our efforts to eradicate all conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Tughuyendere (Namibia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on the maintenance on international peace and
security, with an emphasis on conflict and food security.
Conflict and food security are key factors affecting the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Today the international community is confronted
with a plethora of drivers of fragility. Chief among
them are the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, climate change, ongoing global conflicts,
including the unresolved conflict between Russia and
Ukraine, and coercive economic measures, such as
sanctions. As a result, the lived experience of many of
the world’s citizens, especially in the developing world,
is characterized by crisis levels of food insecurity,
coupled with rising unemployment, the loss of income
and increasing poverty. That is on the back of widened
gender inequalities and a climate crisis, which
only deepens the vulnerabilities of local and global
food systems.
These are profound consequences of the drivers
of fragility, which do not only pose serious security
challenges to the entire world, but also deepen inequality
and erode the global gains towards the attainment of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Conflicts have increased inflation in many parts
of the world, thereby increasing the vulnerabilities
of those who need assistance the most, namely,
children, the elderly, women, girls and the disabled.
Today food prices are on the increase, especially in
developing countries, partly due to the ongoing wars
and instability. That could make food unaffordable
and cause famine and extreme hunger, which could
eventually trigger political riots and further conflicts.
In addition, it also significantly increases the global
need for humanitarian assistance to reduce food gaps
and prevent acute malnutrition.

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Every effort must therefore be made to invest in
preventive diplomacy and in seeking the amicable
resolution of conflicts. To do that, however, flexibility,
political commitment and boldness are required.
It is a reality, under the current raging conflicts,
that global food supply chains are severely disrupted
due to challenges in production, transportation and
other logistics. Furthermore, it compounds the impact
on developing countries, as many rely on many external
markets for food consumption. The imposition of
sanctions also affects global food supply chains and
destabilizes the targeted countries, thereby impacting
the lives of the most vulnerable. A great deal of
fortitude, with good intention, is therefore needed to
address this issue. Conflict early-warning systems
must not only be designed, reviewed and strengthened,
but must be embraced and taken seriously.
The link between climate change and security
cannot be denied; neither can it be relegated to mere
discussions in the Security Council. It is real in many
parts of the world, especially in Africa. One of the
effects of climate change is drought, and that affects the
livelihoods of many people. Competition for water and
land has increased, and it often generates an unhealthy
social atmosphere that only foments conflicts.
Namibia, a country with 30 per cent of its land
surface covered by two deserts, remains one of the most
arid sub-Saharan countries; 92 per cent of its land mass
is considered semi-arid, arid or hyper-arid. Over the
past six years, we have experienced three devastating
droughts. One of them was recorded as the most severe
in the past 100 years.
Since Namibia’s independence in 1990, we have
experienced at least 12 years during which half of the
country received below-average rainfall, resulting in
droughts and land degradation. During those years,
many farmers lost their livestock and experienced
poor crop harvests. In some instances, droughts are
followed by floods, compromising food security and
the livelihoods of farming communities. For Namibia,
therefore, land degradation and desertification, which
are further compounded by climate change, are critical
areas of concern.
That reality imposes a huge responsibility on
us to promote policies that focus on combating
desertification and promoting land restoration, as
part of our sustainable agriculture and food security
strategy. For that reason, Namibia has been a consistent

22-3551149/51

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

participant in the proceedings of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification, including the
ongoing fifteenth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which is being hosted by Côte d’Ivoire.
In conclusion, the global community must exercise
more restraint in the use of trade restrictions as a
political tool. It is all too often innocent bystanders,
including women and children, who become victims of
such punitive measures. We must guard against having
good intentions that may have bad consequences on
the lives of the vulnerable in our societies. We must
resist unnecessary trade restrictions, not only to
support recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic but
also to shore up macroeconomic stability, maintain
peace and security in fragile States and ensure global
food security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to echo previous speakers in commending the
United States on convening this timely and important
open debate.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU), and I would
like to add the following in my national capacity.
The unprecedented surge in food prices — the
highest in the past three decades — the rise in fertilizer
prices, which threatens the future production of
essential food, the disruption in supply chains and
surging shipping and transport costs, coupled with the
spike in energy and fuel prices, are snowballing. It is a
trend that reverses years of progress in reducing hunger
and efforts to accomplish Sustainable Development
Goal 2 — a trend that undoubtedly exacerbates
inequalities and could aggravate social and civil unrest
and instability.
As the world is struggling to recover from the
coronavirus disease pandemic in a responsible and
resilient way, we are facing a future we cannot
accurately predict. Yet we can surely estimate that it will
be bleak unless we act collectively and in solidarity. In
that vein, we have co-sponsored the General Assembly
draft resolution on the state of global food insecurity,
submitted by Lebanon. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call to action through the establishment of
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
50/51

19/05/2022

Finance, as well as the other recent initiatives, and we
are actively engaging with the EU to identify and take
advantage of all alternative routes to make Ukrainian
grains available to the world. The disruptions caused
by the conflict have ramifications that go far beyond its
borders, food shortages being only a part of them.
War and hunger have been loyal companions since
antiquity. At the end of the great Peloponnesian War,
just before the city of Athens yielded, it had endured
more than 30 years of deprivation and exhausting
circumstances, including a famine that claimed the life
of its most glorified leader. History has demonstrated
how conflicts worsen food and nutrition insecurity,
affecting and even taking millions of lives.
The subsequent destruction of infrastructure, the
disruptions in market access, the lack of resources in
a globalized economy and the humanitarian tragedies
are all factors that lead to a steep rise in the prices of
basic foodstuffs, making them practically unavailable
to those who need them. That is a recipe for starvation.
Unfortunately, food insecurity is also a cause of tension,
as many cases involving civil conflict have shown.
However, in our modern, interconnected era, crises
reverberate much louder than ever, and the current
pressure will eventually reach all corners of our world.
What is happening in Ukraine today is having an
unprecedented impact on food security worldwide, not
only because Russia and Ukraine represent a considerable
percentage of global wheat and grain production but
also because of the disruption caused in transport lines,
markets and food production internationally.
In the aftermath of the pandemic, the situation is far
from building back better. It sows the seeds of further
tensions, jeopardizing peace and potentially fostering
political instability in vulnerable regions. That is why
Greece has repeatedly called for an immediate ceasefire
and the swift creation of humanitarian corridors to scale
up humanitarian operations and supply-chain capacity.
Our call is for peace and dialogue to prevail. Our
call is to stand up for international law, the fundamental
norms of international relations and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Greece, together with its
partners, will spare no effort to address the issue at its
root. This is our collective responsibility.
The President: The representative of India has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
22-35511

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Parihar (India): I am constrained to take the
floor once again at this late hour. In the interest of time,
I will be brief.

flagrant and continuing violation of Security Council
resolutions, the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

The representative of Pakistan made unwarranted
remarks that symbolize nothing other than a Pavlovian
response aimed at misusing any forum and every topic
to propagate false and malicious propaganda against
my country. The Union Territories of Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh were, are and will always be an
integral and inalienable part of India. That includes the
areas that are under the illegal occupation of Pakistan.
No amount of rhetoric or propaganda from any country
can deny that fact. The only contribution that Pakistan
can make is to stop State-sponsored terrorism. With
regard to his other remarks, we will treat them with the
contempt that they deserve.

The Indian Government’s unilateral and illegal
actions of 5 August 2019 — robbing occupied Jammu
and Kashmir of its identity, oppressing its people with
900,000 occupying troops and changing Jammu and
Kashmir demography from a Muslim majority to a
Hindu majority state — narrowed the space for dialogue
on Jammu and Kashmir.

The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Mohammad Aamir Khan (Pakistan): My
delegation is obliged to take the floor in response
to the false and misleading comments made by the
representative of India.
Jammu and Kashmir is not, and has never been,
a part of India, as can be verified by any official
United Nations map. Jammu and Kashmir is a disputed
territory. As stipulated in resolution 47 (1948), the final
disposition of the state of Jammu and Kashmir is to be
decided by the people of Jammu and Kashmir through
a fair and impartial plebiscite to be held under the
auspices of the United Nations.
India accepted the relevant Security Council
resolutions, which remain to be implemented. India is
obliged, under Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to implement those resolutions. India’s refusal
to do so for over seven decades now constitutes a

India’s allegations regarding terrorism are nothing
but a smokescreen to conceal State terrorism against
the Kashmiri people. History bears testimony to the
fact that colonizers and occupiers often attempt to
justify their suppression of legitimate struggles for
self-determination and freedom by portraying them
as terrorism.
But mark my words: nothing will dampen the
indomitable spirit of the Kashmiri people to seek
their inalienable right to self-determination. Pakistan
will continue to expose India’s State terrorism and
its oppression against the people of illegally Indianoccupied Jammu and Kashmir. We will continue to call
for a just solution to the Kashmir dispute in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
wishes of the Kashmiri people.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning this meeting, I would like to take
a moment, on behalf of the Council, to thank our United
Nations staff colleagues who have worked late this
evening to make this meeting possible. Specifically, I
want to recognize the interpreters who worked tirelessly
throughout the day to ensure that we could hold this
meeting. I thank them all.
The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.

22-3551151/51
