S/PV.7294

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7294th meeting

Thursday, 30 October 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

14-59621 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1459621*

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Argentina.
I would like to begin by thanking all the Council
members for supporting the initiative of the presidency
to convene a wrap-up session.
It is true that we hope to have wider participation by
the membership, as my dear friend the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation has said. However, it is also true
that the Council, through its working methods, must
provide for and generate greater interest, credibility
and desire on the part of the broader membership to
participate.
When we were preparing to assume the presidency
of the Council for the month of October, we decided
not to overload the programme with activities beyond
those provided by previous Council decisions or
practice. Despite our self-restraint, we have had a very
busy month, with 3 open debates, 12 public briefings,
1 private meeting and 15 informal consultations, as
well as the adoption of 3 resolutions, the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly,
1 presidential statement and 14 press statements, 5 of
which were issued in a single day.
The three open debates — on 21 October on the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see
S/PV.7281), on 23 October on the working methods
of the Security Council (see S/PV.7285), and on
28 October on women and peace and security (see
S/PV.7289) — although diverse, had at least two
things in common. The first is the large number of
non-members of the Council that participated in each
of the three debates and the high level of interest that
was generated, which demonstrates how important the
international community considers those issues to be.
The second is the consensus that emerged — among
the members of the international community, if not

2/20

30/10/2014

necessarily among the members of the Council — with
regard to five matters.
The first is that the Security Council should play
an active and positive role in resolving the Palestinian
question by supporting concrete initiatives aimed at
making a two-State solution a reality, since that solution
is the only one with the potential to put a definitive end
to a conflict that has lasted too long and cost too many
lives.
The second is that the International Criminal Court
makes a positive contribution to achieving our common
goal of ending impunity for serious crimes under
international law, and that the Security Council should
be responsible for following up referrals made to the
Court.
The third is that the guarantees of due process are
not only a human right of the individuals targeted by
Security Council sanctions lists; they also contribute
to the effectiveness of sanctions regimes, making
them less vulnerable to challenges by domestic or
international courts.
The fourth is that, while improving the Council’s
transparency and capacity for dialogue, and ensuring
that it operates more efficiently, are important, it is vital
that we acknowledge the international community’s
expectations that we will continue to work for more
democratized decision-making processes and more
substantive and transparent interaction with the
membership as a whole.
And the fifth is that it is important to pay attention
to the specific and multidimensional needs and abilities
of women and girls who are refugees or internally
displaced, by strengthening the gender perspective and
focusing on women’s human rights when designing,
implementing and monitoring policies for refugee and
displaced women and girls, and implementing and
translating the commitments made in resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions into concrete results.
This should also include integrating gender into the
post-2015 development goals and the reviews of the
sanctions system, our peacekeeping operations and the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, to be held
next year.
Many other situations occupied our attention
during October: Syria in its three aspects — chemical
weapons, the humanitarian situation and the political
process, Mali, Somalia, Yemen, Lebanon, the United

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Nations Disengagement Observer Force, South Sudan,
Ukraine, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Western Sahara and, once again, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We received two reports on sanctions
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and Côte d’Ivoire.
We also held meetings with Force Commanders of the
Organization’s peacekeeping operations, on Ebola and
with the President of the International Court of Justice.
The Council also renewed the mandates of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
African Union Mission in Somalia — which included
the renewal of the Monitoring Group’s mandate and the
partial lifting of the arms embargo — and of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the only United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Latin America and
the Caribbean, in a country whose stabilization is a top
priority for Argentina.
Given the impossibility of discussing all of
those issues, I would like to say something about the
Security Council’s working methods. During October,
the Council adopted resolution 2180 (2014), on Haiti,
with four explanations of vote, and another, resolution
2182 (2014), on Somalia, with two abstentions and six
explanations of vote, and on both occasions it failed
to take the views and concerns of the countries of the
respective regions into account. I believe that those
are not good precedents, and that they certainly do not
reflect the Council’s commitment to respecting regional
leadership, as expressed in numerous resolutions and
presidential statements on cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations.
Finally, concerning the situation created by the
recent outbreak of Ebola — which if left unchecked
could jeopardize the hard-won progress that has been
made in building peace in West Africa — I think it
is important that all of us, especially the members of
the Council, learn to work collaboratively to find a
comprehensive solution to the problem in coordination
with the other bodies of the United Nations. That also
means that the Council should not infringe on the
purviews of other entities in the system that have the
primary responsibility, and also possess the right tools,
for dealing effectively with a crisis that is essentially a
health and social issue. It does not mean that the Council
should relinquish its own responsibilities regarding the
potential impact that this tragic epidemic could have
on security conditions in the affected region. We know
that innovation is not always an advantage. However,
we believe we missed a valuable opportunity when we

S/PV.7294

were unable to organize a joint meeting between the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
issue.
Since this is the last meeting for the Argentinian
presidency of the Council, I would like to heartily
thank all my colleagues for their guidance and support,
without which the work of the presidency would not
have been possible. I would also like to wish Australia
every success in its leadership, for which it can count
on Argentina’s full support.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for being the seventh President
to organize a wrap-up session this year, and the third to
do it in a public meeting. As Rwanda has always said,
these meetings provide a unique and regular opportunity
for the Security Council to assess its work and examine
its progress and effectiveness critically, and the format
of a public briefing enhances our transparency vis-à-vis
the United Nations membership and the larger public.
Rwanda also appreciates the way you,
Madam President, presided over the Council during
Argentina’s second and last presidency in its current
term. We particularly appreciate the fact that during the
month of October you continued the so-called “Power
formula”, introduced by the Permanent Representative
of the United States in September, which is aimed
at encouraging more interaction between Council
members and briefers during closed consultations. We
also offer our appreciation to your Deputy Permanent
Representative and political coordinator, the engineer
who made Argentina’s well-oiled machinery function
this month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia
on his assumption of his last presidency of the Council
for the busy month of November. I have no doubt
that in November the interactive formula initiated
in September will be continued, since Ambassador
Quinlan has in any case never been a man for
following written scripts. As Argentina and Australia
and the other outgoing delegations, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda, move slowly
towards the end of their terms — which I believe

14-596213/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

have been successful — we would like to reiterate our
congratulations to our successors, Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, on their election
earlier this month, and to wish them success in their
two years to come.
Besides being an election month, October also
saw the adoption of the annual report of the Security
Council (A/69/2), for which Rwanda, as Council
President for the month of July, was in charge of the
drafting process. We would again like to thank our
fellow Council members, as well as the Secretariat, for
their invaluable contributions and support. As we stated
when introducing the report last week (see S/PV.7283),
Rwanda believes that a more analytical report, with an
assessment of the Council’s effectiveness during the
reporting period followed by a debate on the occasion
of its adoption, would benefit the work of the Council
in the future.
It is in that context that Rwanda appreciated
the discussion conducted last Thursday by Member
States during the open debate on working methods
(see S/PV.7285). We all agree that, pending the
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, there
is a need to continue improving the accountability,
transparency and effectiveness of this organ of the
United Nations entrusted with the responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. As we
stated in the open debate, we believe that improving our
working methods will require extending the mandate
of the Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, to
cover all Sanctions Committees, as well as enhancing
dialogue and interaction between Council members
and the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), in order to regularly consider all our standing
issues related to ICC referrals and deferrals, in
accordance with the Rome Statute.
The Council should also strengthen its relations with
the International Court of Justice. The private meeting
we held yesterday (see S/PV.7290) with its President
gave us an opportunity to appreciate the important role
played by the Court in the pacific settlement of disputes
between States.
The annual briefing held this month with the
Force Commanders of United Nations peacekeeping
missions (see S/PV.7275) was critical for the Council
to better understand the challenges that they face on

4/20

30/10/2014

the ground. We appreciate in particular the fact that
the upcoming Australian presidency will organize in
November a similar meeting with the heads of United
Nations police components. During the meeting with
Force Commanders, we were briefed on the delicate
situations in various missions, such as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which is no longer operating in a
peacekeeping environment, as it is facing terrorist
organizations against which it was not mandated,
equipped or trained to fight. The situation of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is
quite different. MONUSCO, which is one of the largest
peacekeeping missions, was reinforced last year with
the Force Intervention Brigade, mandated to neutralize
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda. Unfortunately, though, despite
a clear mandate and a significant budget, MONUSCO
has yet, some 15 years after its inception, to live up to
the Council’s expectations or those of the Congolese. In
that regard, while the Security Council should, when
adopting resolutions, ensure that the peacekeeping
mandates provided reflect the security context on the
ground, it is also critical that it should ensure that the
activities of missions are results-oriented, so that they
can be held accountable.
The situation in the Middle East was prominent
on the programme of work of October, as it was in the
preceding month. With the gridlocked Middle East
peace process, the ongoing fighting in Syria, the rise
of a barbaric terrorist organization named “the Islamic
State”, or “Daesh”, and the increasing security chaos
in Yemen, the Security Council seems unequipped or
unable to have a significant impact on the situation
in the region. Nonetheless, it is all too convenient to
put the blame on the Council. This organ of the United
Nations is not a separate or independent entity; it
was created by us, the States Members of the United
Nations; it is us. Therefore, as long as members of the
Council, in particular the permanent members, together
with other world and regional Powers fail to use their
influence in New York and in the field to support
the efforts of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security — and we all know
that they can — the Council will always be used as a
scapegoat for international inaction.

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

In conclusion, Madam President, as your country
has successfully completed 22 months of membership, as
well as two presidencies of the Council, I wish, without
awaiting 31 December, to congratulate Argentina for
its successful term on the Security Council. I wish to
pay tribute in particular to you, Madam President, for
your unique style and talents, for your commitment
to the improvement of the working methods of the
Council and to the promotion and protection of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and for your
steadfast attachment to justice and accountability.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): We wish
to thank you, Madam President, for having convened
today’s meeting. We appreciate in particular Argentina’s
success in presiding over the Council during the month
of October. We welcome the five countries recently
elected to serve on the Council for the 2015-2016 term,
namely, Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela. China is ready to cooperate closely with the
new members in jointly contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
I wish to focus on three of the issues that the Council
took up during the month of October, beginning with the
situation in the Middle East. The Palestinian question
was the focus of the Security Council’s work in October.
The Council held several public debates and emergency
meetings on this issue. China attaches great importance
to the Middle East peace process and is deeply concerned
about the tension caused by the Palestinian-Israeli
situation. China urges Israel to immediately cease
its settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, so as to create
conditions conducive to confidence-building and the
resumption of negotiations. We earnestly hope that the
Palestinian and Israeli sides will show restraint and
avoid any further escalation of the tensions or a relapse
into outright conflict. Dialogue and negotiations are
the only path to peace. Both sides must demonstrate
political will and resume negotiations as soon as
possible.
The international community should consider
carefully how to create synergies, mobilize resources
and promote the speedy resumption of peace talks
with a view to making progress on the Palestinian
question and resolving the matter promptly and in
a just and reasonable way. The Council’s inaction on
this question should not be allowed to continue. We
welcome the draft resolution circulated by Jordan on
this subject. China supports the Council in discharging

S/PV.7294

its due responsibilities and playing its rightful role by
responding to the legitimate demands of Palestine and
other Arab States as soon as possible.
Second is the situation in Somalia. In October, the
Security Council considered the work of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the humanitarian
situation and piracy. It also adopted resolution 2182
(2014), extending the AMISOM mandate. China
hopes that that resolution will be implemented fully
and faithfully so as to help the African Union and
the Federal Government of Somalia in the fight
against Al-Shabaab and maintain peace and stability
in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. China officially
reopened its embassy on 12 October, which was a
significant step taken by the Chinese Government in
support of peace and reconstruction in Somalia. China
will take this opportunity to pursue comprehensive and
practical cooperation in various areas with the Somali
Government and assist the country in achieving peace,
stability and development.
Third is the situation in South Sudan. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the international community recently stepped up
their mediation efforts and good offices regarding the
conflict in South Sudan. China has urged the two sides
to the conflict to cooperate with IGAD in mediation
efforts to bring an end to the violence and hostilities
and to make progress in the inclusive dialogue, with a
view to achieving a solution acceptable to all sides and
giving hope to the Sudanese people. We support IGAD
in continuing to play a leading role in mediation. We
also welcome the fact that the countries of the region,
such as Ethiopia, Kenya and the United Republic of
Tanzania, are playing a positive role and working in
harmony with IGAD. The international community
should, as soon as possible, implement its commitments
and scale up its humanitarian assistance in South
Sudan. China will continue to play a constructive
role in promoting the speedy restoration of peace and
stability in South Sudan.
In conclusion, I express in advance my best wishes
to Australia for a smooth presidency of the Council
during the month of November.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I congratulate you and your entire team,
Madam President, for the way in which you have led
the work of the Security Council during the month
of October. We appreciate the fact that you have kept
the briefing format for the wrap-up session, a working

14-596215/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

mechanism that strengthens the transparency of this
body.
We would like to highlight two elements that we
consider positive: the holding of the open debate on
women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) and
the debate on working methods (see S/PV.7285). We
appreciate the approach on the theme of women and
peace and security, focusing on internally displaced
women and women refugees, as an important step
forward on this agenda and that of the protection of
civilians. We believe that focusing on subjects from
new perspectives that correspond to the challenges
faced by the international system is a way of making
the Council’s work more effective, as was demonstrated
in the high number of States that participated in the
meetings. We believe that the statements made in
that debate will be used to guide the independent
global study commissioned by the Secretary-General,
pursuant to resolution 2122 (2013), particularly with
respect to identifying the emerging issues linked to
that agenda, such as the challenges raised by non-State
actors, including terrorist groups.
We also welcome the approach followed in the open
debate on working methods that allowed us discuss
the possible expansion of the mandate of the Office of
Ombudsperson to other Sanctions Committees as a way
to strengthen due process in proceedings. Similarly, we
note the initiative to develop a follow-up mechanism for
referrals to the International Criminal Court.
With respect to the situation in Somalia, we are
interesting in seeing how that can be addresed in the
agenda from different points of view, which would
allow the Council to act effectively. In that regard,
we think it crucial that the humanitarian perspective
not be set aside, not only in this case but also in all
the situations on the Council’s agenda, in particular
those that are not high profile, such as the case of
Somalia. In that respect, we believe that this organ
has a responsibility to contribute to finding solutions
involving humanitarian crises.
Likewise, we view favourably the measures
adopted to strengthen and control the charcoal and
arms embargoes established by the Council. We
understand that such measures neither affect the rights
and obligations established by the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, nor constitute a
precedent, since they are based on a request made by
the Federal Government of Somalia itself.

6/20

30/10/2014

We cannot conclude without referring to the
adoption of resolution 2180 (2014) on the situation
in Haiti, which my country supported despite the
apprehensions that we share with other troopcontributing countries of the region. We maintain that
position in the constructive spirit with which we have
approached our membership on the Security Council,
and as an expression of our ongoing commitment to the
democratic process, the rule of law, the promotion of
human rights, and the socioeconomic development of
Haiti, where the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti has played and continues to play an important
role. As we pointed out when the resolution’ was
adopted, it is crucial to take the opinions of troopcontributing countries into account when we engage
in reconfiguration processes. We believe that helps to
make the Council’s decision-making more effective and
more inclusive.
Lastly, we wish Australia a successful presidency,
and assure it of our support.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, let me thank you,
Madam President, for the able manner in which you
have conducted the affairs of the Council this month.
This wrap-up session provides us with an opportunity
to assess the work of the Council during Argentina’s
presidency.
We are pleased to note that several country-specific
briefings were held in the Council Chamber, thereby
affording concerned delegations the opportunity to
participate and speak under rule 37. Briefings by the
Chairs of the Sanctions Committee were also held in
public, providing interested delegations a chance to
gain first-hand experience or knowledge of the issues
under discussion. We see that as going a long way
towards increasing transparency in the work of the
Council, and allowing for greater engagement, not
just with the wider membership but indeed with civil
society, non-governmental organizations and private
individuals as well.
The briefing by the United Nations Force
Commanders afforded Council members and the wider
United Nations membership an opportunity to hear
directly from the individuals responsible for carrying
out the peacekeeping mandates authorized by the
Council. The Force Commanders briefed us on three
very important topics: the protection of civilians, the
expectations for military contingents under a changed
security environment, and the accomplishment of

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

traditional mandates under that changed environment.
The interactive nature of the meetings proved very
useful, as Council members had the opportunity to ask
questions and receive clarifications on operational and
related peacekeeping issues.
The adoption of the Council’s annual report covering
the period 1 August 2013 to 31 July 2014 (A/69/2) was
another significant development during the month. We
commend the delegation of Rwanda for the tremendous
effort that it put into preparing the report. We look
forward to its presentation to the General Assembly on
19 November, and we will be interested in hearing the
views of the wider membership on it.
Strengthening the rule of law is a necessary
corollary to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Dialogue with international judicial
institutions, particularly the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court, afforded
Council members the opportunity not only to discuss
the administration of justice, but also to appreciate
the various roles such judicial institutions play in
complementing the work of the Council.
On country-specific issues, we welcome the
conclusion of the Joint Mission of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
United Nations on the elimination of Syrian chemical
weapons. It proves that, when united, the Council can
achieve positive results. Still on Syria, we welcome the
first briefing by Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura. It
helped to bring the attention of the Council back to the
political situation in Syria. We restate our conviction
that the conflict in Syria and the humanitarian crisis it
has triggered can be resolved only through negotiations
leading to a political solution.
With regard to Lebanon, we note that 10 years after
the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the disarmament
of all militias is yet to be achieved. The situation
poses a threat to the peace, stability and sovereignty
of Lebanon. It is critically important that all militias
disarm, in line with the provisions of resolution 1559
(2004) and their obligations under the Taif Agreement.
This being the last scheduled meeting under the
presidency of Argentina, I would like — on behalf of
the Nigerian delegation, particularly on behalf of my
Ambassador and Permanent Representative Mrs. Joy
Ogwu, — to congratulate you personally, Madam
President, and your very able team, led by its political
coordinator Mario Oyarzábal, for the courageous and

S/PV.7294

diligent manner you have managed your tenure this
month. It has indeed been a very busy but productive
month for you and for all of us. We would also like
to take this opportunity to extend our best wishes
to Australia, a Commonwealth country with which
we share many things in common, and to give our
support to its delegation when it prepares to assume the
presidency of the Council in November.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Madam President, allow me to congratulate you
on your leadership in leading the work of the Council
this month, and your entire team for its work. We
welcome the initiative of the United States for having
introduced a new way of conducting Security Council
consultations, which you also decided to use, while
providing several improvements. The method makes
our meetings more flexible.
We note with satisfaction that the debates
organized on the situation in the Sudan and South
Sudan (see S/PV.7276) allowed Council members
to better understand the status of Abyei, with all the
parametres and challenges represented by the elections
to be organized by Khartoum in 2015. It was under
your presidency, Madam President, that the Security
Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei to 28 February 2015.
The related resolution 2179 (2014), presented by the
United States, was adopted by the Security Council
and welcomed by the Permanent Representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan.
Regarding the Ebola crisis, we also acknowledge
that your leadership has led to the issue’s having been
considered twice by the Council and to important
measures have been taken. The open debate on Ebola
held on 14 October (see S/PV.7279), followed by
consultations, allowed the Council and the entire
international community to acknowledge that Ebola
constitutes a genuine threat to peace and security, not
only in the three most impacted countries but also for
all humankind. We would wish to see the momentum
of solidarity launched at that collective awarenessraising event to be maintained and strengthened so as
to eradicate the epidemic at its source and to ensure
that it does not spread to the rest of the world. In
other words, the three most impacted countries should
receive multifaceted assistance that will allow them to
build upon their achievements in peacebuilding and
economic development.

14-596217/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting with the Force Commanders of
United Nations peacekeeping missions (see S/PV.7275)
highlighted the tenuous nature of the conditions in
which Blue Helmets carry out their missions. They
increasingly face complex, hostile and unpredictable
situations, and they are regularly targeted by non-State
actors in the Golan, Syria, northern Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. Mandates must therefore be adjusted
to take that new element into account.
Regarding the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, we welcome the meetings convened by the
Argentine presidency, which allowed Council members
to clarify their stances on various matters. Nevertheless,
a lack of consensus within the Council has meant that
the Syrian and Palestinian questions have yet to find
medium- or long-term solutions.
Somalia has also been the subject of particular
attention this month. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Special Representative of the
African Union for Somalia and the Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia each described a hopeful
outlook for that devastated country. The military
success of Operation Indian Ocean and the political
efforts under way in Somalia should lead to the holding
of credible elections in 2016. My delegation believes
that the Security Council should consider the effective
implementation of resolution 2182 (2014), which, inter
alia, prohibits the export of charcoal.
On 23 October, the Security Council debated its
methods of work (see S/PV.7285) so as to improve the
effectiveness of its activities. This shed new light on
the need to enhance the transparency and regularity of
the sanctions regime. The participation in that meeting
by many Member States demonstrates the interest
attached to the matter by the broader United Nations
membership.
I cannot conclude without referring to the meeting
held on 28 October on the theme “Women and peace
and security — Displaced women and girls: leaders and
survivors” (see S/PV.7289), which led to the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21. We welcome
the fact that all speakers recognized the central role
that women can play in peace and security processes
throughout the world and the need to protect women
and to ensure their full and equal participation in all
efforts in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and
in post-conflict peacebuilding.

8/20

30/10/2014

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate you, Madam
President, and the entire Argentine team for the
significant work accomplished, the relevance of the
topics chosen and the tireless efforts made throughout
your term. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Australia on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of November; I assure its delegation of
the full support of my own and wish it every success.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The activities of the Security Council in
October have been marked by high intensity and
productivity, to a great extent thanks to the initiatives
and effective work of the Argentine presidency. I
congratulate Ambassador Perceval and the entire
delegation of Argentina on their success.
The Security Council continued to closely follow
the developments in the Middle East and North Africa.
The situation there continues to be marked by high
volatility, and its stabilization will be impossible
without achieving a political and diplomatic settlement
of the regional crises. That applies to new crises as
well as to those that have dragged on for decades.
Their sustainable solution will be possible only
through inclusive dialogue, without intervention or the
imposition of ready-made solutions from the outside.
Unfortunately, there is no reason for optimism in
the Middle East peace process. The situation in Yemen
remains volatile. Iraq and Libya have reached a boiling
point. As a result of blatant outside interference in Syria
and irresponsible pandering to the armed opposition, a
new regional threat has arisen in the form of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham, which has even more global
ambitions. The zone of risk now includes United Nations
peacekeepers serving the region for decades. All of this
demonstrates the danger not only to Syria but to the
entire Middle East of pursuing the reckless destruction
of the foundations of society and governance. We are
encouraged by the first briefing of the Security Council
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and by his assessments of the
situation. We shall provide firm support to his efforts to
move forward a political settlement to the Syrian crisis.
Africa remained in our focus this month. On
24 October (see S/PV.7286), the Security Council
adopted the comprehensive resolution 2182 (2014)
on the situation in Somalia and Eritrea. In spite of
its significant shortcomings, which made it hard for
us to support it, we hope that the resolution will help
facilitate peace in the Horn of Africa.
14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting on the situation in Ukraine (see
S/PV.7287) underscored that it is only through inclusive,
nationwide dialogue based on the Minsk protocol,
the Minsk memorandum and the Geneva document
of 17 April that the fractured Ukrainian society will
overcome the far-reaching internal crisis and return to
sustainable harmonious development in the interests
of all political, regional and ethnic groups. Today,
Ukraine is navigating a most crucial period that will
require careful and balanced action and the Ukrainian
sides to continue the political dialogue. In that regard,
we call on all internal and outside actors to refrain from
ill-considered, much less provocative declarations or
activities.
We note the meeting on the working methods of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7285), which is traditionally
a matter of great interest to the broader United Nations
membership. It makes perfect sense that it was convened
by the Argentine presidency, as Argentina heads the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Indeed, in the past month the
Working Group continued its active work.
For our part, we actively participate in those
endeavours, consistently call for increased transparency
in the Council’s working methods, and encourage the
implementation of useful initiatives. Due in large part to
the unwavering efforts of the Argentine chairmanship
in overcoming attempts at obstruction made by other
Council members, the Working Group agreed upon an
item initiated two years earlier, namely, a note by the
President concerning statements made in the Council.
It is our hope that the activities of the Working Group to
strengthen transparency and democracy in the Council
will continue. Some relevant initiatives remain on
the table, including on the topic of conducting Arria
Formula meetings and procedures for preparing the
Council’s annual report to the General Assembly.
In conclusion, I wish every success to the Australian
delegation in harmoniously guiding the Council in the
month of November.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to extend to you, Madam President, and to
your team my delegation’s gratitude and appreciation
for your excellent conduct of the work of the Council
this month, which has seen important international
developments with respect to various items on the
Council’s agenda.

S/PV.7294

In addressing these wrap-up sessions, it has
been customary for my delegation to avoid extensive
consideration of the substantive issues before the
Council and to limit our intervention to the Council’s
working methods. In that regard, we wish to commend
the manner in which the Council’s work was conducted
this month, particularly in consultations. That format
has been effective and fruitful, despite the fact that
at times it has resulted in the extension of meetings
beyond the regular time frame.
Despite my statement concerning my delegation’s
avoidance of current substantive matters before the
Council, the events taking place in East Jerusalem and
the escalation of actions on the part of Israel compels me
to reiterate that the Council must bear its responsibility
concerning those events with a view to putting an end to
the escalation in the Palestinian territories, particularly
in view of Israel’s actions in Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We
thank the Council for its positive response to our call to
hold an emergency meeting yesterday on the issue (see
S/PV.7291).
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate
the Australian delegation on its assumption of the
presidency next month and to wish it every success in
conducting the Council’s work.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me first of all congratulate you, Madam President,
and your entire team on the manner in which you
have conducted our work in a month that has proved
especially rich in activity. I also wish to thank you for
convening this wrap-up meeting on our work for the
month; the added value of such meetings can no longer
be denied and fulfils the goal of transparency which we
support.
I wish to begin my remarks by noting the
new challenges in peacekeeping. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are more often intervening in
complex situations in which there is little or no peace to
maintain and an increased risk of asymmetric attacks
directly targeting our peacekeepers. Multidimensional
responses are necessary given the new context. We
were able to discuss this on 9 October in the annual
open debate with the military commanders of the
peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.7275). The Force
Commanders of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

14-596219/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

provided the Council with their point of view from the
field regarding the impact of these new challenges on
fulfilling the mission mandates, whether due to more
complex situations involving the protection of civilians
or to deteriorating security or operational conditions.
We were able to address some of those issues in greater
detail during the course of the month in our discussions
on the situations in the Golan Heights, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.
These issues will be all the more critical when the
Council discusses mandate renewals. That will be the
case next month regarding the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. It goes without saying
that discussions with the troop-contributing countries
before the renewal of a mandate will be essential in
considering their concerns and opinions. Moreover,
next month we will have to identify solutions to assist
MINUSMA in more effectively tackling its challenges
in northern Mali. Similar issues may arise in the scalingup of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
which is already facing a particularly complex situation.
Above all, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
announcement of his intention to establish a high-level
task force to carry out a global study on peacekeeping,
aimed at improved strategies in that area. Useful
synergies could be developed in view of the review of
the peacebuilding architecture planned for 2015.
I also wish to briefly reiterate another topic of
great importance — the fight against impunity and to
promote justice. We believe that this is a fundamental
aspect of the Council’s effort in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as in conflict
prevention.
In last Thursday’s open debate on working methods
(see S/PV.7285), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and Ms. Kimberley
Prost, Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime,
once again stressed the importance of justice and due
process in the Council’s actions and the supporting role
that the Court and the Ombudsperson can play. The
annual private meeting of the Security Council with
the President of the International Court of Justice (see
S/PV.7290) also helped to highlight the complementary
efforts of both institutions.
This month we also spoke about several crises
where the fight against impunity must be an integral if
not a critical part of the quest for a lasting solution. That

10/20

30/10/2014

is the case of South Sudan or even in Syria. It will be
crucial to establish at the right time who is responsible
for the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in order to achieve reconciliation and
a lasting peace. The poignant accounts heard during
the public debate on the situation of women and girls
displaced by conflict (see S/PV.7289) strengthens
our conviction that the fight against impunity for
perpetrators of crime, namely, sexual crimes, must
be an integral part of any holistic strategy to support
women and girls affected by conflict.
Before concluding, I would like once again to
mention a few other important topics that were on our
agenda for October. First of all, with regard to Syria,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura, reported this morning on the steps that have
been taken towards finding a political solution to the
crisis. We must support those efforts, given, above all,
the suffering of the Syrian population and the refugees,
but also given the growing impact of the conflict on
stability for the region as a whole. At the same time, we
must continue to stress the scrupulous implementation
of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) to provide
humanitarian assistance and relieve the population’s
suffering. We must also remain vigilant when it
comes to the complete dismantling of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme. The Security Council
cannot allow violations of resolution 2118 (2013) to be
overlooked.
As to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the open debate
this month (see S/PV.7281) and the emergency meeting
held yesterday (see S/PV.7291) have underscored the
urgency of overcoming the deadlock. Greater tension in
East Jerusalem is of the greatest concern to us. We hope
that Israel will refrain from any additional step that
would further reduce the chances of reaching a twoState solution. We call upon both parties to take the
necessary measures to make progress towards peace.
Other questions that were dealt with should be
raised here, in particular the situation in Ukraine, the
fight against the Ebola epidemic or even the hostilities
that continue to ravage South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. They will continue to motivate us in
the weeks and months to come.
The responsibility to steer our work will now fall
upon Australia. I would like to wish every success to
my colleague, Mr. Gary Quinlan, and to his team. They
can count on our full support.

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Luxembourg for the great similarities
that we share and for the lucidity and serenity she
brings to the Council.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank the President for her strong leadership of the
Council this month. You, Madam President, and your
team — Mario in particular — have been excellent,
and the United States thanks you for having guided us
capably and for keeping us on track through a very busy
month of October.
Today I would like to share my delegation’s views
on some of the areas where the Security Council has
been productive this month and also look ahead to a
few areas that will require our continued attention in
November and beyond.
But first, I would like to congratulate the Security
Council class of 2015-2016 on their recent elections. We
very much look forward to working with them.
To begin our look back at the month, we must
examine the Council’s response to the Ebola virus
crisis in West Africa. The Council has recognized
both this month, during the briefing (see S/PV.7279)
from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response, Mr. Banbury, and at
last month’s emergency session (see S/PV.7268), that
the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak has
moved beyond a serious public health crisis. This
highly complex emergency constitutes a real threat
to international peace and security, and it requires all
parts of the United Nations system to work together to
beat back the epidemic. We have so much more work to
do on that front.
Secondly, the Council continued to follow the crisis
in Ukraine. The United States remains committed to
finding a peaceful solution to the crisis and to the
restoration of Ukraine’s full sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We welcome the Ukrainian Government’s active
commitment to the Minsk agreements. The Government
of President Poroshenko has taken steps to fulfil the
Minsk commitments, yet the separatists have responded
to those positive steps with a unilateral declaration to
hold their own local so-called elections in November.
That is unconstitutional and completely inconsistent
with Minsk.

S/PV.7294

On sanctions, we welcomed last week’s discussion
on how better to impose and implement those measures
(see S/PV.7285). Because United Nations sanctions
are targeted at those most responsible for diverse
threats, such as terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the
use and recruitment of children in armed conflict
and trafficking in conflict minerals, they minimize
unintended humanitarian consequences. The United
States welcomes the recent major improvements in
the way that the Council imposes targeted sanctions,
including enhancements to the fairness and clarity of
listing procedures. The Council should also recognize
the essential role that national procedures play in
ensuring due process for listed individuals.
We discussed more than once in this Chamber the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The United States remains
fully committed to achieving a negotiated final status
agreement allowing two States to live side by side in
peace and security. That is the only viable way forward.
If the parties choose to go down that path, we stand
ready to support them every step of the way.
Our meeting on women and peace and security (see
S/PV.7289) underscored the importance of the subject.
We especially welcomed hearing the inspiring words
from Suaad Allami about her work to advance education
and the rights of women in conflict settings. Speaking
of conflicts, this morning we heard from Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Staffan de
Mistura about the humanitarian and political crisis that
continues to plague Syria. Those are areas where the
Council must maintain strong focus.
That leads me to several issues we are going to need
to continue to concentrate on, particularly in Africa.
As I mentioned, Ebola must be foremost in our minds.
Ambassador Power, as you know, Madam President,
was in the region this week to demonstrate United
States support for the three countries most affected
by the Ebola crisis and their efforts to combat this
deadly disease and to drive increased support for the
international response. The upcoming meeting on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia will be a valuable
opportunity to take stock of our response thus far.
The Council adopted a strong resolution on Somalia
last week that included an interdiction for suspected
violators of the charcoal ban (resolution 2182 (2014)).
Despite substantial progress, Somalia risks backsliding
from recent gains as hunger and humanitarian concerns
persist. More than 3 million people are now affected by

14-5962111/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

drought and insecurity and, as was emphasized, supply
routes are a key constraint to humanitarian access.
In the Central African Republic, we must be
vigilant in the face of attacks on peacekeepers working
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and focus on bringing an end to the violence there. In
Mali, we have lost far too many peacekeepers to violent
attacks from armed groups and we need to ensure that
our peacekeepers have the equipment and capabilities
necessary to carry out their mandate.
Outside of Africa, the threat posed by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to be felt
across the Middle East, especially in Iraq and Syria.
Foreign fighters and Syrian nationals who have been
recruited and trained to fight in ISIL and other terrorist
groups pose a threat to countries far from the battlefield.
Australia’s planned ministerial meeting on counterterrorism will provide a much-needed opportunity
to continue our discussion on the practical steps to
implement the most recent major counter-terrorism
resolutions — resolution 2170 (2014), on the threat from
ISIL and related groups, and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters. We look forward to working
with the Council on those and other issues during
Australia’s presidency. We extend our congratulations
and good wishes to Ambassador Quinlan as he takes up
those responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United States for the fact that we
were able to agree and express our feelings freely and
authentically, with affection and respect. Please convey
my regards to Ambassador Power.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I think it is worth
reminding ourselves regularly that the Security
Council’s primary responsibility is to act on behalf of
the Members of the United Nations — all Members — to
maintain international peace and security. In meeting
that responsibility, the Council cannot and should not
work in isolation.
As this month’s programme has demonstrated,
the Council’s effectiveness in discharging its
responsibilities depends on a network of partnerships
with other bodies and actors. We are grateful to the
Argentine presidency for convening this session
today and providing an opportunity to reflect on the
performance of the Council in working with its partners
over the past month.
12/20

30/10/2014

As highlighted by the Secretary-General’s
considerable efforts in the past month to exercise his
good offices in the interest of international peace
and security, perhaps the most crucial partnership
for the Council is with the Secretary-General. He has
engaged extensively with parties to conflicts, including
through visits in the past month to Libya, Israel and the
Palestinian territories, Somalia and the Horn of Africa,
and issued numerous statements encouraging those
actors to choose the path of peace and de-escalation.
Those actions improved the Council’s own efforts.
Briefings by the Secretary-General, as at the Middle
East open debate held on 21 October (see S/PV.7281),
are always of benefit.
The Council’s partnerships with the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General are also
crucial. The Council relies heavily on the Special
Representatives to implement the mandates that we
establish and to report regularly on progress. Reports
this month from Special Representatives and Special
Advisers responsible for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Lebanon, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria
and Yemen were central in shaping our thinking
here in the Council and, importantly of course, our
decision-making. Greater interactivity in consultations
ensured that we derived the most from those meetings.
We should continue that interactive practice. Likewise,
greater interaction with the Department of Political
Affairs is increasingly of serious value to the Council
and is being seen as such.
The trust central to the Council’s partnerships
with a wide range of United Nations agencies was
also evident in October. Briefings by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on Somalia
and Syria enhanced our understanding of those serious
crises and will help guide our decisions. Strong
presentations by UN-Women Executive Director
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka (see S/PV.7289) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, (see S/PV.7282)
also added value to our deliberations.
The peacekeeping partnership between the
Security Council, troop contributors and the
Secretariat is also fundamental to the Council’s work.
In circumstances where United Nations peacekeeping
is under unprecedented historic strain, the Council
must be particularly attuned and responsive to the
challenges faced by each peacekeeping operation. The
annual briefing by the heads of military components

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

held this month (see S/PV.7275) was a very effective
demonstration of the peacekeeping partnership. The
Council can learn a great deal from regular briefings by
Force Commanders. We hope to have a similar briefing
by the heads of police components in peacekeeping
operations in November.
The Council’s partnership with the Peacebuilding
Commission
(PBC)
and
its
country-specific
configurations is also important. The role of the PBC
in assisting States emerging from conflict in order
to prevent relapse is central to the Council’s conflict
prevention role. We welcome the fact that briefings
by PBC country-specific configuration chairs are
becoming standard Council practice.
Effective cooperation between the Council and
regional organizations is an imperative. The joint
communiqué between members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council (S/2014/400, annex), which we adopted in June
2014, stressed the fundamental importance of a close
organic partnership between the two institutions. That
was again highlighted in our work during October. In
discussions on Somalia, Council members recognized
the achievements of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). The recent security gains
demonstrated that the Council’s decision to increase
AMISOM’s troop ceiling a year ago was the right
one. At the subregional level, the mediation role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development on South
Sudan and the efforts by the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region to bring stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region are crucial. Despite all of this, however, we need
to do more to ensure an optimal level of cooperation
with the African Union.
The importance of the Council’s partnership
with key international judicial institutions was also
on display, with a useful briefing yesterday (see
S/PV.7290) by the President of the International Court
of Justice on the Court’s dispute resolution work. That
should make us reflect on how the Council might
engage with the Court’s dispute resolution functions.
Discussion during the working methods debate this
month (see S/PV.7285), a significant agenda item under
Argentina’s leadership, has highlighted once again how
necessary it is to strengthen the current relationship
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court. The Council must work harder at that.

S/PV.7294

Civil society is another essential partner for the
Council. Humanitarian organizations look to the
Council to support their work and to demand access and
protection on their behalf. Human rights organizations
provide crucial information that requires attention.
Reports by groups such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the Central African
Republic, Iraq, South Sudan and Syria have been not
just extremely valuable, but at times instrumental,
sometimes bringing information to the attention of the
Council and at other times sharpening our appreciation
of what is happening on the ground. Analytical work
by groups such as the International Crisis Group also
assists. Argentina’s initiative in inviting Ms. Suaad
Allami, founder and director of the Sadr City Women’s
Centre and Legal Clinic, to brief the Council on women
and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) was a very
good example of bringing civil society voices into the
Council. We need more of that.
In conclusion, I want to refer to one other important,
and indeed critical, partnership: the partnership
between the presidency and all other Council members.
I congratulate you, Madam President, for the serious
and empathetic manner in which you, Mario and all your
team have managed that partnership so successfully in
October. We hope to follow your example in November.
I thank those members who have spoken today with very
hopeful references to our own presidency. Fortunately,
that is still 31 hours and 40 minutes away, so I want to
reaffirm my delegation’s continuing strong support to
Argentina’s presidency.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the representative of Australia for his invaluable
contribution aimed at ensuring the Council’s debates
are serious and profound, even on the most thorny and
controversial issues.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, and the entire Argentine
delegation, in particular Mario, for the brilliant
stewardship of the Council, and your leadership and
successful presidency during the month of October. We
appreciate in particular your dedication to conducting
interactive consultations, to reading out the Council’s
press statements at stakeouts and to blitzing tweets
before and after Council meetings.
We thank Argentina for holding two important
open debates, on the Council’s working methods (see

14-5962113/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

S/PV.7285) and women and peace and security (see
S/PV.7289), and the briefing by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Force Commanders (see
S/PV.7275). The Council will need to follow up on
many ideas that were raised at those meetings.
This month the Council dealt on an emergency
basis with the evolving grave crisis in Yemen, the Ebola
pandemic in West Africa, persistent ceasefire violations
by illegal armed groups in the east of Ukraine and the
situation in the Middle East, including settlements in
East Jerusalem. In fact, much of the work of the Council
on crisis situations has been a matter of public record.
This is fifteenth public meeting this month.
I will therefore focus my remarks on a few working
methods and important issues that the Council will
have to address in the month of November.
The Security Council of 2014 has been setting
records for meetings in public. The past few wrap-up
sessions, mainstays of privacy not long ago, have been
held in the format of a briefing. That is welcome. We
note the welcome practice of more and more chairs of
Sanctions Cbriefing in public. It has not yet become a
gold standard, but is surely not an exception either. We
look forward to your public briefing, Madam, in your
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan. As the Chair of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
Lithuania stands ready to brief the Council and the
United Nations membership following any significant
developments in the Committees’ work, hopefully in
November.
The Council needs to improve the quality of
exchanges between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), especially as the United Nations
increasingly gears up for capacity-based peacekeeping
planning. There must be a meaningful follow-up to
discussions. In October, the Security Council held a
frank and timely discussion with DPKO on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, and we look forward
to brainstorming with that Department on the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Mali, as United
Nations peacekeepers have sustained many casualties
since September in the north of the country.

14/20

30/10/2014

Similarly, we believe we need to pay close attention
to the capacity of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic to meet the challenges in the precarious
situation in that country. We need a more systematic
implementation of presidential note S/2013/630, on
consultations with TCCs and police-contributing
countries, and we must continue to build on that.
We need to encourage more interaction when the
Council has an opportunity to hear the views of the
Force Commanders. We look forward to a discussion,
suggested by the representative of Australia, with
United Nations Police Commissioners in November.
We congratulate the five new incoming Council
members elected two weeks ago. As the heat and euphoria
of the elections subsides, important preparations
start immediately, in particular the preparation for
chairmanships of subsidiary bodies on the Council.
Lithuania had the task of kick-starting two Sanctions
Committees, on Yemen and the Central African
Republic, during the first four months of its Council
membership. We are ready to share our experience with
incoming chairs. Beyond that, we look forward to an
early appointment of chairpersons of subsidiary bodies,
in line with presidential note S/2014/393, agreed by the
Council four months ago.
In November, the Council will again hear a briefing
by Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on the relationship between Libya
and the ICC. That should not be a routine exercise.
We counted at least 37 Member States that took the
floor, some of them on behalf of a larger group of States,
at the open debate on the Council’s working methods
(see S/PV.7285) with regard to the need to effectively
address the relationship between the Council and the
Court. It is difficult to overlook the overwhelming
call for a follow-up mechanism. Nine years have
elapsed since the first Council referral. No warrant of
arrest has been executed. Do we aim to translate our
statements on justice and accountability into a tangible
pursuit to end impunity? A follow-up mechanism
could include many elements, such as an obligation
for all States to cooperate with the ICC; designation
criteria for sanctions mechanisms; the streamlining
of decision-making by the Sanctions Committees
where Court processes intersect; incentives to prevent
failures of cooperation; a follow-up forum; a financial
provision; cooperation with regional organizations and
responses to requests and orders from the Court.

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

In the public meeting (see S/PV.7287) on Ukraine,
on 24 October, many Council members called on
all parties to the Minsk agreements to immediately
implement them in full and to work towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The Secretary-General
deplored the planned holding by armed rebel groups
in eastern Ukraine of elections on 2 November, in
breach of the Constitution and national laws. We call
on Council members to condemn the holding of the socalled elections on 2 November in areas held by illegal
armed groups of Ukraine and to call on parties to the
Minsk protocol and the implementation memorandum
to unequivocally distance themselves from such
provocative actions, just as the Russian delegation
reiterated moments ago. Those elections will seriously
undermine the Minsk agreements.
In conclusion, once again we thank the presidency
of Argentina and congratulate the incoming Australian
presidency and assure it of our full support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Lithuania for his delegation’s
dynamism and consistency with regard to its positions
on the Council.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Madam, and the Argentine
delegation on your successful presidency for the month
of October. The work of the Council has been excellently
conducted thanks to your able, warm-hearted and
passionate leadership and the diligent work of your
team. We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the five newly elected Security Council
members — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela.
The Council’s work this month focused, among
others, on situations in Africa and the Middle East.
With regard to Africa, we had valuable opportunities
to review the situations in Somalia and Eritrea, as well
as the work of the Somalia Sanctions Committee, on
which I reported to the Council as Committee Chair. We
believe that those discussions serve as a useful reminder
that the sustained engagement of the international
community remains critical to those countries’
paths towards stability. In particular, the adoption of
resolution 2182 (2014), including the authorization of
maritime interdiction, demonstrated the Council’s
commitment to peace and stability in Somalia.
The Council also remained vigilant on the situation
in the Middle East. The last open debate on the Middle

S/PV.7294

East (see S/PV.7281) allowed us to address that issue in
a comprehensive manner, especially in the wake of the
Secretary-General’s visit to the region, which reflected
his unswerving efforts to bring peace to the Middle
East. Yesterday’s briefing (see S/PV.7291) was very
timely as well, given the series of actions undertaken
by the Israeli Government in East Jerusalem.
With regard to the situation in Syria, given its
gravity, this morning’s briefing (see S/PV.7293), the
first by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, provided us
with a new perspective on the situation in that country
and the neighbouring area. For more than three years,
the situation in Syria has been deteriorating, and today
it is having a spillover effect on all its neighbours,
including Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. The
Council’s consultations on resolution 1559 (2004) and
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
as well as this morning’s briefing by the Special Envoy,
all pointed to a political solution to the Syrian conflict
as the only viable way forward in the region.
Turning to thematic issues, the open debate on
women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) was
both timely and pertinent in the run-up to the 2015
high-level review to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that meeting offered
momentum to mobilize international attention and
commitments with a view to the protection of displaced
women and girls facing dire situations around the
world.
Another open debate this month, on the working
methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.7285), also
served as a valuable opportunity to consider ways to
improve due process in sanctions regimes, as well as
how to ensure follow-up of the Council’s referrals to
the International Criminal Court. At the same time,
the progress achieved and limitations with regard
to the working methods overall were also addressed.
In the light of that, it is necessary to consider how to
follow up on some of the commonly raised points at
the meeting through the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
This month we also heard an assessment of the Ebola
epidemic by the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
and we heard about its continued political and security
impact in West Africa (see S/PV.7279). As a follow-up
to resolution 2177 (2014), the meeting demonstrated
the Council’s attention to the Ebola crisis, specifically
through the issuance of a press statement (SC/11602).

14-5962115/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Finally, we would like to congratulate Ambassador
Gary Quinlan and Australia’s team as they prepares to
assume the Council’s presidency in November, even
though it is still 31 hours away. We assure them of the
Republic of Korea’s full cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the Republic of Korea for the
constructive, tireless and generous spirit he and his
delegation have displayed.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you and your team, Madam President,
for your leadership and hard work during this month’s
presidency. I could wax lyrical about that, like my
Korean colleague, but that would not be very British.
I would also like to thank you for convening today’s
wrap-up session. It is once again commendable that
the meeting is being held in public, and I hope that
subsequent presidencies will repeat the open and
transparent format.
The Council covered an extraordinarily wide
range of issues in October. They included a number
of continuing conflicts in Africa — Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan, Abyei and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Council also spent time on a number
of issues in the Middle East, including Yemen, Syria
and yesterday’s emergency meeting in response to the
escalating tensions and risks surrounding the situation
in Jerusalem. We discussed the Ebola crisis, which is
now recognized to be a threat to international peace and
security. We discussed Ukraine, where the separatists
planned to hold so-called local elections this weekend,
in clear violation of the Ukrainian Constitution and
the Minsk agreements. All Member States should vow
not to recognize them. And we had meetings with the
President of the International Court of Justice and
peacekeeping Force Commanders.
Throughout the month, Madam President, you have
stuck to the principle of openness and transparency,
supporting the move of the Côte d’Ivoire sanctions
briefing into the Chamber, and even allowing Malian
television to broadcast live the statement of its Minister
for Foreign Affairs to the Council at the beginning of
the month (see S/PV.7274). You have also convened
three very different open debates that have given a
representative flavour of the nature and breadth of
the issues before the Council. The open debate on
the Middle East (S/PV.7281) represented the more
traditional, geographically defined prism through
which the Council engages on the maintenance of
16/20

30/10/2014

international peace and security. The open debate on
women and peace and security (S/PV.7289) reflected
how the Council has embedded a cross-cutting thematic
approach in its work. The agenda on women and peace
and security is now an integral part of the Council’s
work and of its understanding of the nature of conflict
today and how to resolve it. The open debate on working
methods (S/PV.7285), the fifth consecutive debate on
the topic, showed how the Council has been prepared
more recently to open up its self-reflection to the wider
membership. That trajectory of openness, transparency
and reflection should be welcomed. It demonstrates a
willingness in the Council to adapt the ways in which
it considers matters of international peace and security
and to remain open to hearing from a wider range of
actors on all aspects of its work.
While we can see that trajectory in the way the
Council has dealt with the issues before it in October,
we can also see areas where it has been unable to make
progress. The Council has discussed the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo innumerable
times since 1960, when the first United Nations
mission, the United Nations Operation in the Congo,
was established. We have been considering questions
about Israel and Palestine since the 1950s. Even the
relatively recent issue of Western Sahara has been on
the Council’s agenda for nearly 25 years.
But if we fail to resolve those old issues, we will not
have the time to deal with the new crises and challenges
that the world faces. That is why a renewed focus on
conflict prevention must remain a central part of the
Council’s efforts to maintain international peace and
security. If we can take early action to prevent situations
deteriorating, we may be able to avoid their becoming
entrenched fixtures on the Council’s programme of
work. But in order to create the space and time needed
to take a genuinely preventive approach, we must
find ways to avoid having repetitive discussions of
entrenched issues. We must move some items off the
Council’s agenda faster than new items are coming onto
it. Some items on the Council’s formal agenda have
not been discussed for 60 years, and we should stop
pretending that we are trying to resolve them.
That is connected directly to our methods of work.
We require timely briefings from early-warning actors
across the United Nations. We should develop more
interactivity in informal consultations. And despite
recent efforts, including yours, Madam President,
in the month of October, those too often resemble a

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

formulaic exchange of positions. We should also ensure
that we are as efficient as possible in the conduct of our
business. Unless we can improve those basic aspects
of our working methods, an enlarged Security Council
will simply not be able to function.
Lastly, although it may be too soon to congratulate
Ambassador Quinlan on Australia’s assumption of
the presidency, I can offer the United Kingdom’s full
support to Australia in its presidency next month.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I should
first thank you and all your team, Madam President, for
all the work you have done in October. In an extremely
busy period you have led our discussions with great
professionalism and energy, for which many thanks.
It is always a challenge to be the final speaker and to
produce a synthesis of a meeting that is itself a monthly
synthesis, and I am not going to attempt it. There is
a great deal that could be said, particularly about the
Middle East, which has been the subject of two major
public meetings, but today I am not going to revisit the
statements my delegation has made on the various crises
in the region — the peace process, the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Lebanon and
Libya — and will confine myself to five subjects: the
Ebola crisis, Mali, Ukraine, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Council’s working methods.
In its 15 October press statement (SC/11602), the
Security Council noted that the Ebola epidemic is a
threat to international peace and security, as well as how
urgent it is that all international actors mobilize their
resources on the ground in order to contain the epidemic.
For its part, France is planning to build three centres,
with a capacity of 200 beds, to combat Ebola in Guinea,
the first of which will open in November in the eastern
part of the country, the heart of the outbreak. We also
plan to open a hospital for health professionals working
to combat Ebola in Guinea, and the French Ministry of
Defence will deploy 120 personnel in Guinea to train
caregivers dealing with Ebola in dedicated centres.
We are also participating in the European evacuation
mechanism for infected international humanitarian
workers, a key part of encouraging such workers to
travel to the affected countries.
Concerning Mali, the Security Council sent a
clear message in its consultations on 8 October and its
17 October press statement (SC/11604). On the political
front, the peace negotiations that are being relaunched
in Algiers at the end of this month, through international

S/PV.7294

mediation, represent a historic opportunity for peace
in Mali. We welcome Algeria’s role as facilitator
and the key part being played by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), which will be responsible for
supporting the implementation of any future agreement.
The Malian parties, both Government and armed
groups, should engage in the negotiations in good faith
and a spirit of compromise. The goal is an inclusive and
comprehensive peace agreement that takes every aspect
of the crisis in Mali into account. On the ground, the
parties must fully respect the ceasefire and commit to
preventing attacks on MINUSMA.
On the security front, the proliferating deadly
attacks on MINUSMA require us to rethink how
to ensure MINUSMA’s safety and effectiveness on
the ground. We welcome the proposal of the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
initiating a discussion in the Security Council on the
subject. We must collectively find ways to enable
MINUSMA to fulfil its robust mandate to stabilize
northern Маli. Operation Barkhane has conducted
counter-terrorism efforts in recent weeks, particularly
in the North of the Niger, that have led to the arrest
of those responsible for the attack that resulted in the
death of a Senegalese peacekeeper from MINUSMA
and destabilized the terrorists in their sanctuary by
neutralizing many of them. Unfortunately, a French
soldier was killed during the operation. The focus of
Operation Barkhane efforts in Mali will shortly be
shifted farther north, specifically to the region around
Tessalit and Kidal.
At the meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.7287), all the
members of the Security Council endorsed the Minsk
Agreement as the cornerstone of the way out of the
crisis and called on all parties to fully implement it. We
hope that that unanimous signal from the Council will
be paid heed, in particular by Russia.
We welcome the calm conduct of the voting on
26 October despite the difficult conditions under which
it was held. We also stress the importance of resuming
national dialogue and implementing the reforms
expected by the Ukrainian population and to which
these elections should lead.
We recall, as many other members of the Council
have already done, our commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. In that regard,
we condemn the organization by the armed rebel
groups in eastern Ukraine of their own elections on

14-5962117/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

2 November, in violation of the national Constitution.
Such illegal elections would seriously go against the
Minsk Agreement, and we call on Russia to use all its
influence to discourage the separatists from moving
forward with that effort.
During our consultations on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, shared concern was expressed
regarding the slow progress on all topics at the centre
of the Council’s attention. On the security front, the
impasse in the process of voluntary disarmament of the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda is now
obvious. The Council had the opportunity to firmly
express its position in that regard in a press statement
on 3 October. We are counting on the commitment of
the countries of the region to find a definitive solution
to this problem, which has haunted the relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours for more than 20 years. The date
2 January cannot be pushed back. Plans must now be
made for joint military action by the Armed Forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
Council recalled that neutralizing this group is a top
priority for the international community. With regard to
other groups, the Council welcomed the progress made
but which too often remains too slow and too fragile.
During those consultations, it was also recalled
that neutralizing such groups was necessary but not
sufficient for re-establishing lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Compliance with commitments under the Addis Ababa
framework agreement is more crucial than ever, and the
Council is counting on all signatory States to comply
fully in good faith with the obligations undertaken at the
regional level. The Council also expects the Congolese
Government to step up its efforts in implementing the
necessary reforms. МONUSCO, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler and Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Djinnit have the full support of the
Council in supporting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the States of the region in the right direction.
We regretted the recent decision by the Congolese
authorities to expel the head of the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We recall the great importance the Council
attaches to the promotion and protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity, and our full

18/20

30/10/2014

support for MONUSCO and the work of United Nations
staff in that regard.
Finally, the annual public debate on the working
methods of the Security Council, held on 23 October (see
S/PV.7285), was an opportunity to consider ambitious
ideas. The outcomes of the Argentine chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions have been universally
welcomed. They were indeed substantive, under
your leadership, Madam President, including a first
presidential note clarifying the role of the drafter of
resolutions.
Another central topic of discussion was that of
prevention, the broad support for which was clear from
Arria Formula meetings, statements to the Council
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide. This consensus is going in the
right direction and we hope that, in practice, members
of the Council will not block rapid response actions to
prevent the exacerbation of crises.
The importance of regular contacts between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council
received broad support. These contacts with the Council
are maintained on a daily basis and enhanced follow-up
would, of course, further aid in preventing violence.
The debate also welcomed the work of Ms. Prost,
Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
In conclusion, a great number of delegations — some
40 — either directly or through the group statements,
expressed their support for the application in 2015
of the French initiative seeking to limit the use of
the veto. I thank them warmly. Naturally, neither the
French initiative nor the very useful measures we are
implementing in favour of transparency in working
methods are a substitute for comprehensive reform of
the Security Council.
I conclude by thanking once again my dear
colleagues Marita and Mario for their presidency. We
also wish the greatest of success to Australia, who will
carry the torch from tomorrow night. I assure them of
our full support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I could not resist the pleasure of taking

14-59621

30/10/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the floor one more time under your presidency,
Madam President.
The representative of France just said that all
members of the Council have called for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreement on Ukraine. We
should have liked that to be the case, but unfortunately
it is not because when the Minsk agreement was
made, the Russian delegation swiftly proposed the
adoption of a statement to the press in support of it.
However, we came up against attempts by a number
of delegations to rewrite the Minsk agreement. They
proposed amendments to the simple and brief statement
in support of the agreement that would have rewritten
the content of the agreement. The Council therefore did
not take a stance in support of Minsk agreement.
We have, unfortunately, heard similar attempts made
in certain statements to rewrite the agreement reached
between the Kyiv authorities and the representatives
of the south-east. These statements distort the idea
behind the Minsk agreement and paint the intentions
of the people in the south-east to hold elections on
2 November in a disingenuous light. We have heard
similar statements in Kyiv and some Western capitals.
This requires us to make an important corresponding
clarification.
In line with the Minsk agreement achieved in
September between representatives of the President
of Ukraine and representatives of the militias in the
south-east, with the participation of Russia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) , it was agreed to hold such elections between
19 October and 3 November. The law signed by President
Poroshenko on 16 October regarding the so-called
territories and their special autonomy, establishing
7 December as the date of the elections, runs counter
to the Minsk agreement. The date of 7 December was
included in the law arbitrarily and unilaterally, without
any discussion with the militias. Moreover, that law
cannot be applied in practice, as it does not define
the specific regions of its coverage. This issue must
remain pending until an additional decision is taken by
the Verkhovna Rada. Such a decision cannot be made
because Kyiv withdrew its signature to the document
defining the boundaries between the Ukrainian forces
and the militias. The statement issued by the head of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine concerning
the refusal to carry out the law signed by President
Poroshenko on 16 October is not constructive.

S/PV.7294

There have been constant violations by Kyiv
of the Minsk agreement on other matters as well.
Shelling continues of areas controlled by the militias,
in violation of the ceasefire. Promised acts of amnesty
and security guarantees for militia negotiators have not
been enacted. The provisions on the decentralization
of power and the continuation of the national dialogue
are not respected. The Kyiv authorities have totally
undermined the improving humanitarian situation in
the Donbas and placed artificial obstacles in the way of
humanitarian convoys from Russia.
Against this backdrop, the position of the militias
regarding the holding of elections, in particular those
of 2 June, is justified and fully in line with the Minsk
agreement and its provisional timelines. There is an
urgent need for a full-fledged governing body in southeastern Ukraine to resolve practical issues relating to
daily life and law enforcement.
Efforts to resolve the situation in south-eastern
Ukraine are being undertaken in the most difficult and
unfavourable conditions. It is important now to do our
utmost to support the tenuous ceasefire, the onset of the
economic and humanitarian rebuilding of the region and
the launch of sustainable political dialogue. Attempts
to impose artificial ultimatums and reduce the whole
package of the Minsk agreement due to just one aspect,
such as the date of the elections, or to use the conduct
of either side as a criterion could undermine the entire
process of peaceful resolution, making it hostage to
certain geopolitical ambitions.
We cannot rule out the possibility that those who put
forward such ultimatums are seeking to undermine the
Minsk agreement, just as the agreement of 21 February
was undermined, and creating a pretext to settle the
conflict in south-eastern Ukraine by force. The Russian
side firmly calls for such a turn of events to be averted
and for everything possible to be done to ensure that the
elections of 2 November are a step towards the further
normalization of the situation and a comprehensive
settlement of the internal Ukrainian crisis.
We recall that, before the beginning of the Minsk
process, the militia leaders publicly stated their
negotiating positions, which in part stressed that the
conduct of free elections on those territories, based on
the principles of national self-governance, would pave
the way for joint efforts to retain a united, economic,
cultural and political space in Ukraine. Russia will help
to ensure that the winner in the elections for leader of

14-5962119/20

S/PV.7294

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

30/10/2014

the south-east adheres to that line. We expect specific
actions for the voluntary implementation of the Minsk
agreement from the Ukrainian authorities, Western
partners and the OSCE.

the Council; to the Permanent Representatives and their
respective staffs; and to the secretariat of the Council for
the warm support it has given us with professionalism
and a great deal of patience.

Today there is an opportunity to use the 2 November
elections, not for a reckless and unjustified exacerbation
of the confrontation, but rather to move things along in
a constructive way with a mutually respectful dialogue
and a search for compromise on the basis of a balance
of legal interests of all Ukrainian parties, as required
by the document signed in the framework of the Minsk
process.

It has been a very busy month. We have reached
consensus on important matters, while other issues
are still pending. The text prepared by the secretariat
says that we could not have done it alone, and that is
true. The Council’s work is not the work of a single
person, or of five, six or seven. It is the work of all,
hard work and an immense responsibility. We value
the support and positive contributions, as well as the
constructive criticism, of every one of the delegations
and the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as all
of the relevant conference service officers.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of October, I should like to express the
sincere appreciation of the Argentine delegation to the
members of the Council; to all of my colleagues, in
particular the “W-6” — the six women Ambassadors to

20/20

As we end our presidency, I am sure that the
members of the Security Council will speak in a single
voice in wishing the delegation of Australia very good
luck for the month of November.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

14-59621
