39

Resolutiont1 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Ke,eping in mind the principles and purposes contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 entitled "Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples",
Considering that by resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27
November 1%1 the General Assembly established a
Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Considering further that in paragraph 8 of that resolution the General Assembly requested the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territpries
to assist the Special Committee in its work,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same
basis ~s hitherto until such time as the General Assembly has decided that the principles embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples have been fully implemented;
2. Decides further that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories shall examine
the political and constitutional information transmitted
by the Administering Members as well as information
relating to functional fields, and submit its reports to
the General Assembly with its observations and conclusions thereon ;
3. Instructs the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to undertake intensive
studies of political, educational, economic and social
conditions and problems of Territories located in the
same area or region, except where circumstances require individual consideration;
4. Recalls its resolution 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and instructs the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to invite the cooperation of the Special Committee of seven members
established by General Assembly resolution 1699
(XVI) of 19 December 1961;
5. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to transmit to the
Special Committee on the application of the Declaration
on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples the reports referred to in paragraph 2
above, and to provide it with pertinent material available. to the Committee on Information including such
studies prepared for its consideration as may be required for the discharge of the Special Committee's
functions.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*
* *
At its 1253rd meeting, on 18 December 1961, the Fourth
Committee, acting on behalf of the General Assembly, elected
four members to the Committee o~ Information from NonSelf-Governing Ten:itories for a period of three years to fill
the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office
of the Dominican Republic, Ghana, India and /raq. 1 • At its
1083rd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1961, the Assembly
confirmed this election.
The following States were elected:

ECUADOR,

PAKISTAN,

PHILIPPINES and UPPER VOLTA.
18
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/5048, para. 2.

1701 (XVI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 1 July 1960 to 19 July
1961, 17
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
take account of the recommendations and observations
contained in the report;
3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council should
consider at its n\·c11ty-eighth session the com111,:11ts and
suggestions which'were made, d1.1ring the discussion of
the repl0 rt at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly, regarding the remaining Territories nuder
trusteeship, as well as the Council's methods of work
and procedure, in order to bring them into accordance
with the requirements of the new sitnation in the field
of the International Trusteeship System.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1702 (XVI). Question of South West Africa
The G§neral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) _of 14 pecemlJ!!r
1960 entitled "Declaration on the grantmg of mdependence to colonial countries and peoples", and its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 establishing
a Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration,
Recalling its resolutions 1568 (XV) of 18 Decem1.)er
1960 and 1596 (XV) of 7 April 1961,
Noting with approval the special report of the Committee on South West Africa,18
Bearing in mind the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the special report of the Committee on
South West Africa on the measures to be taken to
ensure the institution of the rule of law and such democratic processes, reforms and programmes of assistance
as will enable the Mandated Territor,y of South West
Africa to assume the full responsibilities of sovereignty
and independence within the shortest possible time,
Noting 'Wi,th deep regret that the Government of the
Republic of South Africa has prevented the Committee
on South West Africa, with threats, from entering the
Territory,
Noting with increased disquiet the progressive deterioration of the situation in South West Africa as a
result of the ruthless intensification of the policy of
apartheid, the deep emotional resentments of all African
peoples, accompanied by the rapid expansion of South
Africa's military forces, and the fact that Europeans,
both soldiers and civilians, are being armed and militarily reinforced for tl1e purpose of oppressing the indigenous people, all of which create an increasingly
explosive situation which, if allowed to continue, will
endanger international peace and security,
Considering that the Government of South Africa
has persistently failed in its international obligations
"Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4818).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/4926).

18
