S/PV.8636

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8636th meeting

Tuesday, 8 October 2019, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2019/782)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30542 (E)
*1930542*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8636

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

I also take this opportunity to welcome Ambassador
Issa Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali to
the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda

This report comes at a time when news from Bamako
is, unfortunately, not encouraging, particularly last
week’s gruesome attacks on Boulékéssi and Mondoro,
as well as the death 48 hours ago of a peacekeeper
in Aguelhok and the injury of another in the vicinity
of Bandiagara.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/782)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Annadif is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Bamako.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/782, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by
Mr. Annadif and Ambassador José Singer Weisinger,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif: Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the role of President of the Security Council
for the month of October. I would also like to take this
opportunity to greet and congratulate the Ambassador
of Russia for his presidency of the Council during the
month of September.
(spoke in French)
It is an honour and a renewed pleasure for me to
present to the Council today, from Bamako, the report
of the Secretary-General on Mali (S/2019/782), covering
the past three months, in accordance with paragraph 64
of resolution 2480 (2019).
2/13

08/10/2019

Despite these ongoing tragedies committed by the
enemies of peace, significant progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation on Mali, particularly with regard
to political and institutional reforms, defence and
security issues and socioeconomic development issues,
as mentioned in the report under consideration. That
progress includes the promulgation last July of the Loi
d’entente nationale and legislation establishing the
fundamental principles for the creation, organization
and control of the northern economic development
zone, which lays the foundations for relaunching
development at the local level.
In the same vein, it is worth noting and welcoming
the workshop held from 14 to 16 September in
Bamako, which endorsed the terms of reference of
the inclusive national dialogue and the official launch
of the dialogue by Prime Minister Boubou Cissé, on
16 September. In that regard, we note that the main
political and institutional reforms provided for in the
Agreement are well reflected in the terms of reference.
The consultations at the local level began yesterday and
will through today. They will continue at the cercle
level on 14 and 15 October, then at the regional level
on 21 and 22 October, before moving to the capital,
Bamako, for the national dialogue to be held towards
the end of October, or early November at the latest.
The Malian political class and civil society should
be commended for taking this important step, and an
appeal should be made to the various stakeholders to
take part in the debate in order to ensure massive and
truly inclusive participation.
The failure to hold the thirty-eighth session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, scheduled to take
place in Kidal on 17 September, caused some unease
among the signatories. That unease was amplified
by the Government’s announcement of its wish to
review certain provisions of the Agreement during
the inclusive national dialogue. In the light of these
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

developments, which could hinder the smooth progress
of the peace process, it is extremely important to call
on all stakeholders to continue the dialogue in the spirit
of the Agreement, which remains the only basis for a
return to peace and stability in Mali. Building trust
among the signatories is essential in order for the next
session of the Committee to take place. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend Ambassador
Ahmed Boutache, who, after leading the work of the
Committee in an outstanding way for almost five years,
is about to take on other responsibilities in the service
of his country, Algeria.
Concerning the defence and security pillar of
the Agreement, the planning of the redeployment of
1,006 combatants from the Operational Coordination
Mechanism, who are now an integral part of the
Malian security forces, is on track. That number will
be supplemented by 328 other combatants who are still
in training; a further 506 will be added, bringing the
number of troops to nearly 1,840. The troops, who are all
from the Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad,
will be mixed with others in already constituted units
and redeployed to the northern regions to form the core
of the reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and
security forces.
The establishment of a national security council
and the appointment of its permanent secretary are
significant steps forward, which were welcomed by
all the partners at the fifth session of the strategic
committee on security sector reform, held on 4 October.
The council’s establishment will likely facilitate the
adoption of the national defence and security policy,
which is essential to the coherent implementation of
security sector reform in Mali.
By initiating its efforts under the policy framework
on crisis management in Centre, the Government of
Mali is demonstrating its determination to remedy the
situation, including through the implementation of its
Centre stabilization strategy. Thanks to the efforts
of the Malian Government, combined with those
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), statistics
show a significant decrease in the number of attacks
against civilians and the number of civilians killed or
injured in recent months. This is a good opportunity to
call for an increased presence of defence and security
forces in Centre, in coordination with MINUSMA
efforts to protect civilians and combat impunity.

S/PV. 8636

In that context, on 27 September, MINUSMA
held a coordination meeting with the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission to discuss the implementation of the
community rehabilitation programme designed to
handle the disarmament and dismantling of self-defence
groups and at-risk youth, particularly in Centre. The
Government plans to launch the programme very soon.
The provisional date is set for 11 October, in the presence
of the Prime Minister. MINUSMA will support the
operation, particularly in the areas of disarmament,
biometric registration, human rights awareness, child
protection and HIV/AIDS testing, as well as through
the community violence reduction project.
In addition, the humanitarian situation in Centre
continues to deteriorate. The cycle of violence has led
to waves of internal displacement, currently numbering
around 171,000 people. That is the highest number of
displaced persons since 2015. Some of them live in
displaced persons’ camps, while others live with host
families, in often very difficult conditions, which is
putting humanitarian assistance under strain owing to
the lack of regular funding and, above all, to difficult
humanitarian access despite MINUSMA’s support. The
restoration of public services, whether security, judicial
or social, is essential if the level of violence is to be
reduced. Humanitarian workers are not immune from
the violence. At the end of September, two vehicles of a
United Nations agency were stolen by armed men.
On cross-cutting issues such as child protection,
the Plateforme, one of the signatories to the Agreement,
submitted its action plan against the recruitment and
use of children on 18 September.
In the area of combating sexual violence,
MINUSMA held a workshop from 24 to 27 September
to prepare an action plan following the signing, on
1 March, of the joint communiqué on conflict-related
sexual violence by the Government and the United
Nations. The draft action plan is currently being
reviewed and will have to be signed at the end of this
year in order to be rolled out in 2020.
Lastly, in accordance with resolution 2480 (2019),
a workshop on the inclusion of women in the peace
process is planned for 25 November. It will focus on
determining and validating the modalities for their
inclusion, including the establishment of a women’s
observatory. MINUSMA, UN-Women and donors stand

19-305423/13

S/PV.8636

The situation in Mali

ready to support the Government’s efforts to organize
and run the workshop.
As members can see from the Secretary-General’s
report, while there are many challenges, MINUSMA is
determined to fulfil its obligations, in full coordination
not only with the Government of Mali but also with
international partners, including the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, Operation Barkhane and
the European Union (EU) missions, such as the EU
Training Mission in Mali and the EU capacity-building
mission Sahel Mali.
I thank you, Mr President, for your kind attention
and continued support to Mali and MINUSMA.
The President: I thank Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Singer Weisinger.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the honour to brief the members of
the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali. In my statement, I intend to
provide information on my role as Chair since the start
of my mandate on 1 January and to highlight the work
conducted by the Committee and the Panel of Experts
since the beginning of the year.
The Committee has met five times since the
beginning of the year. The Committee held informal
consultations on 7 February to consider the midterm
report of the Panel of Experts on Mali (see S/2019/137),
submitted to the Security Council in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2432 (2018). Committee
members heard a briefing on 12 April by Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on the scourge
of sexual violence in Mali. Since the Committee was
established to date, there have been eight people on
the 2374 (2017) sanctions list. The Committee signed
an agreement with INTERPOL in March to publish
and circulate INTERPOL-Security Council Special
Notices. The Panel of Experts submitted its final report
to the Security Council on 9 August (see S/2019/636),
as mandated by the Security Council.
Lastly, I would like to report that I will be visiting
Bamako from 16 October to 18 October. The visit is a
timely one, as it is a good opportunity to engage with
national authorities and receive updates on the political
and security situation in Mali and the Sahel, including
on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
4/13

08/10/2019

and Reconciliation in Mali. It also provides a good
opportunity to explore prospects for future engagement
with countries in the Sahel in order to promote peace and
reconciliation in Mali and stability in the wider region.
The President: I thank Ambassador Singer
Weisinger for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s briefing on developments
in Mali in the light of the strategic priorities defined
by resolution 2480 (2019). We commend Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), on his briefing and express our
full support for his tireless efforts in implementing
the MINUSMA mandate. My delegation also thanks
Ambassador Singer Weisinger, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017),
concerning Mali, for his detailed briefing. We welcome
the Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations to today’s meeting and will pay close attention
to his statement.
In the light of the findings and recommendations
of the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Mali and the work of MINUSMA (S/2019/782), my
delegation would like to make a few observations on
the political, security and humanitarian issues.
At the political level, my country welcomes the
actions of the Malian authorities, in particular the
launching, on 16 September, of the political dialogue,
which should enable all the country’s leading forces to
make their voices heard on constitutional issues and
political and institutional reforms. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire calls on all stakeholders to prioritize the best
interests of the nation in the political dialogue.
National consultations must also give a prominent
place to women, the primary victims of the unspeakable
violence perpetrated by terrorist groups, so that their
aspirations can be taken into account in the quest
for lasting solutions to Mali’s many challenges.
Furthermore, my country believes that the success of
the dialogue depends, above all, upon the willingness
of Malian political actors to take ownership of the
recovery process following the crisis. We also welcome
the support of MINUSMA, which is an added value
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, borne out of the Algiers
process. Côte d’Ivoire therefore hopes that the new
momentum created by the political dialogue will enable
a continuation of the slow but encouraging progress in
the areas of defence and security and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and in
establishing the northern economic development zone.
The security situation in northern and central Mali
remains a source of serious concern, as illustrated
by the recurrent attacks by terrorist groups against
civilians and the use of community violence. Côte
d’Ivoire reiterates its firm condemnation of the heinous
and indiscriminate attacks on the Malian defence and
security forces, MINUSMA, the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and international
forces. They include attacks on the Boulkessy and
Mandoro military camps, on 1 and 2 October, which
killed 25 Malian soldiers, as well as those carried out
four days later in Aguelhok and Bandiagara, which left
one dead and injured five among MINUSMA forces.
Such attacks, similar to violence against civilians,
compel the Security Council to continue strengthening
the logistical and operational capacities of the Malian
armed forces, in particular when collecting and analysing
information. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
MINUSMA’s support in building the capacity of the
Malian armed forces, in line with the Government’s
integrated security plan for the central regions and the
restoration of State authority and basic social services
in the centre of the country, which should help reduce
violence and intercommunity tensions.
The continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, due mainly to attacks by extremist armed
groups and terrorists, as well as community violence,
is also worrisome. The number of internally displaced
persons continues to increase and, regrettably, reflects
the urgency of the humanitarian situation in affected
areas. According to the most recent report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, dated
12 September, the number increased from 84,300 to
168,500 between January and July. Approximately
3.9 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance today, as compared to 3.2 million in January,
thereby increasing the budget for the intervention
plan to $324 million. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls
for strong support from the international community
commensurate with the immense humanitarian
challenges in order to fund the intervention plan.

S/PV. 8636

Today’s meeting takes place in a worrisome
regional security context, marked not only by the
exacerbation of intercommunity conflicts but also the
growing terrorist threat and an increase in the number
of attacks throughout the West African subregion.
There is an increasing number of worrisome signs that
require the Council to go further and be pragmatic
in its support for the fight against terrorism in West
Africa and the Sahel. That calls for a paradigm
shift in the fight against terrorism, which must be
considered at the subregional level, while building
on the achievements of the G-5 Sahel. That is the
essence of the commitment made by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at its
Extraordinary Summit of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government on Terrorism in the ECOWAS
Region, held on 14 September in Ouagadougou, where
they pledged to pool their resources in the fight against
terrorism through a priority action plan with a fund of
$1 billion.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its ongoing
support for the Malian authorities during this difficult
phase of their country’s history and encourages the
international community, first and foremost the
Security Council, to strengthen its support in order to
help restore peace and stability in Mali.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Annadif for his briefing.
Today I want to emphasize the continued
importance of follow-through. We have seen that
essential quality in the sustained commitment of
those serving in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the most dangerous mission of the United Nations.
Both MINUSMA and the Malian Defence and Security
Forces have suffered heinous attacks in recent days,
with a Chadian peacekeeper killed in one attack and at
least 38 Malian troops killed in two others. The United
States owes a debt of gratitude to the families whose
loved ones’ lives were taken, and we wish a speedy
recovery to all the injured.
On a personal note, we must not become numb
to this kind of violence. The deaths of those Malian
soldiers are wrong. The death of one soldier is wrong.
They come far too soon, and that should motivate
the Council to redouble its efforts. Such horrific acts
reinforce the reality that MINUSMA is no ordinary
peacekeeping mission and that Mali’s security and

19-305425/13

S/PV.8636

The situation in Mali

humanitarian crisis is continuing its dangerous spiral.
Terrorist organizations operate with impunity, and
civilians are being killed, injured or displaced in
unacceptable numbers. Affirming such a status quo
is unacceptable.
The Council unanimously adopted resolution 2480
(2019) on 28 June. Notably, the mandate created a
second strategy priority for MINUSMA, supporting the
Government of Mali in its efforts to protect civilians
in the centre of the country. We commend MINUSMA
for its efforts to address instability in that region,
particularly through the launch of Operation Oryx II,
as well as its work to re-establish State authority and
its assistance with local reconciliation efforts. We also
welcome the Mission’s strategy of increasing its mobility
and concentrating on major population centres. Like my
colleague from Côte d’Ivoire, we encourage the greater
and continued participation of women in inclusive
national dialogue and in the monitoring mechanisms of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The United States also recognizes the efforts made
by Mali’s Government to stabilize the centre of the
country. The handing over of a MINUSMA camp to
Malian security forces is an example of a small but
concrete step in the right direction, and we want to see
more transitions like it in the future.
However, despite MINUSMA’s commendable
efforts, the overall trend in this reporting period is
deeply worrying, as it speaks to a notable lack of followthrough. The Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups have made little progress in implementing
the Algiers peace agreement, despite the clear message
in resolution 2480 (2019) that the signatory parties
are expected to accelerate that implementation. In
the three months since the resolution was adopted,
we have yet to see any consensus reached on how the
inclusive national dialogue should proceed. A number
of critical parties have pulled out of the process, and
implementation has been hampered by administrative
shortages and a failure to fund local authorities at the
level the agreement requires. That is not acceptable.
We cannot continue to support a peacekeeping mission
where the signatory parties enjoy security provided by
international forces while refusing to fully implement
their own agreement. We have also heard calls for giving
MINUSMA a more robust counter-terrorism mandate.
In our view, however, MINUSMA, as a peacekeeping
mission, should not be viewed as a solution to a regional
counter-terrorism problem. The States of the Group of
6/13

08/10/2019

Five for the Sahel have already developed a Joint Force
to address those specific challenges, and the United
States supports that effort.
In conclusion, I want to return to the theme of
follow-through. The late theologian Eugene Peterson
once wrote that beginnings are important, but that
a beginning without a continuation is a lie. We
cannot allow another promising beginning to evade
continuation. We cannot allow another year to pass in
which we are no closer to the implementation of the
Algiers accord or the achievement of the agreement’s
key political goals. If all stakeholders remain unwilling
to break the status quo, we must be willing to begin
developing a different approach to peace, security and
renewed hope for the people of Mali.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and Ambassador José Singer
Weisinger, Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
concerning Mali, for their comprehensive briefings.
I would also like to express my deep condolences
for the death of one peacekeeper and the injuring of
five others during attacks in northern and central Mali.
We appreciate the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and all MINUSMA personnel in
ensuring peace and stability in Mali. I would now like
to share three points.
First, we welcome the political developments in
Mali, including the launch of an inclusive national
dialogue on 16 September. We hope that the dialogue
will enable an important consensus to be reached on
constitutional reform, the election of a new Parliament
and the redeployment of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces. We also welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, including the continuing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the promulgation of laws on the establishment
of a northern economic development zone. We call
on all Malian stakeholders to continue to work
together in accelerating the implementation of the
peace agreement and the priority measures set out in
resolution 2480 (2019).
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

Secondly, the security situation continues to be a
cause of concern, particularly in northern and central
Mali. With this situation in mind, we believe it is
necessary to step up efforts to redeploy the Malian
Defence and Security Forces. That will be crucial to
restoring a State presence and addressing the security
situation, particularly in northern Mali. In central Mali,
we commend the reconciliation efforts being led by the
Government and supported by international partners,
including MINUSMA. We believe that reconciliation,
the re-establishment of a State presence and the provision
of basic needs for the population should continue to be
prioritized, along with security responses. With regard
to MINUSMA, we commend the efforts made to adjust
its footprint and increase its proactive posture. We call
on the Government to support the implementation of
that adaptation plan.
Thirdly, we would like to reiterate the importance
of a holistic approach to addressing the situation in
Mali that encompasses security, humanitarian and
development efforts. We therefore call on regional and
international partners to advance the implementation
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and its support plan. Only such a concerted effort
can enable us to achieve durable peace, stability and
sustainable development in Mali.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative Annadif
and Ambassador Singer Weisinger for their briefings.
China strongly condemns the attack on 6 October
targeting peacekeepers from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). We would like to express our
condolences to the family of the peacekeeper killed in
the attack and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
At present, the peace and reconciliation process in
Mali is slowly advancing, preparations for an inclusive
national dialogue are under way and progress has been
made in the intercommunal reconciliation process in
central Mali. However, the security situation in the
country and the surrounding Sahel region still poses a
challenge to the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The international
community should continue to pay attention to the issue
and to help Mali and the countries of the region on the
political, security and development fronts.
First, we should support Mali in advancing peace
and reconciliation. All the parties in Mali should take

S/PV. 8636

the opportunity presented by the national dialogue to
work together for peace and development and resolve
their differences peacefully, through full consultations.
The international community should provide Mali with
constructive assistance and support it in strengthening
its development and governance capabilities. The
Council’s Mali sanctions mechanism should abide
strictly by the Council’s mandate, and its work should
help advance the political process.
Secondly, we should support Mali in enhancing
its security capacity-building. The Government of
Mali bears the primary responsibility for protecting
its territory and people. The international community
should continue to help it improve its security and
counter-terrorism capabilities so that it can gradually
assume its full responsibility for security. Since
terrorism knows no national boundaries, we must
strengthen regional cooperation and combat terrorism
in and around Mali, with an integrated approach. The
international community should continue to support
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). Through the African Union, China has provided
financial support amounting to ¥300 million to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, we should support Mali in achieving
economic and social development. Development is the
foundation for peace. The international community
should continue to help Mali consolidate its economic
foundation, strive for independent and sustainable
development, and promote development through
cooperation and peace through development. China
calls on all the relevant parties to follow through on
their aid commitment and help the Malian Government
increase investment in development in the country’s
northern and central areas. We welcome the progress
made in establishing a northern economic development
zone and hope that all the parties concerned will
continue to advance those efforts and help the local
people share the peace dividends as soon as possible.
Fourthly, we should support the work of
MINUSMA. In June the council adopted resolution
2480 (2019), extending the mandate of MINUSMA
for one year, enhancing its mandated tasks in central
Mali and expanding its support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. We hope that MINUSMA will plan sensibly, use
its existing resources effectively and fully cooperate
with all parties in performing all of its functions.
Given the complex environment in which MINUSMA
is deployed, we hope that the Mission will continue to

19-305427/13

S/PV.8636

The situation in Mali

take measures to strengthen the safety and security of
its peacekeepers and ensure their effective performance
of their duties. China supports the important role played
by the Mission and Special Representative Annadif in
assisting the peace process in Mali and strengthening
the country’s security capacity-building.
China is a major troop-contributing country to
MINUSMA. More than 420 of our peacekeepers are
currently carrying out their duties in the Mission. China
will continue to work with the rest of the international
community to contribute to achieving peace, stability
and development in Mali.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and Ambassador José Singer Weisinger, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, for their
informative briefings regarding the increasing tensions
at the political level and the deterioration of the security
situation in our brother country of Mali and in the
Sahel region.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, I want to express our firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks of 30 September
and 1 October on the Malian armed forces and on one
of the battalions of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in the areas of Boulikessi
and Mondoro. We offer our sincere condolences to the
families of the fallen soldiers and wish the wounded a
speedy recovery.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, under the leadership of President Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, reiterates its full solidarity with
the Government of Mali and the countries contributing
troops to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We want to
emphasize that such attacks should not in any way
hinder the valiant efforts of national and international
parties to achieve peace and security. On the contrary,
they should serve as a reminder of the urgent need
for strong and effective support on the part of the
international community for the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat terrorism.
8/13

08/10/2019

Mali has been dealing with a multidimensional
crisis since 2012. Neither the signing of the 2015 Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
the mobilization of enormous financial resources, nor
the deployment of Operation Barkhane, MINUSMA
and even the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has succeeded in
curbing the jihadist threat. In the face of these gloomy
prospects, international public opinion is clear and
unanimous that the humanitarian and security situation
is deteriorating to a worrying degree, while the civilian
population is the most affected by the conflict and
marginalized young people are badly exploited by
terrorist groups preying on their vulnerability.
In the light of the situation, we should combine
synergies and prioritize mechanisms and initiatives that
can potentially weaken the terrorists and create new hope
for restoring peace. In that regard, the implementation of
the inclusive national dialogue launched in September
constitutes an ideal framework for addressing the most
pressing matters, as the Secretary-General underscores
in paragraph 99 of his report (S/2019/782) — that is,
fostering consensus among national actors with regard
to the essential reforms that will lay the groundwork for
a more peaceful and stable Mali.
My Government takes note of the postponement of
the thirty-eighth session of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which was supposed to take place on
17 September in Kidal. We urge the Malian parties
not to withdraw from the dialogue. In the current
environment, it is crucial to ensure that the negotiations
continue in order to create the necessary conditions
for the rapid implementation of the peace agreement,
particularly in view of the upcoming internationally
established deadlines. Those joint efforts should result
in the speedy provision of basic social services and
State services, including those related to the return of
the Malian Defence and Security Forces to the northern
area of the country.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its unwavering support
for the Malian Government on its path to stability and
lasting peace and greatly appreciates the leadership and
work of MINUSMA in often very difficult conditions.
We welcome the 25 July communiqué of the African
Union Peace and Security Council highlighting the
urgent need for the Malian parties to redouble their
efforts to further accelerate the implementation of the
Algiers agreement, which is the most viable framework
for resolving the crisis in northern and central Mali,
as well as for ramping up the continuing support for
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

G5-Sahel operations and strengthening its presence in
the centre of the country, in accordance with resolution
2480 (2019).
In line with the declaration issued at the
extraordinary session of the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on 14 September in
Ouagadougou, we reaffirm the principle of respect for
the inviolability and territorial integrity of States in
accordance with the founding principles of the African
Union, and commend the adoption by the leaders of
ECOWAS of a $1 billion plan of action over the next
five years aimed at stepping up the fight against
terrorism and cross-border organized crime, including
trafficking in arms, tobacco and drugs.
In conclusion, I want to point out that the
implementation of everything that we just mentioned
will not bring back the thousands of people who lost
their lives. However, it is likely to create conditions
conducive to optimism and a new hope for realizing
peaceful co-existence, accepting intercommunal
co-existence, and fully restoring the authority of
the States’ concerned so that they can exercise
their constitutional prerogative and legitimacy by
protecting their people and property, as united and
indivisible States.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of South Africa.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif for his insightful briefing on the developments
in Mali pertaining to the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also
thank Ambassador José Singer Weisinger for his update
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali. We pay tribute
to our peacekeepers and the members of the Malian
armed forces who have sacrificed their lives so that
Malians can enjoy peace in their homeland.
My statement this morning will focus on the
political process and the security and humanitarian
situation in Mali. It will also reflect on the support
provided by MINUSMA to the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and on the sanctions
imposed on Mali.

S/PV. 8636

With regard to the political process, South Africa
welcomes the launch, in September, of the inclusive
national dialogue. We urge stakeholders to participate
in the national dialogue, which is aimed at contributing
to the creation of political and institutional reforms that
will characterize the future State of Mali and address
the situation in the north and centre of Mali with a view
to maintaining the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country.
In that regard, we emphasize that the full
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is vital for the establishment of
peace, security and stability in northern Mali. It is also
important that all Malians, including women, actively
participate in the political processes in their country.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the efforts being
made to establish an independent women’s observatory
to enable women to participate in the monitoring of
the implementation of the Agreement, which is an
important step towards improving the participation of
women in the political process in Mali.
With regard to the security situation, South Africa
remains concerned about the continued instability in the
north and centre of Mali, as evidenced by the sustained
attacks against MINUSMA peacekeepers and national
and international forces. We condemn the recent
attacks in September and early October that resulted
in the loss of many lives, including 38 Malian soldiers
and a peacekeeper from Chad. It is important that the
perpetrators of those attacks be held accountable and
brought to justice.
The cessation of hostilities between the Fulani
and Dogon communities in central Mali with a view
to reducing intercommunal violence is a positive
development that must be commended. Despite that
overture, however, the persistent intercommunal attacks
that result in casualties among civilians, including
women and children, have the potential to undermine
the positive gains that have been made to date. The
protection of civilians, particularly the vulnerable
groups in the conflict, must be a priority for all those
concerned. The Security Council should encourage,
support and provide the capacity for communitybased conflict resolution and mediation and sustained
intercommunal,
inter-ethnic
and
interreligious
dialogue throughout Mali. Such grass-roots efforts
should include women, young people and religious and
tribal leaders.

19-305429/13

S/PV.8636

The situation in Mali

We note the progress that has been made to date
on the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes, which could contribute
to the redeployment of the reformed and reconstituted
Malian defence and security forces throughout the
country, especially in northern and central Mali. All
possible measures must be taken by Malian authorities
to address concerns regarding the DDR processes.
As we heard in the briefing by Special Representative
Annadif, MINUSMA continues to help the authorities
in Mali to restore State presence and State authority
in northern and central Mali, primarily by ensuring
the provision of basic services to its people, which is
particularly important to ensure the normalization of
the living conditions and the improvement of the lives
of the ordinary citizens of Mali.
However, such an undertaking requires sufficient
resources. The international community should
therefore redouble its efforts to mobilize the requisite
funds for the 2019 humanitarian response plan for Mali.
South Africa would like to also reiterate the importance
of a comprehensive and holistic approach to the multiple
challenges facing Mali, particularly with regard to
improving economic growth and socioeconomic
development. In that regard, we are encouraged by the
reports of the adoption of legislation to support the
establishment of the northern development zone.
We reiterate the importance of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force in Mali and the Sahel region. Every possible effort
should thus be made by the United Nations and its States
Members to ensure that the continued challenges facing
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are addressed and that it has
its full capacity and is able to efficiently implement
its mandate. That is in addition to the life-support
consumables that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is already
receiving from MINUSMA. There is an urgent need to
resolve the root causes of instability, intercommunal
clashes, terrorism and violent extremism.
In that regard, the decision taken by the leaders of
the Economic Community of West African States at
its recently concluded Extraordinary Summit, which
pledged resources for fighting terrorism in the region, is
an indication of the willingness of African countries to
resolve their own problems and should be commended.
Regarding the sanctions imposed on Mali, allow
me to reiterate my country’s position that any sanctions
regime should aim to support political processes and
peace efforts, and not undermine them. The work of
10/13

08/10/2019

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, should
therefore ensure that the Mali sanctions regime is
effective in supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
does not hinder it in any way.
In conclusion, South Africa is encouraged by the
continued commitment of the international community,
through the United Nations, to supporting efforts
towards the establishment of peace, security and
stability in Mali, all of which are precursors to the
achievement of sustainable peace. As we have seen time
and again, Mali is like a wall that acts as a dam blocking
water from the north. If that wall breaks — and we can
see the cracks — the countries downstream will suffer
the most. Mali is a friend in the fight against terrorism.
If those terrorists find their way out of Mali, the rest of
Africa will suffer.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): It is
always an honour for me to brief the Security Council
on developments in Mali, in this case in the light of the
latest quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/782).
First of all, I would like to warmly congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Jerry Mathews Matjila, Ambassador of
the Republic of South Africa, both on his country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council and on
the outstanding way in which he conducts the work of
the Council.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
to the delegation of Russian Federation for its excellent
leadership of the Council in the month of September.
I would be remiss if I did not reiterate here the deep
gratitude of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President of the Republic of Mali, as well as
the deep gratitude of the Government and the people
of Mali, to Secretary-General António Guterres for his
strong commitment to the stabilization and development
of both Mali and the Sahel region,
I would like to add my thanks to all the members of
the Council, the countries that have contributed troops
and personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African
Union, the European Union and the Economic
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8636

Community of West African States for their decisive
and valued support to Mali during this particularly
difficult time.

problems with a view to proposing solutions to end the
crisis through a concrete plan of action and timelines
for its implementation.

I would also be remiss if I did not commend the
tireless work carried out by Ambassador Ahmed
Boutache of Algeria in his role as Chair of the
Monitoring Committee for the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. I also thank Ambassador
José Singer Weisinger, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali, both for his briefing and the
plans he has made to visit Mali next week.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the
dialogue has already begun in Mali. Talks between 611
communes were launched yesterday and are ongoing
at this very moment. Consultations at the level of the
cercles and communes of the district of Bamako are
scheduled for 14 and 15 October — in one week’s
time. Dialogue at the regional level, in the district of
Bamako and among Malian Embassies and consulates
abroad, will be held on 21 and 22 October. Those steps
demonstrate that we are fulfilling that commitment,
which is particularly dear to our hearts, so that Malians
have the opportunity to talk to one other and take
ownership of the peace process.

The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General under consideration. I thank
my brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, for
his briefing and update on the latest developments in
Mali since the finalization of the report. I have also
taken note of the comments and high expectations that
the members of the Council just expressed. I will be
conveying them to the Government of Mali and to all
Malian stakeholders. For my part, I would like to make
several remarks on behalf of my Government.
Exactly 12 days ago, on 25 September, the President
of the Republic of Mali, his Burkinabé counterpart, in
his capacity as the current President of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, and the Secretary-General of our
Organization co-chaired a high-level meeting on Mali
and the Sahel. It was an opportunity to take stock of the
progress made and assess the challenges and consider
perspectives in Mali and the region.
The Government, led by the President of the
Republic, remains today more than ever firmly
committed to implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the
Algiers process. That political will is reflected in the
substantial progress we have made in implementing the
Agreement. I am delighted that the Secretary-General
has noted that progress, as did many members of the
Council in their statements this morning.
Therefore, with regard to political and institutional
reform and after two unsuccessful attempts, the
Government is now focusing on the timely organization
of an inclusive national dialogue whose overall
objective is to formulate a rigorous diagnosis of the
problems that have plagued our country for more than
three decades and to analyse, in a participatory and
inclusive manner, the causes and consequences of those

The overarching inclusive national dialogue will be
held soon — according to the Secretary-General, it will
be held towards the end of October or, at the latest, at the
beginning of November. Again, that shows that we are
taking steps in the right direction and that we remain
firmly committed to creating a framework for Malians
to converse and take ownership of the peace process. I
must state here that one of the specific objectives of the
inclusive national dialogue is to discuss institutional
and political reform, including the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, the outcome of the Algiers
process. I also wish to stress that the inclusive national
dialogue is intended to foster greater ownership of the
peace process by the Malian people.
I am pleased to inform the Council that tangible
progress has also been made in the area of defence
and security issues. In the context of the establishment
of the reconstituted national army, nearly 2,000 excombatant members of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism have been registered in the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. Half of those fighters have just completed
an updated predeployment training cycle and those new
members of the reconstituted national army are waiting
to be deployed on the basis of a consensual deployment
plan that is currently being finalized.
In addition, the signatory parties agreed on
the modalities for the distribution of ranks and
responsibilities among ex-combatant commanding
officers who will join the reconstituted national army.
Meanwhile, the process of security sector reform is
ongoing and gaining momentum with the adoption of

19-3054211/13

S/PV.8636

The situation in Mali

a plan of action by the National Council for Security
Sector Reform.
With regard to the development issues in the
northern regions of Mali, the President of the Republic
has promulgated all the texts constituting the legal and
institutional framework of the northern development
zone. We have also created the Sustainable Development
Fund, which is the financial instrument responsible for
implementing the development strategy for the northern
regions of Mali, to which the Government has already
allocated $72 million.

08/10/2019

commitments and redouble their efforts to honour the
relevant provisions of the Agreement so that our entire
people can fully enjoy the dividends of peace.
I understand the impatience of our partners
regarding the delays in the Agreement’s implementation.
However, it must be kept in mind that the implementation
of the Agreement continues to be impeded by a number
of significant challenges, such as the deterioration
of the security environment and the lack of financial
resources, particularly in terms of funding pledged by
our partners.

As of 28 June, as recognized by the SecretaryGeneral, the Government had earmarked 21 per
cent of its national budget — out of the 30 per cent
planned — for implementing the Agreement. In that
regard, too, we have made tangible progress. The State’s
financial efforts serve yet again to demonstrate of will
of the Malian Government to honour its commitments
under the Agreement.

I therefore take this opportunity to appeal to our
partners to honour their commitments so that we can
expedite the implementation of the Agreement. The
Government remains firmly committed to advancing
its implementation in a timely manner, as evidenced by
the adoption of a new road map for the Agreement’s
implementation in July by both the Government and the
signatory parties.

In terms of national reconciliation, I can assure
Council members that an important step has also been
taken in that area. The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission has to date registered 14,191 depositions
from victims, while public hearings are scheduled
to begin in December. Moreover, the mandate of the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has been
extended until 31 December 2021 and now covers all
incidents that occurred in Mali from our independence
to the present day.

The situation in the regions of central Mali remains
a source of major concern for the Government. The
tragic events of the night of 30 September to 1 October
in Mondoro and Boulékéssi are a bitter reminder that
our adversaries — terrorist groups, drug traffickers,
human traffickers and others — are determined to
further destabilize Mali, its neighbouring countries
and the region as a whole. Worse still, in addition to
sowing terror in our common space on a daily basis,
those forces of evil are exploiting our populations and
turning them against each other. The factions created
and manipulated by those criminal groups are fuelling
the intercommunal violence that is inflicting deep
suffering upon our nation.

In the same vein, the President of the Republic
promulgated the law of national understanding in July.
Admittedly, the law exonerates persons who committed
or were accomplices to crimes in the context of the
painful events that occurred in Mali from January
2012, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Conference of National Understanding. However,
the law does not constitute a guarantee of impunity.
On the contrary — the law of national understanding
specifically excludes war crimes, crimes against
humanity, rape and crimes not subject to the statute
of limitations. It also provides for recognition and
reparation measures for the victims of those events,
as well as a reintegration programme for the collateral
victims of that painful experience endured by
our people.
It is clear that genuine progress is being made in
the implementation of the Agreement, although I am
aware that Malian stakeholders must live up to their
12/13

The Government is fully aware of the complexity
of the situation that is developing in central Mali. That
is why it has opted for a comprehensive approach by
adopting an integrated security plan for the regions of
central Mali. The plan provides for political measures,
including dialogue among communities, strengthening
the security apparatus to protect people and their
property, and providing peace dividends to our people,
in particular basic social services.
I wish to emphasize that the Government remains
very committed to accountability and the fight against
impunity. Thus, following the violence that the centre
experienced during the first half of the current year,
several alleged perpetrators were arrested and are now
in the hands of the courts to answer for their actions.
19-30542

08/10/2019

The situation in Mali

In addition, I also wish to reiterate the Government’s
resolve to respect and uphold human rights. Indeed,
justice is systematically activated whenever cases
of human rights violations are reported. It is true,
however, that security conditions, the absence of
competent public services in certain localities and the
lack of expertise in some cases do not favour the rapid
conclusion of some open procedures.
The regional dimension of the Malian crisis is
another major challenge to the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It
is the very foundation of the commitment of the G-5
Sahel member States to stabilizing our region. As I said
earlier, the proliferation of terrorist attacks in recent
weeks in the Sahel region underscores the urgent need
for the international community to work more closely
with us. In that regard, I welcome the heartfelt message
sent by the President of the Security Council. Mali and
the Sahel are a bulwark against the common threat we
face from terrorism. If it were to collapse, the rest of
the world would suffer. I therefore ask the Council to
stand with us and support us in addressing our common
challenges. That is my appeal.
That having been said, our region is ready to play
its part. We have invested our own material, human
and financial resources in implementing the G-5 Sahel
mandate, and we are determined to assume our share
of the responsibility. However, we are aware that no
amount of security alone can overcome those challenges.
That is why, alongside the security component, we are
working together to implement the Priority Investment
Programme to create economic, social and development
opportunities for our populations, particularly our

S/PV. 8636

youth. In that regard, I welcome the ECOWAS decision
to strengthen its support for our common efforts.
In closing, I wish to commend the outstanding
work of the women and men of MINUSMA on the
ground, under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif. I know they work in extremely difficult
conditions — and I know what I am talking about, for it
is my country. They are far from their homes and their
families. I pay tribute to the sacrifices they make every
day to help us. The recent attacks on MINUSMA, on
6 October in Aguelhok and Bandiagara, which claimed
the life of a Chadian Blue Helmet and wounded five
others, remind us of those sacrifices. I address the
heartfelt condolences of the Malian people to the family
of the late hero and to the brotherly Chadian people. I
wish a speedy recovery to the wounded, including the
Togolese Blue Helmets hurt at Bandiagara.
Similarly, I pay homage to all the victims of
the Malian crisis — civil and military, foreign and
Malian — who have fallen on the field of honour in
our country. I reiterate the gratitude of the Government
and the people of Mali to the French Force Barkhane, to
the troop-contributing countries of MINUSMA and to
all partners, multilateral and bilateral, for their tireless
support for Mali and a lasting and final settlement of
the crisis.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

19-3054213/13
