70

General Assembly-Twenty-fonrth Session

2555 (XXIV). Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the speclalized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the itero entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the intemational institutions
associated with the United Nations",
Récalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
. 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 2311 (XXII) of 14 December 1967 and 2426 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 and other relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Taking into account the relevant reports submitted
by the Secretary-General, 12 the Economic and Social
Council18 and the Special ·Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lniplemenfation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 14 conceming the implementation of the
Declaration by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Noting that sorne of the specialized agencies have
taken steps, including the establishment of relationship agreements or other special arrangements with
the Organization of African Unity, designed to increase
the scope of their assistance to refugees from the
colonial Territories in Africa, and have initiated procedures aimed at facilitating the forrnulation of joint
or complementary projects beneficia! to those refugees,
Noting with regret that sorne of the specialized
agencies and intemational institutions concemed have
not extended their full co-operation to the United
Nations in the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions,
Mindful of the urgent need of the peoples and the
national liberation movements of severa! colonial Territories for assistance from the specialized agencies
and intemational institutions concemed, especially in
the :fields of education, training, health and nutrition,
in their struggle to attain freedom and independence,
· Re~ognizing the need for further and more eflective
ll!leasures to be taken for the speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant General Assembly
r~solutions by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Considering that by virtue of the Charter, in particular Chapters IX and X, the United N ations shall
make recommendations for the co-ordination of the
policies and activities of the specialized agencies,
l. Reiterates its appeal to the specialized agencies,
tbe Intemational Atomic Energy Agency and the inter'."
national institutions associated with the United Nations
to extend their full co-operation to the United
Nations in the achievement of the objectives and
provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
aJld other relevant resolutions;
'
12 fbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 69
and 12, document A/7725.
: 18 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603
and Corr.1), chapter XIII, section C.
: 14 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/7623/Rev.1 ), chapter V.
1

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to those specialized agencies and the international
institutions which have co-operated with the United
Nations in the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions;
3. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
intemational institutions concerned, as well as the
various programmes within the United Nations system,
should take measures individually and in collaboration
with one another to increase the scope of their assistance to refugees from the colonial Territories, including
assistance to the Governments concerned in the preparation and execution of projects beneficia! to those
refugees;
4. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
intemational institutions concemed, as well as the
various programmes within the United Nations system,
should give all possible assistance to the peoples
struggling to liberate themselves from colonial rule
and in particular to work out, within the scope of
their respective activ:ties and in co-operation with
the Organization of African Unity and, through it,
with the national liberation movements, concrete programmcs for assisting the oppressed peoples of
Southem Rhodesia, Namibia and the Territories under
Portuguese administration;
5. Recommends that, in order to assist in the full
and speedy implementation of paragraphs 3 and 4
above, all the organizations concemed should establish
relationship and other special arrangements with the
Organization of African Unity, and should introduce
the greatest possible measure of flexibility in their
relevant procedures;
6. Urges all the specialized agencies and international institutions, and in particular the Intemational
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
Intemational Monetary Fund, to take a1l the necessary
steps to withhold financia!, economic, technical and
other assistance from the Governments of Portugal
and South Africa until they renounce their policies
of racial discrimination and colonial domination;
7. Recommends that all the specialized agencies
and international institutions associated with the United
N ations, particularly the Intemational Civil A viation
Organization, the Intemational Telecommunication
Union, the Universal Postal Union and the InterGovemmental Maritime Consultative Organization,
should work out, within the scope of their respective
activities, measures aimed at discontinuing any collaboration with the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa, as well as with the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia;
8. Requests all States, through action in the specialized agencies and international institutions of which
they are members, to facilitate the full and speedy
implementation of the present resolution and other
relevant General Assembly resolutions;
9. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
the international institutions associated with the United
Nations, in order to facilitate the eflorts of Member
States to comply fully with paragraph 8 above, sbould
examine, on the basis of reports to be submitted by
their respective secretariats, all the problems which
they might encounter in their eflorts to give eflect to
the present resolution and to other General Assembly
resolutions;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for the co-ordination of the policies
and activities of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant General Assembly resolutions;

11. Invites the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and international institutions concerned in working out
appropriate measures for implementing the present
resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
( b) To obtain and transmit to the Special Committee for its consideration information on the action
taken by the specialized agencies and intemational
institutions concerned in accordance with the provisions
of the present resolution;

12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.

I 831 st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2556 (XXIV). Offers by Memher States of study
and training facilities for inhahitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2423 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories16 under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Reaffirms its resolution 2423 (XXIII) with
respect to the granting of scholarships to inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;

4. Invites the administering Powers concerned to
provide all the necessary facilities to enable students
to avail themselves of offers by Member States of study
and training facilities;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;

6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present
resolution.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
111 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 63,
70 and 71, document A/7744.

71

2557 (XXIV). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 by which the special educational and training
programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans were consolidated and
integrated, and its resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 by which, ínter alía, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to cstablish
an advisory committee of Member States to assist him,
among other things, in strengthening and expanding
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southem Africa,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 10
Recalling paragraph 14 of its resolution 2507
(XXIV) of 21 November 1969 concerning the question
of Territories under Portuguese administration, in which
it invited the Secretary-General to develop and expand
training programmes for the inhabitants of those
Territories, and the relevant section of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, 17
Noting that, although the financia! situation has improved during 1969, available funds are still far from
adequate to meet the objectives of the Programme,
W elcoming the establishment of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa 18 in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 2431 (XXIII),
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is essential and that it is therefore
desirable further to strengthen and expand the Programme,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
contributed to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southem Africa;
2. Appeals anew to all States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa within the terms of paragraph 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII), to take ali possible
measures for the promotion of adequate contributions
to the Programme;
4. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget for the financia! year 1970, for an amount of
$100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme
pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
16 /bid., document A/7735.
17 !bid., Twenty-fourtlz Ses.fion,

Supplement No. 24 (Al
7624/Rev.l ), paras. 49-56.
18 The Ad:>isory Committee is composed of representatives
of the followmg Member Sta~es: Ca!1ada, Dem~cratic Republíc
of the Congo, Denmark, India, Umted Repubhc of Tanzania,
Venezuela and Zambia (see Official Records of thP General
Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda itcms 63.
70 and 71, document A/7496).
