General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

14

4. Decides to keep the item entitled "Question of
the Comorian island of Mayotte" on its agenda and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
55th plenary meeting
1 November 1977
32/9.

Question of Namibia
A

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONHOOD
PROGRAMME FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided to assume direct responsibility for Namibia, as well as resolution 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, by which it established the United
Nations Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until its independence,
Recalling further its resolution 31/153 of 20 December 1976, by which it decided to establish a comprehensive assistance programme within the United Nations
system, covering both the period of struggle for independence and the initial years of independence of
Namibia,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibians for self-determination, freedom and
independence under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility for assisting the
people of Namibia morally and materially,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December
1970, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 9
Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within
the United Nations system to provide assistance to
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility
towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
2. Calls upon the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the legal Administering Authority of the Territory, to continue and intensify, in consultation with
the South West Africa People's Organization, the direction and co-ordination of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
3. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of those
specialized agencies and other bodies within the United
Nations sys!em which have contributed to the planning
of the Nat10nhood Programme for Namibia;
4. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies to elaborate further their plans
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).

for assistance to the Namibian people in order to
enable the United Nations Council for Namibia to consolidate all assistance measures in a comprehensive
and sustained plan of action, and in particular requests:
(a) The World Health Organization to assist the
United Nations Council for Namibia regarding contingency medical plans for Namibia;
(b) The International Labour Organisation, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Africa People's Organization,
to prepare a programme for the training of Namibians;
(c) The Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organization to assist the United Nations Council for
Namibia in enacting a decree on navigation in Namibian
waters which would further the cause of the liberation
struggle of the Namibian people led by the South West
Africa People's Organization, and to prepare training
programmes in maritime skills for the benefit of suitable
Namibian candidates;
(d) The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to assist the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the preparation of legislation on the
protection of Namibia's fishery resources;
(e) The International Atomic Energy Agency to
take urgent measures to ensure that South Africa does
not in any way represent Namibia in the Agency and
to assist the United Nations Council for Namibia in
the hearings, in 1978, on the question of the exploitation and commercialization of Namibian uranium;
(f) The United Nations Industrial Development
Organization to co-operate with the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the preparation of an industrial
development assistance programme for Namibia;
(g) The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to intensify its assistance to the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the preparation
and implementation of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary assistance to the United Nations Council for
Namibia for the effective planning and implementation
of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977

B
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until independence, and its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Recalling further its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, by which it appointed the United
Nations Council for Namibia trustee of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia,

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge its responsibility with regard to the Territory in
accordance with resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations accepted a solemn obligation to grant all possible support to the Namibian people in their struggle for self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia,
Convinced of the need to grant all possible material
assistance to Namibians and their dependants who are
victims of South Africa's repressive and discriminatory
policies,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, 10
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and approves the conclusions and recommendations contained therein; 11
2. Expresses its appreciation to all States, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have made
voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
3. Decides that the utilization of resources of the
United Nations Fund for Namibia should be considered
also in the context of the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
4. Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to
the United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of
$US 500,000 from the regular budget of the United
Nations for 1978;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to intensify appeals to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and private individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
6. Invites Governments to appeal once more to
their national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
7. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, as well as to governmental and non-governmental organizations, to make financial contributions
to the United Nations Institute for Namibia through
the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians and
requests them, in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to give priority to the allocation
of funds for material assistance to the Namibian people;
9. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system-in particular the International Labour Organisation, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
10 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. II, annex XIII.
11 /bid.,

annex XIII, sect. F.

15

Organization, the World Health Organization, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research-to provide such assistance as is within
their competence, including financial assistance, to
the United Nations Institute for Namibia as well as to
provide specialists, lecturers and researchers in accordance with the needs of the Institute;
10. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Namibian refugees;
11. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be
eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977
C
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 12 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 13
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to the question of Namibia,
Stressing the urgent need to arouse world public
opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the people of Namibia to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence in a united Namibia and, in particular, to intensify the widespread and
continuous dissemination of information on the struggle
for liberation being waged by the people of Namibia,
guided by their liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization,
Reiterating ,the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the mandate given by the General
Assembly to the United Nations Council for Namibia,
and mindful of the pressing need for the Office of
Public Information of the Secretariat to intensify its
efforts to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects
of the question of Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia;
2. Decides that the United Nations map of Namibia
prepared by the United Nations Council for Namibia
12 Jbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).
13 Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1 ), vol. I, chaps.

I, II and VI, and vol. II, chap. VIII.

16

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

pursuant to General Assembly resolution 31/150 of
20 December 1976 is the official United Nations map
of Namibia and supersedes any other map of Namibia
or "South West Africa" hitherto prepared and published
by South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information of the Secretariat to continue to make every effort to generate publicity and
disseminate information with a view to mobilizing public support for the independence of Namibia;
4. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to intensify
the dissemination of information on Namibia in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia;
5. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to send a mission to the headquarters of specialized
agencies not visited in 1977 to discuss the question of
dissemination of information and assistance to Namibians;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information, in consultation with the
United Nations Council for Namibia:
(a) To continue publicity through radio, newspaper,
television and other media in ma.ior Western countries
in order to mobilize support in those countries for the
genuine national independence of Namibia;
(b) To contract with qualified individuals to make
films on the contemporary situation in Namibia, including the military build-up of South Africa in that
Territory;
7. Calls for the speedy completion of the action
undertaken by the Secretary-General in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 3399 (XXX) of 26
November 1975, on the question of a United Nations
radio transmitter for Namibia;
8. Requests the International Telecommunication
Union to assign to the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, an adequate number of frequencies
to be used for broadcasting inside Namibia;
9. Authorizes the United Nations Council for Namibia, pending the establishment of its own broadcasting
service, to assign to the Governments of neighbouring
African countries, for use inside Namibia, frequencies
allocated to the Council by the International Telecommunication Union;
10. Requests the International Telecommunication
Union, in consultation with the United Nations Council
for Namibia, to investigate the jamming by South Africa of radio broadcasts inside Namibia with a view
to instituting legal proceedings against South Africa
before the International Frequency Registration Board;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information to distribute widely, with
particular attention to television stations, the new film
on Namibia made by the Office of Public Infotmation
in 1977;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the dissemination of information related to the activities undertaken
by the Council;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information to prepare a programme
of publications on military, political, economic and

social conditions in Namibia, including in such publications ample photographic material;
14. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the imrlcmentation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977

D
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTJI AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 14 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 15
Having heard the statement of the President of the
South West Africa People's Organization, 10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
I 960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequen_t resoluti~ns of _the General Assembly
and ~h_e Secunty Council relatmg to the question of
Nam1b1a, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 17 delivered
in response to the request addressed to it by the Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July I 970,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary session,
and subsequently endorsed by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its fourteenth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 2 to 5 July 1977,
. Reaffirming_ that the Territory and people of Namibia are the direct responsibility of the United Nations
and that ,the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued refusal to comply with the resolutions and decisions of
the Uni~e~ N!1tions, its contin~ed illegal occupation
of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people and _its persistent violation of their human rights,
as well as its efforts to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia,
Stron15l_y con4emning, as ~n act of colonial expansion,
the dec1s10n of South Afnca to annex Walvis Bay,
thereby undermining the territorial integrity of Namibia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nation~
14 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).
(A/32/23/Rev.1 ), vol. J, chaps.
I, II, IV and V, and vol. II, chap. VIII.
16
.
lbid., Thirty-;econd Session, Plenary Meetings, 35th rneetmg, paras. 55-8 __
11 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of Sowh Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) Advisory
Opinion, I.CJ. Reports 1971, p. 16.
'
15 Ibid., Supplement No. 23

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Commitlee

and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular and other relations with
South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the United Nations,
Strongly condemning the racist regime of South
Africa for its efforts to develop a nuclear capability
for military and aggressive purposes,
Gravely concerned at the militarization of Namibia
by the illegal occupation regime of South Africa, its
threats and acts of aggression against independent African countries and the forceful removal of Namibians
from the northern border of the Territory for military
purposes,
Recognizing that the situation in Namibia constitutes
a threat to international peace and security,
Declaring that the natural resources of Namibia are
the birthright of the Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by foreign economic
interests under the protection of the repressive racist
colonial administration, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, of the pertinent resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council and of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974, 18 is
illegal and contributes to the maintenance of the illegal
occupation regime,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence in the
Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and, in
particular, the progress of their struggle in all its forms
for national liberation under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly supporting the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and as declared in
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) as well as
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to Namibia, and the legitimacy of their struggle by all means at their disposal
against the illegal occupation of their Territory by
South Africa;
3. Reiterates that the continued illegal occupation
of Namibia by South Africa constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people as well as against
the United Nations as the legal Administering Authority
of the Territory until independence;
4. Requests all Member States to co-operate fully
with the United Nations Council for Namibia, the sole
legal authority for the Territory until independence,
in discharging the mandate entrusted to it under the
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.l ), para. 84.
The Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Ga::.ette
No. 1.

17

terms and provisions of General Assembly resolution
2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the Assembly
and the Security Council;
5. Reiterates that the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa and the war of repression waged there,
as well as the acts of aggression against neighbouring
independent African States from bases in Namibia,
constitute a serious threat to international peace and
security;
6. Declares that the decision of South Africa to
annex Walvis Bay is an act of colonial expansion in
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and that such annexation is illegal,
null and void;
7. Declares that Walvis Bay is an integral part
of Namibia with which it is inextricably linked by
geographical, historical, economic, cultural and ethnic
bonds;
8. Categorically condemns South Africa for the
decision to annex Walvis Bay, thereby attempting to
undermine the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia;
9. Declares that, in order that the people of Namibia shall be enabled freely to determine their own future, it is imperative that all South African armed
forces be completely withdrawn so that free elections
under the supervision and control of the United Nations
may be held urgently in the whole of Namibia as one
political entity;
10. Reiterates that the national liberation movement of Namibia, the South West Africa People's
Organization, is the sole and authentic representative
of the Namibian people;
11. Supports the armed struggle of the Namibian
people, led by the South West Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determination, freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia;
12. Decides that any independence talks regarding
Namibia must be between the representatives of the
South West Africa People's Organization and South
Africa, under the auspices of the United Nations, for
the sole purpose of discussing the modalities for the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia;
13. Appeals to all Member States to grant all necessary support and assistance to the South West Africa
People's Organization in its struggle to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia;
14. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent refusal to withdraw from Namibia and for its
manoeuvres to consolidate its illegal occupation of the
Territory in violation of all pertinent resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council;
15. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent refusal to comply with the pertinent resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolution 385
(1976) of 30 January 1976;
16. Strongly condemns the illegal South African
administration for its massive repression of the people
of Namibia and their liberation movement with the
intention of establishing, among other things, an atmosphere of intimidation and terror for the purpose
of imposing upon the Namibian people a political arrangement aimed at subverting the territorial integrity

18

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

and unity of Namibia and perpetuating a ruthless
policy of racial segregation;
17. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military
build-up in Namibia, its recruitment and training of
Namibians and other agents to carry out its policy of
military adventurism against Angola, its threats and
acts of aggression against all independent African countries and the forceful removal of Namibians from the
northern border of the Territory for military purposes;
18. Demands the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all South African military and paramilitary forces from Namibia;
19. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa
for its current preparations, which have brought it,
with the co-operation of certain Western countries,
to the threshold of exploding a nuclear device for military and aggressive purposes in the Kalahari Desert
region;
20. Declares that, in view of South Africa's consistent defiance of the United Nations, its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia, its persistent policy
of aggression against independent African countries,
its present policy of colonial expansionism and its
policy of apartheid, any development of nuclear weapons by South Africa constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security;
21. Condemns those Western States which have
assisted South Africa in developing a nuclear weapons
capability and urges again all Member States, individually and/or collectively, to frustrate the attempts
by South Africa to develop nuclear weapons;
22. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign
corporations operating in Namibia under the illegal
administration of South Africa which are exploiting
illegally the human and natural resources of the Territory, and demands that transnational corporations comply with all pertinent resolutions of the United Nations
by immediately abstaining from any new investments
in Namibia, by withdrawing from the Territory and
generally by putting an end to their co-operation with
the illegal South African administration in Namibia;
23. Declares that South Africa is liable to pay
reparations to Namibia for the damage caused by its
illegal occupation of Namibia and its acts of aggression
against the Namibian people since the termination of
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI);
24. Demands that South Africa put an end to
extending apartheid in Namibia and to its policy of
"bantustanization" of the Territory, aimed at destroying
the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia;
25. Demands that South Africa release all Namibian political prisoners, including all those imprisoned
or detained in connexion with offences under the socalled internal security laws, whether such Namibians
have been charged or tried or are held w1thout charge
and whether held in Namibia or South Africa;
26. Demands that South Africa accord unconditionally to all Namibians currently in exile for political
reasons full facilities for their return to their country
without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment;
27. Calls upon the international community, especially all Member States, to refrain from according
any recognition to, or co-operation with, any regime

which the illegal South African administration may
impose upon the Namibian people in disregard of the
provisions of Security Council resolution 385 (1976);
28. Requests all States to cease and desist from any
form of direct or indirect military consultation, cooperation or collaboration with South Africa;
29. Requests all States to take effective measures
to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries for service
in Namibia or South Africa;
30. Requests once again all States to take steps
to ensure the termination of all arms licensing agreements with South Africa and to prohibit the transfer
to South Africa of all information relating to arms
and armaments;
31. Requests all States to cease and prevent forthwith:
(a) Any supply of arms and ammunition to South
Africa;
( b) Any supply of aircraft, vehicles or military
equipment for the use of the armed forces and paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
(c) Any supply of spare parts for arms, vehicles
or military equipment used by the armed forces and
paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
(d) Any supply of so-called dual-use aircraft, vehicles or equipment which could be converted to military use by South Africa;
(e) Any supply of oil and petroleum products or
any other fuel to South Africa;

(f) Any activities in their countries which promote
or are calculated to promote the supply of arms, ammunition, military aircraft or military vehicles to South
Africa and the supply of equipment or materials for
the manufacture and maintenance of arms and ammunition in South Africa and Namibia;
(g) Any co-operation or activities by public or
private corporations in conjunction with South Africa
in the development, directly or indirectly, of nuclear
technology, including the development of a nuclear
capability by the racist regime in South Africa;

32. Urges the Security Council to take up again
the question of Namibia, which is still on its agenda,
and to consider the application of sanctions against
South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter;
33. Endorses the Maputo Declaration in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 19 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
and commends to Member States the Programme of
Action for their consideration and action;
34. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977
19 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

E
ACTION BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS WITH RESPECT TO
NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 20 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 21
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia with the responsibility of administering Namibia until independence,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into account the s,tatement of the President
of the South West Africa People's Organization22 and
conscious of the urgent and pressing need of Namibians
outside Namibia for concrete assistance from the specialized agencies and other institutions within the United
Nations system,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take all effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
in the provision of moral and material assistance, on
a priority basis, to the peoples of colonial Territories
and their national liberation movements,
1. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies within the United Nations system to participate, in co-operation with the United
Nations Council for Namibia, in the planning and implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;

2. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to consider the requirements of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia in the revisions of the indicative planning figure for Namibia and requests it to
continue to co-operate with the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the elaboration of programmes of assistance to Namibians;
3. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences within the United Nations
system to grant full membership to the United Nations
Council for Namibia so that it may participate in that
capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia in the work of those agencies, organizations and
conferences;
20 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).
21fbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. I, chaps.
I, II, and VI, and vol. II, chap. VIII.
22 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 35th meeting, paras. 55-82.

19

4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to grant
a waiver of the assessment of Namibia during the period
in which Namibia is represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
5. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected
and to invite the United Nations Council for Namibia
to participate in their work, in its capacity as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia, whenever such
rights and interests arc involved;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977

F
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS
COUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA

The General AssPmhly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia23 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.~ 4
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority of
Namibia until independence,
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Reaffirming that, in the discharge of its responsibilities entrusted to it by resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia, the United Nations Council for Namibia acts as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of ,the United
Nations Council for Namibia to obtain the withdrawal
of the illegal presence of South Africa from the Territory and to promote the compliance of Member States
with the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, including the recommendations contained therein, and decides to make adequate financial
provisions for their implementation;
2. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia, in the implementation of its responsibilities as an
organ of the United Nations:
(a) To continue to mobilize international political
support in order to press for the withdrawal of the
23 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 24 (Al
32/24).
24 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1 ), vol. I, chaps.
I, II, and IV-VI, and vol. II, chap. VIII.

20

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

illegal admimstration of South Africa from Namibia
in accordance with United Nations resolutions on
Namibia;
(b) To maintain under continuous review the political, military, economic and social conditions affecting the struggle of the Nami?ian p~ople for self-d~termination, freedom and national mdependence m a
united Namibia and to that effect, request the Secretary-General to' sub~it to the .Council reports in !he
above-mentioned fields to contribute to the formulation
of policies and recommendations by the Council in
support of Namibian independence;
(c) To represent Namibia to ensure that the ri~hts
and interests of Namibia are protected, as appropnat~,
in all intergovernmental and non-governmental orgamzations, bodies and conferences;
(d) To formulate policies of assistance >t~ Namibians and co-ordinate aid for Namibia provided by
United Nations agencies and other bodies within the
United Nations system;
(e) To act as trustee of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia and in this capacity to administer and
manage the Fund;
(/) To function as the policy-making organ of the
United Nations in respect of Namibia;
3. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia, in the implementation of its respo~s~bilities as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia:
(a) To hold a series of plenary meetings in Africa
in 1978 at the highest possible level, as and when required for the further proper discharge of its functions,
and requests the Secretary-General to defray the cost
of these meetings in Africa and provide the necessary
staff and services for them;
(b) To denounce all fraudulent constitutional
schemes through which South Africa may attempt to
perpetuate the colonial oppression and exploitation of
the people and resources of Namibia;
(c) To endeavour to ensure non-recognition of any
administration installed in Windhoek not issuing from
free elections in all of Namibia, under the supervision
and control of the United Nations, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976;
(d) To protect the territorial integrity of Namibia,
in particular by carrying out all J?~ssible activities d~nouncing the attempts of South Arnca to annex Walvis
Bay;
( e)
To counter the acts of aggression of South
Africa against the people of Namibia and against the
United Nations and the legal Administering Authority,
the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(f) To consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization, as appropriate, in the formulation and
implementation of its programme of work as well as
in any matter of interest to the Namibian people;
(g)
To continue to entrust such executive and administrative duties as it deems necessary to the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia, who, in the performance of his tasks, shall report to the Council;

4. Decides to increase the financial provisions in
the budget of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to finance the Office of the South West Africa People's

Organization in New York, in order to ensure the due
and proper representation of the people of Namibia
through the South West Africa People's Organization
at the United Nations;
5. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of a
representative of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for
Namibia so requires;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to implement
speedily the measures adopted as a result of the consultations proposed in General Assembly resolution
31/147 of 20 December 1976, with due regard to the
need to include an adequate numbet" of staff members
from devdoping countries, in particular from Africa.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977
G
INTENSIFICATION AND CO-ORDINATION OF UNITED
NATIONS ACTION IN SUPPORT OF NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 25 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, zn
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well
as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating to Namibia,
Affirming that the natural resources of Namibia are
the birthright of the Namibian people and that the
depletion of those resources by foreign economic interests under the protection of the repressive illegal administration of South Africa is in violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, 27 continue to maintain diplomatic, economic, consular and other relations with
South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging South Africa in its defiance of the United
Nations,
Strongly condemning the support which the illegal
South African administration continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financial and other interests
which are collaborating with it in its exploitation of the
human and natural resources of, and in the further
entrenchment of its illegal and racialist domination over,
the international Territory of Namibia,
~c. Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).

~,; Ibid., Supplemrnt No. 23 ( A/32/23/Rcv. l ), vol. I, chaps.
I, Ii and IV-VI. and vol. II, chap. VIII.
27 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, T.C.J. Repmts 1971, p. 16.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia;
2. Calls upon those States which have not yet done
so to comply with the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971;
3. Urges those States which have not yet done so
to break off economic relations with South Africa that
concern Namibia and to take measures with a view
to compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248
(S-V), as well as subsequent resolutions of the Assembly and the Security Council relating to Namibia;
4. Appeals to Governments to discourage private
investors from their countries from participating in
business ventures in Namibia which benefit the South
African regime by making available additional resources
to meet the military costs of its repressive policies in
Namibia;
5. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to communicate with corporations supplying
arms, ammunition and oil to South Africa and to urge
them to cease doing so;
6. Requests once again all Member States to take
all appropriate measures to ensure the full application
of, and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
27 September 1974, 28 and such other measures as may
be necessary to assist in the protection of the natural
resources of Namibia;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate financial appropriations to facilitate the continued
implementation of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia during the biennium
1978-1979;
8. Takes note of the progress report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia on the hearings regarding
the exploitation and purchase of Namibian uranium 29
and authorizes the necessary budgetary allocations for
its full implementation during 1978;
9. Authorizes the United Nations Council for
Namibia to notify the Governments of States whose
corporations, whether public or private, operate in
Namibia of the illegality of such operations and of the
position of the Council in this regard;
10. Authorizes the United Nations Council for
Namibia to contact administering and managing bodies
of foreign corporations operating in Namibia to warn
them of the illegal basis on which they are operating
in Namibia and of the position of the Council in this
regard;
11. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session on the implementation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.1), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.
29 Ibid.,
Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 24
(A/32/24), vol. I, paras. 128-133.

21

H
SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON
THE QUESTION OF NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Taking into consideration its resolutions 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as all
other resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of Namibia,
Recalling the resolutions of the Security Council on
the question of Namibia, in particular resolution 385
(1976) of 30 January 1976,
Having heard the statement of the President of the
South West Africa People's Organization,110
Strongly condemning the illegal South African administration in Namibia for its massive repression of
the Namibian people and their liberation movement
with the intention of establishing, among other things,
an atmosphere of intimidation and terror, with the
purpose of imposing upon the Namibian people a
political arrangement in violation of Security Council
resolution 385 (1976),
Strongly condemning South Africa for its persistent
refusal to withdraw from Namibia and for its manoeuvres to consolidate its illegal occupation of the Territory in violation of all pertinent resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council,
Decides to keep the situation under continuous review and to hold a special session before the thirtythird session on a date to be determined by the Secretary-General in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977

32/15.

Question of Cyprusll 1

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Gravely concerned over the prolongation of the
Cyprus crisis, which endangers international peace and
security,
Recalling its resolutions 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974, 3395 (XXX) of 20 November 1975 and
31/12 of 12 November 1976,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Expressing concern over the lack of progress in the
intercommunal talks,
Mindful of the need to solve the problem of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Calls for the urgent and effective implementation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX), unanimously adopted by
the General Assembly and endorsed by the Security
30 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 35th
meeting, paras. 55-82.
3 1 See also sect. I, foot-note 4, and sect. X.B.3, decision
32/404.
