United Nations

S/PV.6161

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6161st meeting
Monday, 13 July 2009, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-40115 (E)

*0940115*

S/PV.6161

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Myanmar in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

advancing national reconciliation, democracy, respect
for human rights and sustainable development.
At the outset, let me say that the refusal of the
senior leadership to allow me to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi was not only a deep disappointment but
also a major lost opportunity for Myanmar. While this
should not define our efforts, allowing such a meeting
would have sent a constructive and conciliatory signal
both inside and outside Myanmar. However, the United
Nations engagement with Myanmar is broad and
complex, encompassing as it does a range of
fundamental issues of concern for the future of the
country, which I was able to address during this visit.

I welcome the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to take the floor.

In my two meetings with Senior General Than
Shwe and an additional meeting with the Prime
Minister, General Thein Sein, I discussed extensively
the need for Myanmar to take meaningful steps on the
five-point agenda developed in the context of my good
offices, as well as in humanitarian areas. I made
specific proposals, with a particular focus on three
outstanding concerns that, if left unaddressed, could
undermine any confidence in Myanmar’s political
process: first, the release of all political prisoners,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi; secondly, the
resumption of a substantive dialogue between the
Government and the opposition; and thirdly, the
creation of conditions conducive to credible and
legitimate elections.

The Secretary-General: I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief its members at
their request on my visit to Myanmar from 3 to 4 July
2009 at the invitation of the Government of Myanmar.
I wish to thank all interested States members of this
Council and in the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar for supporting my decision to
visit Myanmar at this time, and also for supporting my
efforts in the context of my good offices.

From experience, the United Nations has learned
that elections can be unifying or divisive, depending on
the level of buy-in and the quality of the process.
Addressing these three concerns, including with the
support of the United Nations, is therefore essential to
ensuring that the political process is inclusive and
serves the interests of all the people of Myanmar in a
way that can be broadly accepted by the international
community.

Whereas the objective of my first visit, last year,
was to unblock the humanitarian situation caused by
Cyclone Nargis, my objective this time was to engage
Myanmar’s senior leadership directly on a number of
serious and long-standing concerns that I believe
cannot be left unaddressed at this critical stage of
Myanmar’s transition. At a time when there is much
attention to the ongoing trial of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, and on the eve of Myanmar’s first elections in
20 years, it was necessary for me to raise those
concerns and offer the help of the United Nations in

Meeting with Myanmar’s registered political
parties and ethnic ceasefire groups allowed me to listen
to their views and concerns in this regard, which I also
shared with the authorities. However, I also encouraged
the two groups to remain constructive in the political
process. Any successful transition will require
overcoming the country’s twin legacies of political
deadlock and civil conflict. It is in the interests of all to
ensure that any gains made so far become irreversible.
While the Government has a primary obligation to
address the concerns of all stakeholders, every

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swe
(Myanmar) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

2

09-40115

S/PV.6161

stakeholder has a role to play and a responsibility to
assume in the interests of the nation.
On the humanitarian front, I saw for myself the
progress made in one year in the recovery and
reconstruction of the cyclone-affected region, thanks to
unprecedented cooperation between Myanmar, the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). In all my meetings, I stressed the
need to consolidate and build on such efforts to ensure
that assistance in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta is expedited
and that humanitarian access is expanded to reach all
vulnerable groups across the country. Just as the
international community cannot hold humanitarian
assistance hostage to political considerations, there is
no justification for the Government’s allowing
humanitarian access to some of its people but not to
others.
Furthermore, my visit also presented an occasion
to address Myanmar’s development challenge. Here,
too, we know from experience that peace and security
can be affected by underlying socio-economic
conditions. Accordingly, I proposed to the senior
leadership that it enhance cooperation with the United
Nations in order to address, through a broad-based
process involving all sectors of society, the pressing
development needs facing the country. Empowering the
people to participate in their country’s development is
equally important for stability, democracy and
prosperity, and for ensuring that Myanmar fully
benefits from and contributes to the regional and global
economy.
My visit offered the clearest signal of the United
Nations commitment to working with the Government
and people of Myanmar to address issues of
fundamental importance for the prospects of durable
peace, democracy and development. While I stand
ready to work to that end with all concerned, Myanmar
stands to gain much from engaging meaningfully with
the United Nations. To be able to convey this message
clearly and directly to the highest level of Myanmar’s
leadership is a rare chance for the international
community to be heard.
Here, as has been observed, what is more
important is not so much what I came back with but
what I left behind with the authorities. I have made
clear my expectation and that of the international
community that the Government needs to deliver on
the promise to make the 2010 elections inclusive, free

09-40115

and fair and to take necessary steps on my specific
proposals in the very near future. In this connection,
Senior General Than Shwe has pledged to make the
elections free and fair. But I said then and reiterate
today that it is up to the Myanmar authorities to
translate this into concrete action, to ensure the
inclusiveness and credibility of the process and to
demonstrate Myanmar’s commitment to cooperation
with the international community. Like all other
Member States, the more Myanmar works in
partnership with the United Nations, the more it
affirms its sovereignty.
Before leaving Myanmar, I had the chance to
publicly reiterate all my messages in a keynote speech
to a large and diverse audience in Yangon. This was an
unprecedented opportunity to ask openly the question
that is before Myanmar’s stakeholders today: How
much longer can Myanmar afford to wait — and at
what cost — for national reconciliation, democratic
transition and full respect for human rights? My
message, addressed to the international community as
much as to the Government and people of Myanmar,
was twofold. First, while Myanmar has a unique and
complex history, the challenges it faces as a country in
transition are neither exceptional nor insurmountable.
Secondly, none of the challenges facing Myanmar
today — political, humanitarian or development — can
be addressed on their own, and failure to address them
with equal attention could undermine the prospects for
durable peace, democracy and prosperity.
This address was also an opportunity to stress my
commitment, and that of the international community
as a whole, to continued engagement. I clearly stated
that Myanmar was not alone. In Myanmar as
elsewhere, the United Nations works for the people —
their rights, their well-being and their dignity. It is not
an option; it is our responsibility. We cannot give up.
The continued support of United Nations Members for
my good offices efforts and their engagement —
particularly that of neighbouring countries and ASEAN
members — with the Myanmar authorities have
therefore become even more important and necessary.
I welcome the continued support given to my
efforts by the leaders of the G-8 last week, and their
statement that they are “prepared to respond positively
to substantive political progress undertaken by
Myanmar”. I also welcome the reiterated strong
support extended to my good offices and personal
engagement by the Group of Friends on Myanmar.

3

S/PV.6161

Now that I have conveyed in the clearest terms
what is expected of Myanmar’s leaders, it is up to them
to respond positively in their country’s own interests.
As I mentioned in my speech, ultimately it is the
people of Myanmar who will bear the cost of any lack
of engagement and cooperation on the part of their
Government with the United Nations and the
international community. That is why Myanmar’s
leaders have a responsibility not only to their own
people, but also to the members of the international
community, to respond to the proposals I made on their
behalf.
The choice for Myanmar’s leaders in the coming
days and weeks will be between meeting that
responsibility in the interests of all concerned or failing
their own people and each member of the international
community. The world is now watching closely
whether they will choose to act in the best interests of
their country or to ignore our concerns and
expectations and the needs of their people.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of
Myanmar.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to make a statement at this briefing. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts to support Myanmar’s democratization process
and for his comprehensive briefing today. The
Secretary-General’s recent visit to Myanmar was his
second in just over a year, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Gambari’s ninth. It is noteworthy that, during
the Secretary-General’s visit to Myanmar, we did our
utmost to accommodate his requests, although we were
unable to arrange the requested meeting Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi.
It is an established protocol practice that our
Head of State receives foreign dignitaries only once
during their visits. However, at the request of the
Secretary-General, Senior General Than Shwe received
the Secretary-General twice. During their meetings, the
Secretary-General expressed the views of the United
Nations and the international community. Senior
General Than Shwe thoroughly explained the
developments in Myanmar’s political process and
highlighted the two most important priorities of the
Government at this moment — to hand over State
power to a civilian Government after the 2010 general

4

elections and to lay a good foundation for future social
and economic development. He also assured the
Secretary-General that the 2010 general elections will
be free, fair, credible and arranged to ensure the
participation of all citizens.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s request to
meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, although our Head
of State himself was willing to arrange the meeting, we
regret our inability to accommodate the request, as the
Special Court has independent jurisdiction over the
matter. It is the discretion and position of the Special
Court not to accommodate those who could have
influence over its judgments. Our inability to arrange
the meeting with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was clearly
explained before and during the Secretary-General’s
visit.
Arrangements were made for the SecretaryGeneral to meet with the leaders and representatives of
10 officially registered political parties, including the
National League for Democracy (NLD) and former
armed groups. We also even made an arrangement for
the Secretary-General to meet separately with the
representatives of the NLD, although such a meeting
was not included in the original programme. We would
like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
and thanks to the Secretary-General for encouraging
the political parties and former armed groups to
participate in the national reconsolidation process.
As requested by the Secretary-General, a public
“Thank you event” was arranged by the Myanmar
Government, although we were fully aware that such
public meetings have not taken place during the
Secretary-General’s recent visits to certain Member
countries. Moreover, we anticipated that SecretaryGeneral might touch on areas and issues that were not
on the agenda of the event. However, with the aim of
demonstrating our cooperation with the United Nations
and of respecting the wishes of the Secretary-General,
we arranged that unprecedented public meeting. We
invited those whom the Secretary-General wished to
invite, and cabinet ministers, deputy ministers and
senior officials of the Government also attended that
event to honour the Secretary-General.
During his visit, the Secretary-General discussed
at length with the Prime Minster the social and
economic development of Myanmar. As a developing
country, Myanmar has been making untiring efforts for
its economic and social development. However, some

09-40115

S/PV.6161

countries have imposed economic sanctions instead of
providing assistance and cooperation. Regrettably,
official development assistance for Myanmar is less
than $3 per capita, which is minimal compared to that
received by similar countries. During the meeting, the
Prime Minister highlighted the fact that such policies
towards Myanmar hinder the social and economic
development of the country and have mainly impacted
people at the grassroots level. It would be more
constructive and conducive to our democratization and
development efforts if the international community
were to view the situation of Myanmar in a wider
perspective.
Despite
these
obstacles,
the
Myanmar
Government has been striving to stabilize the situation
in the political, social and economic fields with our
own resources. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
remark on Myanmar Government’s endeavours to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals, control
HIV/AIDS, combat human trafficking and eradicate
opium poppy cultivation.
During his visit, the Secretary-General also
visited the Ayeyarwaddy Delta region, which was
struck by Cyclone Nargis a year ago, to observe the
construction of cyclone shelters and other
reconstruction works carried out jointly by the
Myanmar Government, United Nations agencies and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out that the
response to Cyclone Nargis proved the value of
engagement and the unprecedented cooperation
between Myanmar, the United Nations and ASEAN
through the Tripartite Core Group, with the support of
the international community.
With regard to the success of the visit, the
Myanmar Government intends to implement all
appropriate recommendations that the SecretaryGeneral proposed. At the request of the SecretaryGeneral, the Myanmar Government is proceeding to
grant amnesty to prisoners on humanitarian grounds
and with a view to enabling them to participate in the
2010 general elections. Moreover, with regard to the
National Economic Forum, the Government will
cooperate with the United Nations in the agricultural,
livestock and fishery sectors for the betterment of
people at the grass-roots level.
With regard to the offer of technical assistance in
elections, Myanmar will cooperate with the United

09-40115

Nations if technical assistance is necessary for the
2010 general elections. The State will enact a political
party registration law and election law in due time.
Myanmar is resolved to implement everything it
possibly can with a view to facilitating the smooth
attainment of the democratic goals it has set for the
nation and its people.
Myanmar’s acceptance of the good offices role of
the Secretary-General and its active cooperation in the
process, as well as the Secretary-General’s second visit
to Myanmar in just over a year, are important
milestones of cooperation between Myanmar and the
United Nations. We are of the view that the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to Myanmar was successful. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General’s remark that his
inability to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi should
not be seen as the only benchmark for the success or
failure of his visit.
Myanmar today is steadfastly proceeding on its
chosen path to democracy. The challenges faced by
Myanmar are complex and multifaceted. When one
considers Myanmar’s geopolitical location, one sees
that it is surrounded by countries with different
political systems, cultures and religions and that over
40 per cent of the world’s population resides in our five
neighbours. Myanmar itself is a multi-ethnic and
multireligious country. Therefore, we must be neutral
and harmonize with all our neighbours for the stability
of the region. We have to consider, inter alia, the
various historical, geopolitical and multi-ethnic
backgrounds. Exerting undue pressure from the outside
without fully comprehending the challenges faced by
Myanmar will not be conducive to the country’s homegrown political process.
It cannot be stressed enough that no one can
address the complex challenges that Myanmar is
currently facing better than the Government and the
peoples of Myanmar. We are making significant strides
in the national reconsolidation and democratization
process. Thus, Myanmar is nearly in the final stage of
achieving our ultimate goal. Myanmar is not a threat to
international peace and security, so no Security
Council action is warranted.
I should like to close by reaffirming our
commitment to continuing our cooperation with the
United Nations and with the good offices role of the
Secretary-General. The continued support, understanding
and cooperation of the United Nations and the

5

S/PV.6161

international community will best assist our endeavour
to establish a democratic nation.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make statements.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I should like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his visit to Burma. It required courage and
determination on his part to proceed with the visit. His
decision had our full support; the wider international
community supported it too. That support has been
reflected in many recent statements, most notably the
communiqué on Burma issued at the Group of Eight
summit on 9 July, which the Secretary-General
mentioned.
We believe that, by going to Burma, the
Secretary-General demonstrated in the clearest possible
way the commitment of the United Nations to the
progress of democracy, human rights and economic
development in that country. The people of Burma will
certainly have taken heart from the strong leadership
that the Secretary-General has shown.
We also welcome the unambiguous messages on
the need for political reform that the Secretary-General
delivered directly to Senior General Than Shwe and the
leadership of the State Peace and Development
Council — messages which set out the international
community’s concerns and which the Council has
expressed through its presidential statements. Those
statements have made clear what needs to happen,
including the release of all political prisoners,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, and the resumption
of an enhanced, time-bound dialogue among the
Government, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and all political
parties and ethnic groups, facilitated by the United
Nations.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General
was able to meet with ceasefire groups and all 10 of the
registered political parties, including the National
League for Democracy, but we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s disappointment at the Government’s decision
not to allow him to meet Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
herself. It is a measure of their obstinacy and of their
lack of commitment to genuine progress that they
failed to grant that request, particularly at a time when
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is subject to a trial widely
acknowledged to be a travesty of justice. As the only
political figure in the country to have received a
popular democratic mandate, she has a central role to

6

play in the future of a democratic Burma. Her
treatment by the regime is not the only criterion by
which the regime should be judged, but it demonstrates
the regime’s fear of a free and fair political process and
its unwillingness to engage with international opinion.
The Secretary-General’s visit was an opportunity
for the Government of Burma to transform its
relationship with the international community, which
stands ready to respond positively to real progress. The
regime’s failure to take that opportunity has only
served to isolate it further. We can only hope that we
may yet see progress in the coming days; it is not too
late. But if it does not come, and if we see an unjust
outcome in Daw Aung San Suu Kyi’s trial, the
international community will need to follow the
Secretary-General’s lead and respond robustly. The
onus is on the Government to act.
As the Secretary-General has just said, the world
is watching. The generals cannot have failed to hear
loud and clear the strong messages that the SecretaryGeneral delivered in Rangoon when he addressed
ministers and the diplomatic and non-governmental
organization community. They can be in no doubt
about his disappointment and the disappointment of the
international community as a whole.
We urge the regime to engage constructively with
the international community to meet our concerns. My
Government has stated on many occasions that it
remains ready to respond positively to real progress. It
is deeply regrettable, therefore, that the regime has yet
to take the steps that will allow us to do so.
We remain committed to working with partners in
a concerted effort to start a reconciliation process in
Burma. For our part, we will continue to support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his good offices
mission, and we welcome his ongoing personal efforts
to start a reconciliation process in Burma. He remains
the international community’s best hope of breaking
the deadlock.
Each one of us must use whatever influence we
have to encourage the regime to engage constructively
and to convince them that the objectives that they say
they seek — national unity, stability and economic
development — are being inhibited by their actions.
They must understand that their road map and the
elections that they planned will have no credibility if
political prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
are prevented from playing their full part in the

09-40115

S/PV.6161

political process. They must respond positively to the
Secretary-General and to the international community,
which he represents.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to begin this statement by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his presence today and for the briefing that
he gave us on his recent visit to Myanmar. My
delegation is particularly grateful for the good offices
efforts that the Secretary-General has been making in
Myanmar, which proceed from his personal concern to
help improve the political, economic and social
situation in that country — a concern that is shared by
a good part of the international community. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Myanmar for
his statement to the Council today. We appreciated its
forward-looking content — at least, that is our hope.
The Secretary-General’s recent visit to Myanmar,
which was his second in a little more than a year,
occurred at an opportune time. Indeed, the trip not only
enabled the Secretary-General to assess the state of
rebuilding following Cyclone Nargis, but also took
place in the context of the preparations for the general
elections to be held in 2010.
With regard to reconstruction efforts and
humanitarian assistance, we welcome the fact that
progress has been made, in particular as a result of the
cooperation among the Government of Myanmar, the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations through the Tripartite Core Group and the
support of donors in the international community. The
work of reconstruction has not yet concluded, and
efforts to that end must continue.
In the political context, the scene is different and
much more complex, and there are many challenges.
Myanmar is preparing for its first elections in 20 years,
and my delegation believes that many issues must still
be resolved if they are to be transparent and fully
inclusive of those of all political persuasions in
Myanmar.
The forthcoming elections must be aimed at
facilitating Myanmar’s peaceful transition towards
democracy and national reconciliation, placing priority
on strengthening the rule of law and protecting human
rights. In that connection, the elections must have the
support not only of the Government, which bears
primary responsibility for organizing them, but also of
all registered political parties and of those rebel groups
that have demonstrated a readiness to lay down their

09-40115

weapons. We hope that the Government will create the
conditions necessary to engage in a genuine dialogue
with all ethnic groups and minorities in order to
achieve full national reconciliation. This means that all
political prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
must be released as soon as possible. Their
participation in the elections will guarantee the
credibility of the process and thus its legitimacy. It
would therefore have been preferable for Senior
General Than Shwe to have allowed the SecretaryGeneral to visit the emblematic Ms. Suu Kyi, who has
once again been arrested under conditions which have
not yet been fully clarified and is now subject to a new
trial.
The Government of Myanmar now has an
opportunity to strengthen the process of national
reconciliation — thus making it possible for the
population to enjoy their civil and political rights,
building peace and laying the basis for the country’s
future economic development. That objective should be
pursued with the support of the United Nations through
the good offices of the Secretary-General, but also with
the support of States in the region, in particular States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, who play a particularly relevant role given
their close relations with the Government of Myanmar.
The constant flow of refugees from Myanmar to
Thailand reflects the lack of guaranteed protection for
the civilian population, as well as the repeated
violations of human rights in Myanmar. We therefore
urge all regional actors to take necessary measures to
ensure that the more than 100,000 refugees have
adequate protection and shelter.
We are also concerned with the situation of child
soldiers. While we recognize the efforts of the
Government in Myanmar in that regard, we feel that
they have been insufficient. We urge the Government
to ensure the rights of those minors and to cooperate
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict on measures
to demobilize all child solders and reintegrate them
into civilian life with their families.
The message sent by the Secretary-General to the
people and the Government of Myanmar during his
visit was clear. The United Nations and the
international community are looking to the present and
the future of an independent and sovereign Myanmar
and will spare no necessary effort towards dialogue and

7

S/PV.6161

cooperation, in order to guarantee the country’s
political, economic and social development on the path
to peace.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and the Permanent Representative of
Burma for his statement, to which I listened with great
attention. It was essential for the Council to be
informed without delay of the results of the mission of
the Secretary-General at time when the development of
the situation in Burma continues to be a matter of
major concern for the international community.
I also wish to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his courageous, determined and tenacious
commitment on this issue. He went to Burma with our
support and clearly aware of the difficulties of his
mission, in order to convey the expectations of the
international community to the Burmese authorities.
Unfortunately, as he recalled, they refused to
cooperate. Among other things, they did not allow him
to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi and refused any
substantive dialogue. The authorities thus lost an
opportunity to show their desire to undertake genuine
national
reconciliation
and
a
process
of
democratization. It is not after the visit of the
Secretary-General that one should come before the
Council to state that one is ready for dialogue and
reconciliation; it was before and during the SecretaryGeneral’s visit that that should have been done.
The international community has shown its
readiness to work in a constructive manner with Burma
in supporting the political process, but also to support
the economic and social development of the country
with strict respect for its sovereignty and its territorial
integrity. That is the message of goodwill that the
Secretary-General carried. The hand he held out was
ignored.
The authorities’ unwillingness to consider the
Secretary-General’s proposals continues to raise
questions about the attitude of the Burmese authorities
in general, since the repression of the democratic
movement in autumn 2007. In its presidential statement
of 11 October 2007 (S/PRST/2007/37), the Council set
forth clear and precise expectations unanimously.
Those demands were reaffirmed in May 2008 and May
2009.
Almost two years after they were first expressed,
where do we stand in terms of their achievement? The

8

first expectation was the timely release of all political
prisoners. What have we seen? First, the number of
those prisoners has continued to increase, in spite of a
handful of releases. New promises have been made,
including today, with respect to the release of some,
but not all prisoners. Here we recall that the demands
of the Council were for the release of all political
prisoners.
Next, although the appeal for the release of
political prisoners concerned, of course, Ms. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, who continues to be detained since
2003, instead of freeing her the authorities arrested her
in May and launched a political trial against her
without any justification, to the consternation of the
rest of the world, including the friends of Burma. The
fact that the announcement of the verdict is continually
being delayed clearly demonstrates the embarrassment
of a regime at the weakness of the so-called charges
against the head of the opposition and — as my
colleague from Great Britain recalled — the only
political leader in Burma to have won an election
democratically.
The second demand of the Council was for the
launch of a genuine dialogue among the Government,
Ms. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the other concerned
parties and ethnic groups, with a view to inclusive
national reconciliation. Instead of initiating that
dialogue, the authorities chose a policy of fait
accompli, by unilaterally implementing a so-called
road map. That strategy led to increased polarization
within the country.
The third demand of the Security Council bore on
cooperation with the United Nations. After several
visits by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari — whose efforts and tenacity I
commend — the Secretary-General went to Burma to
offer assistance in the political, economic and
humanitarian areas. No response was given to his
suggestions, which were made in a constructive spirit.
The Security Council has shown great patience
with respect to those various demands. We are ready to
actively support change, howsoever gradual, in the
right direction. It must be noted that not only have the
Burmese authorities done nothing to respond to the
demands of the Council, but that, over the past few
months, they have taken decisions that run directly
counter to those demands.

09-40115

S/PV.6161

We all know that the Burmese crisis goes beyond
the political dimension. The country is facing
enormous economic, social and governance challenges.
A response to the needs of the population in all of
those areas is urgently needed.
The European Union is a major actor in
humanitarian and development assistance. It has
continually shown its readiness to revise its common
position as the situation evolves. The onset of a
genuine political process leading to national
reconciliation continues, however, to be a necessary
precondition to positive momentum in all areas. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi is an essential and irreplaceable
actor in that process. Her detention is intolerable,
illegal and an obstacle to dialogue. Without the prior
liberation of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, any
electoral process would be nothing but a parody of
democracy aimed at legitimizing a fait accompli.
The current impasse is not a reason for the
Council to sit back and do nothing and we agree with
the Secretary-General on that point. France also
encourages the Special Adviser to continue his efforts;
however, those efforts can be successful only if the
international community, in particular regional actors,
works actively in favour of change. The Security
Council must continue to follow the situation and to
clearly remind the Burmese authorities of the need to
implement the demands made of them. The Council
must respond firmly if Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is
condemned.
We are committed to unity in the Council.
However, the price of unity must not be inaction. We
cannot risk further deterioration of the situation, which
could contribute to instability in the country and the
entire region.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express
Japan’s deep gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
important statement to the Security Council today on
his recent visit to Myanmar. We are also grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Myanmar for his
statement.
At the outset, I would like to stress how firmly
Japan supports the good offices effort of the SecretaryGeneral, assisted by Special Adviser Gambari. As a
country of the region, Japan has followed the situation
in Myanmar with great interest and concern. Based on
our long-standing excellent bilateral relationship, we
are maintaining a close dialogue with the Government

09-40115

of Myanmar to assist and support the good offices
efforts of the Secretary-General and Mr. Gambari.
The Government of Myanmar has been
implementing
a
seven-step
road
map
for
democratization. With general elections scheduled for
next year, this is a crucial stage in the democratization
process. The attention of the international community
has recently been focused on the situation surrounding
the trial of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. It is therefore
important and timely for the Secretary-General to visit
Myanmar to personally convey the concerns of the
international community and urge the leadership to
make the democratic process open, inclusive and
internationally credible.
During his visit, the Secretary-General met with
Senior General Than Shwe on two occasions. He called
for the early release of all political prisoners, including
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the resumption of substantive
dialogue between the Government and all political
parties, the holding of inclusive, internationally
credible elections in 2010, an improvement in the
human rights situation, national reconciliation and the
establishment of a national economic forum.
We are certainly disappointed that the
Government of Myanmar did not agree to the
Secretary-General’s request to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. However, we recognize that the
Secretary-General’s visit as a whole was very useful
and necessary. We approve of his decision to make the
visit. The Secretary-General is one of the very few
political leaders who can directly convey the concerns
of the international community to the country’s highest
leadership. We welcome the effort of the SecretaryGeneral to unequivocally convey to the top leaders all
the points of common concern shared by all of us.
As reported in the Council today, the SecretaryGeneral had a full, detailed and substantive exchange
of views with the leadership on the concrete steps we
would like it to take. He also expressed to the leaders
the support of the United Nations for Myanmar’s
efforts. It was also significant that the SecretaryGeneral could meet all political parties, including the
National League for Democracy and ceasefire groups,
and make a very candid public address in Yangon.
Although there has been no immediate response
to other points addressed by the Secretary-General, we
hope that the Myanmar authorities will seriously
consider all the issues and concerns of the international

9

S/PV.6161

community and come up with a positive response in
due course. We share the expectations expressed by the
Secretary-General that the Myanmar Government
should match deeds to its words of promise to
cooperate with the United Nations. We should closely
monitor how the Myanmar Government follows up the
outcome of the Secretary-General’s visit.
With regard to the case of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, Japan has conveyed its deep concern to
Myanmar’s authorities at a high level. We have
appealed to them to take appropriate and lenient
actions. Once there are positive moves by the Myanmar
authorities, it will be important for us to respond
positively with concrete steps on our part, as confirmed
by G-8 leaders at the summit meeting in L’Aquila last
week.
The good offices effort of the Secretary-General
does not end with this one visit. Japan will continue to
support further good offices efforts by the United
Nations. At the same time, we appeal to the Myanmar
Government to take positive steps to advance the
democratic process in an all-inclusive manner.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
should like to offer a particular word of thanks to the
Secretary-General. The United States joins other
Council members in reiterating our strong support for
him and his good offices mission, as well as for his
Special Adviser, Ibrahim Gambari. We appreciate the
Secretary-General’s briefing today. We are especially
grateful that he was able to convey critical messages
directly to the Burmese Government. We also
appreciate the presence today of the Permanent
Representative of Burma. We hope that the Burmese
Government will implement all of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations.
We note that the Secretary-General was able to
meet with Senior General Than Shwe, several members
of the National League for Democracy’s central
executive committee and representatives of other
registered political parties. But we are very
disappointed that Burmese authorities refused the
Secretary-General’s request to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. By turning down that simple,
straightforward request, the Burmese Government
missed a critical opportunity, in the words of the
Secretary-General, to show its commitment to a new
era of political openness.

10

We await the regime’s response to the important
challenges that the Secretary-General presented to it
during his visit. If the authorities fail to credibly
address those challenges, they will miss yet another
chance to make meaningful progress on concerns
repeatedly uttered by the Council. The path the
authorities are pursuing leads to neither democracy nor
stability. It is the Burmese people who will suffer
further if this opportunity to change course is not
taken.
As 2010 approaches, the Government has
repeatedly assured us that next year’s elections will be
free and fair. But there can be no free and fair elections
while key leaders of Burma’s democratic opposition,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and more than 2,000
other political prisoners, languish in Burma’s prisons.
We do not seek to dictate Burma’s political future. We
merely seek to ensure that the will of all the Burmese
people can be heard and respected.
The authorities are clearly not respecting that
popular will by putting the leader of the country’s
democratic opposition on trial for spurious charges of
violating a house arrest that was illegitimate to begin
with. We are deeply concerned about those
proceedings. We call on the regime to cease its actions
against Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and to free her
immediately and unconditionally.
We are also troubled that the authorities continue
to resist addressing the grave human rights challenges
facing the country. For example, recent attacks by the
Burmese army and its proxies have forced more than
3,000 ethnic Karen to flee across the border into
Thailand. That violence against ethnic minorities
destabilizes the area around the international border
and raises a red flag about the Government’s treatment
of Burma’s ethnic groups. National reconciliation can
never be achieved so long as the army continues to
attack citizens of its own country. Such problems
cannot be resolved by imposing plans on the citizens of
Burma that lack democratic legitimacy. A democratic
transition to legitimate civilian rule can be achieved
only through genuine dialogue and a vision for the
future that is shared by all, including the democratic
opposition and all ethnic groups.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
the Ayeyarwaddy Delta after the devastation wrought
by Cyclone Nargis, and we recognize the crucial
contribution that the Tripartite Core Group has made to

09-40115

S/PV.6161

facilitate that progress. We strongly support the
Secretary-General’s request to grant outstanding visas
to humanitarian aid workers and to broaden
humanitarian support beyond the Delta. Advancement
towards democracy and stability cannot be made when
citizens are struggling to survive.
The Secretary-General has called for immediate
action from the Burmese Government to avoid more
wasted lives, lost opportunities and prolonged
isolation. We could not agree more. The SecretaryGeneral has noted that Burma cannot face its many
challenges alone. Burma’s generals should understand
that those of us around this table are ready to help
Burma ensure its future stability and restore its past
prosperity. The international community has shown
that it is willing to help the people of Burma. Now it is
up to the Burmese authorities to show they are ready to
do the same.
The Burmese Government has called cooperation
with the United Nations the cornerstone of the
country’s foreign policy. The Secretary-General echoed
this statement in his recent speech. Now is the time for
Burma to match its words with deeds. We strongly
encourage the authorities to seize this opportunity to
engage credibly with the international community.
When Burma demonstrates its willingness to respond
to the international community’s demands and to
commit to genuine progress towards reform, the United
States stands ready to respond.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for joining us here today, for the
briefing he gave us today and, above all, for his active
engagement on Myanmar as well as for that of his
Special Adviser, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari. Allow me to
also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar and let me assure him that
we have listened to his statement very attentively.
It was a courageous decision, on the part of the
Secretary-General, to visit Myanmar and to seek a
dialogue with both the Myanmar Government and the
opposition. It has my country’s full support. Austria
strongly welcomes his leadership in conveying the
concerns and messages of the international community
to the Government and in particular to Senior General
Than Shwe. Austria will continue to firmly support the
United Nations good offices mission and his personal
engagement.

09-40115

Austria notes with great concern that, in the
course of the past year, the human rights situation in
Myanmar has deteriorated significantly. Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi has been detained as a consequence of an
alleged breach of her house arrest — an arrest that,
according to the Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, was in violation not only of international
law but also of national Myanmar law. Moreover, in
recent weeks, intensified fighting in the East of the
country has forced thousands of civilians to flee to
neighbouring States.
All of these developments do not bode well for
Myanmar’s plans for a peaceful transition to
democracy. We therefore believe that the visit by the
Secretary-General was indeed very timely and
important. All the areas that he covered during his
visit — the release of all political prisoners, including
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the resumption of a
substantive dialogue with a clear time frame, the
criteria for free and fair elections, national
development and humanitarian assistance, especially
the swift issuance of visas — are of great relevance to
Myanmar and, as the Secretary-General highlighted in
his speech in Yangon, they are also interconnected. As
has been pointed out by the Secretary-General, neither
peace nor development can thrive without democracy
and respect for human rights.
Like others, Austria is clearly disappointed by the
Government’s decision to deny the Secretary-General a
meeting with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We share his
view that the Government missed an important
opportunity.
The fate of the political prisoners, including Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, will evidently be of great relevance
to the credibility of the elections in 2010 and their
national and international perception of being free and
fair. We urge the Government of Myanmar to
immediately and unconditionally release Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and all political prisoners and detainees.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the high level of poverty in Myanmar and the suffering
of its people. The effective cooperation among the
Government of Myanmar, the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, undertaken in
the framework of the Tripartite Core Group in response
to Cyclone Nargis, has clearly demonstrated the value
of engagement over isolation. We strongly commend
these efforts and hope that this spirit of openness will

11

S/PV.6161

also be applied in the future to practical issues related
to humanitarian assistance — namely, full and
unimpeded humanitarian access — development
cooperation and the proposed establishment of a
national economic forum.
Given the fact that opium production in the
territory of Myanmar is still the second highest in the
world, the active promotion of alternative development
activities, pursued by the Government of Myanmar
with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime country office, could help redress this
situation.
In its Council conclusions of 27 April, the
European Union recalled its important and growing
role as a donor to the country and its readiness to
further increase its assistance to the people of
Myanmar. However, genuine positive steps on the basis
of the Secretary-General’s proposals will be necessary
in order to enable the European Union and other
donors to unleash the full potential of their cooperation
with the country.
In conclusion, allow me to stress that Austria now
hopes that the Myanmar Government will act on the
Secretary-General’s requests and proposals. We are
convinced that this would be in the best interests of the
country and its people. We wish to encourage the
Myanmar authorities to cooperate closely and
constructively with the Secretary-General and Special
Adviser Ibrahim Gambari in the follow-up to his visit.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish to join
other Council members in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his descriptive briefing on his Myanmar
visit 10 days ago. We are particularly appreciative of
and grateful for the Secretary-General’s personal
efforts and commitment in making this visit, given his
very tight schedule. I also thank Ambassador Than
Swe, Permanent Representative of Myanmar, for his
statement.

were realized. He had two meetings with Senior
General Than Shwe and several meetings with highlevel Government officials, at which he straightforwardly
raised his views and recommendations on the current
situation. He also had a frank exchange of views with
leaders of 10 registered political parties, including a
separate private meeting with the National League for
Democracy and representatives of ceasefire groups. In
particular, he met with and made public critical
comments to a large audience comprised of over 300
participants from non-governmental organizations,
civil society groups and the diplomatic corps, which is
yet another sign of Myanmar authorities’ continued
respect for the Secretary-General and his opinion.
We regret but understand from the local legal
perspective the Secretary-General’s inability to meet
with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We regard the SecretaryGeneral’s meeting with Tripartite Core Group as very
important, for it again gives added value to the
successful cooperation between the United Nations, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Government of Myanmar.
While sharing the common wish to see faster and
more tangible progress in all fields of life in Myanmar,
we take positive note of the decision by the
Government of Myanmar to grant amnesty to prisoners
and enable them to participate in next year’s elections,
which we hope will be free, fair and inclusive, as a first
concrete measure in follow-up to the SecretaryGeneral’s visit.

It is our view that the visit was timely and
necessary, given the overall situation in Myanmar at
this juncture. In reality, it has further confirmed the
role of the United Nations, represented by the
Secretary-General, as a key mediator and its
commitment to helping the Government and people of
Myanmar with a broad-based, forward-looking package.

At the same time, taking into account the
complex situation of Myanmar as a country emerging
from years of, and still suffering from, political
tension, economic underdevelopment and disastrous
natural calamities, we believe that the visit has proved
to be a meaningful step in a process needed for
Myanmar to become a peaceful, stable and prosperous
country. In this process, it is the people of Myanmar
who will determine their own destiny. The assistance
of the international community and the United Nations
is extremely important and will be effective when it is
based on the engagement of and cooperation with the
Government and the people of Myanmar, as has been
the case, particularly in the present context of the
country’s seven-step road map towards democracy and
national reconciliation.

As we have learned directly from the SecretaryGeneral, all activities scheduled for the visit except one

As stated on many occasions, Viet Nam supports
a comprehensive approach in helping to address the

12

09-40115

S/PV.6161

root causes of the challenges that Myanmar is facing,
which lie in poverty and economic underdevelopment.
In that connection, the establishment of a national
economic forum, with a focus on agriculture, will be
pivotal. For that to be realized fruitfully, we believe
that United Nations agencies and donors should and
could play a more active role.
Finally, as a country in the region with a high
stake in seeing peace, stability and development
promoted in Myanmar, Viet Nam wishes to reaffirm its
continued support for the Secretary-General’s good
offices and all other efforts conducive to the national
reconciliation and democratization process in that
country. In ways that we deem appropriate and
productive, we will continue to be a constructive part
of that process.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his substantive briefing on his recent trip. We listened
closely to the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar.
In our view, the Secretary-General’s visit was
timely and necessary. The programme of work was
extremely full: the Secretary-General met twice with
the head of State, and met also with the Prime Minister,
representatives of political parties, including the
opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), and
armed ethnic-minority groups. The Secretary-General
personally visited areas that were affected by last
year’s destructive natural disaster. We note the
constructive spirit displayed by the Myanmar
authorities in permitting the Secretary-General to speak
before the broader Myanmar public and the press.
He had hoped to meet with Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, representing the NLD. We would observe that that
should not be the sole criterion on which his visit is
judged. He openly and directly recalled to the
authorities and the country’s highest leaders the
importance of democracy in Myanmar and reaffirmed
the readiness of the international community to provide
comprehensive assistance to help overcome urgent
problems. We welcome the multidimensional nature of
the Secretary-General’s efforts, which encompass the
socio-economic
and
humanitarian
aspects
of
cooperation with Myanmar.
The good offices mission is a process. It is clear
that many of the questions set out by the SecretaryGeneral at Nay Pyi Taw during his trip cannot be

09-40115

resolved immediately. Time and patience are needed.
We are counting on the constructive efforts of
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar.
Myanmar is now preparing for general
parliamentary elections, to be held in 2010; this is the
most recent stage in the road map of the democratic
transition. The country’s highest leadership reassured
the Secretary-General that the upcoming elections
would be free and fair and that all political parties,
including the National League for Democracy, would
be able to participate. We expect those reassurances to
be backed up by concrete measures. We welcome the
readiness expressed by the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar to cooperate with the United Nations and
the international community in the organization of the
elections and in a number of other spheres.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
active personal role in carrying out his mission of good
offices. That mission has provided an important and
effective channel of communication between the
Security Council, the United Nations and Myanmar.
The Russian Federation will continue to provide that
mission with needed assistance.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I too would like to join the
Secretary-General for briefing the Council and
providing us with a first-hand account of his recent trip
to Myanmar. Croatia commends the Secretary-General
for the continued personal leadership he has
demonstrated on this issue. Fully cognizant of the
challenges faced by the Secretary-General in deciding
whether to visit Myanmar, Croatia welcomes the visit,
which was aimed at pressing the Myanmar Government
to release political prisoners, including Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi, and to hold free and fair elections.
Croatia values the Secretary-General’s frank
assessment of the outcome of his meetings with senior
members of Myanmar’s leadership. We were
particularly interested also to learn of the SecretaryGeneral’s impressions drawn from his meeting with
representatives of ethnic minority groups and
representatives and leaders of several political parties,
including members of the National League for
Democracy, as well as his impressions regarding the
status of humanitarian and reconstruction efforts in the
Irrawaddy delta since his first visit, in the aftermath of
Cyclone Nargis. We were encouraged to hear about the
good cooperation among the Government of Myanmar,

13

S/PV.6161

the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
Croatia remains deeply concerned about recent
events in Myanmar concerning political prisoners and
the regime’s treatment of ethnic minorities, in violation
of international humanitarian law, alongside its
continuing lack of respect for the basic human rights of
its population. In that respect, Croatia shares the
international community’s increasing sense of
frustration with the Myanmar authorities’ continuing
political blockage of international efforts to bring
about substantive progress towards an inclusive
process of democratization in the run-up to the 2010
elections.
Given the complexity of the political situation in
Myanmar, which has been further complicated by the
ongoing trial of Aung San Suu Kyi, Croatia deeply
appreciates the good offices of the Secretary-General
in conveying, in unequivocal terms, the fundamental
concerns of the international community directly to
Senior General Than Shwe and other senior officials.
We also believe that the visit serves another important
purpose: in laying out his vision for Myanmar in his
speech of 4 July, the Secretary-General also sent a
crucial message from the international community that
Myanmar has a choice about how to proceed. National
ownership of the political process is not in question
here, and primary responsibility for its progress lies
with the Myanmar authorities and the choices they
wish to make.
It is deeply regrettable, therefore, that Myanmar’s
leaders chose not to use the unique opportunity of the
Secretary-General’s visit to demonstrate any level of
commitment to the promotion of genuine democratic
reform. Indeed, their refusal to allow the SecretaryGeneral to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi is of great
concern to us, as was the leadership’s resistance to
many of the Secretary-General’s proposals. We
strongly urge the Myanmar authorities to utilize the
Secretary-General’s good offices and begin to show
some readiness to cooperate, by translating into actions
the assurances they gave during the visit that they
would make the 2010 elections credible by releasing
all political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, as
well as resuming a general process of dialogue and
national reconciliation.
Croatia stands ready, along with the rest of the
international community, to continue to help the people

14

of Myanmar achieve their aspirations to a democratic
and prosperous future. In that respect, Croatia
reiterates its support for the continued important role
the Secretary-General must play in Myanmar through
his good offices mission and through the work of his
Special Envoy, Ibrahim Gambari.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar, Ambassador U Than Swe,
for his statement.
China places high value on the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to Myanmar in early July. We greatly
appreciate the efforts he has made since he assumed his
post to promote the democratic process and national
reconciliation in Myanmar. We believe that his visit
was very valuable and brought great influence to bear.
China appreciates the high-level reception accorded to
the Secretary-General by Myanmar and is encouraged
by the determination expressed by Myanmar to
promote the democratic process and actively cooperate
with the United Nations.
We note that some media and certain countries
are not happy with the fact that the Secretary-General
did not meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. In our view,
the Secretary-General met with many people during his
visit; whether or not he met with Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi should not be used as a criterion to measure the
success of his visit.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was unfortunately
involved in a legal proceeding. In order to maintain
impartiality in the judicial process, the Myanmar side
did not make the arrangements for the SecretaryGeneral to meet with her, which is totally
understandable. The United Nations should respect the
jurisdiction of its Member States.
We have time and again stressed that the
Secretary-General’s good offices are a process and that
his visit was part of the good offices mandate. During
his visit, the Secretary-General had in-depth dialogues
with the top leaders of Myanmar, directly conveyed to
them the concern of the international community on the
question of Myanmar, and enhanced mutual trust with
that country. That will play an important role in
encouraging the Myanmar side to maintain the current
momentum and promote the democratic process
according to the established plan.

09-40115

S/PV.6161

The Secretary-General also had extensive contacts
with the civil society of Myanmar and exerted a
positive influence on its members. All of these
developments fully indicate that the visit of the
Secretary-General is of positive and important
significance.
In recent years, the Secretary-General has
actively conducted good offices in Myanmar, as
mandated by the General Assembly. His unremitting
efforts and the positive outcome achieved thereby
deserve an objective and fair assessment by the
international community. Up to 2006, when
Mr. Gambari made his first visit to the country at the
request of the Secretary-General, Myanmar had taken
14 years to complete the first step of the seven-step
road map. Next year, however, it will finish the fifth
step by holding the first general elections in 20 years.
These achievements would not have been possible
without the Secretary-General’s good offices and
Myanmar’s own efforts.
Taking into account Myanmar’s historical
evolution and the political reality in the country, the
aforementioned progress was no easy gain. It is unfair
to turn a blind eye to the progress that Myanmar has
made or to continuously focus on picking at its
Government. The international community should
make a balanced assessment of the efforts Myanmar
has made, lend its Government more encouragement
and assistance, and treat it with less arrogance and
prejudice.
As an Asian country and Myanmar’s close
neighbour, China fully understands the difficulties
facing the people and the Government of Myanmar.
Myanmar is plagued by a myriad of problems, not just
one problem concerning a single individual. As a least
developed country, while Myanmar is self-sufficient
agriculturally, the majority of its people have yet to
share the dividends of industrialization. The biggest
problem for Myanmar is therefore development.
As Myanmar is a multi-ethnic nation, national
reconciliation faces a serious challenge there, with
armed groups inside its territory yet to sign peace
agreements with the Government. The greatest
challenge for Myanmar is therefore achieving national
unity and social stability.
As both an old country with a long history of
civilization and a new one that emerged from the
Second World War after shaking off colonial rule,

09-40115

Myanmar’s democratic process and system of
governance are faced with many problems. Like many
other developing countries, Myanmar’s problems can
only be gradually addressed in the process of its
economic and social development.
It is obvious that Myanmar’s problems cannot be
solved exclusively through Western-style problemsolving. We hope that the Government of Myanmar
will implement the seven-step road map of its
democratic process with due seriousness and make full
preparations for the general elections scheduled next
year. We hope that the Government of Myanmar will
engage in steady reform and lead its people towards
greater economic achievements. We also hope that the
international community will make an objective and
fair assessment of its multifaceted problems and lend a
helping hand to Myanmar. It is also our hope that the
countries concerned will lift their sanctions against
Myanmar so as to provide the people of that country
with a fair and enabling environment for its economic
development.
China supports Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Gambari in their continued good offices. It is
our sincere hope that the Secretary-General’s good
offices will help Myanmar to achieve domestic
stability and national reconciliation, and that the
United Nations will play a constructive role in helping
the country to address its economic, social,
humanitarian and human rights issues. China has been
and will be helping the Government of Myanmar in its
efforts to address its problems in a responsible and
constructive manner, but we believe that events inside
Myanmar are the internal affairs of Myanmar itself and
should be handled by its own Government and people
through consultations.
The situation in Myanmar poses no threat to
international or regional peace or security. China has
explicitly opposed the inclusion of the question of
Myanmar on the Security Council’s agenda, and we are
against the policy of isolating and sanctioning
Myanmar. China’s position on this matter remains
unchanged.
As Myanmar’s friendly neighbour, China will
always provide assistance to the people and the
Government of that country within its capabilities. We
hope that the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and other countries of the region will
work together to help Myanmar address its difficulties.

15

S/PV.6161

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his extensive
briefing concerning his recent visit to Myanmar on
3 and 4 July 2009. This second visit of the SecretaryGeneral in just over a year was again timely, and we
hope that it will lead to concrete examples of
cooperation between the Government of Myanmar and
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Myanmar for his
statement.
Turkey attaches great importance to national
reconciliation and the protection of human rights in
Myanmar. We therefore fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices mission in this direction, as
mandated by the General Assembly, as well as the
efforts of his Special Adviser, Ambassador Ibrahim
Gambari.
Myanmar has undergone very tough times in the
past two years, and we all remember the disastrous
consequences of Cyclone Nargis. This tragedy showed
the resilience of the people of Myanmar, and we are
now happy to hear from the Secretary-General that the
rebuilding efforts are gradually bearing fruit as a result
of effective cooperation between the United Nations,
the Government of Myanmar and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. We are also pleased to hear of
some other positive developments in the political and
economic domains, such as the ceasefire agreements
between the Government and armed groups, as well as
the facilitation of external trade and investment.
Yet, we would want to see more substantive and
tangible progress in the protection of human rights and
political freedoms. Echoing the words of the SecretaryGeneral at the end of his visit to Yangon, peace,
development and human rights are closely interrelated
in all countries, and Myanmar is no exception.
In this regard, the elections to be held in 2010
will be a critical test. These elections, including
developments in the pre-election period, ought to be
free and fair. All political parties should be allowed to
campaign for and participate in these elections freely.
We noted with interest the reassurances provided by
the Myanmar leadership to that end. We would now
like to see that commitment followed up by concrete
steps. Furthermore, the Government of Myanmar
should establish the necessary conditions for national
reconciliation through an inclusive process with the
full participation of all political parties and groups.

16

This brings me to the issue of the release of all
political prisoners, and in particular to the situation of
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. As a leading opposition
figure, it is unfortunate that Ms. Suu Kyi has spent
13 years under house arrest. In this context, and even
more significantly, her recent imprisonment just a few
weeks before she was bound to be released of house
arrest raises yet again important questions that need to
be elucidated. In this regard, the refusal of the
Myanmar Government to allow the Secretary-General
to visit Ms. Suu Kyi is certainly not a welcome
development.
However, irrespective of the individual cases, we
believe that it is high time that the Government of
Myanmar heed the repeated appeals of the Security
Council and release all political prisoners. This is
indeed essential to the establishment of a political
environment conducive to dialogue, conciliation and
mutual respect leading to free and fair elections, the
results of which have to be respected and honoured
by all.
We sincerely hope that all parties, and primarily
the Government, will seize the historic opportunity
presented by the 2010 elections in order to embark
upon an irreversible path towards national reconciliation
and peace. The Secretary-General has declared that the
United Nations could and would assist Myanmar in this
process, and Turkey supports the United Nations
efforts in this direction.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like at the outset to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and to commend his
good offices efforts to promote stability and national
reconciliation in Myanmar. We stress our support for
his personal work and that of his Special Adviser,
Mr. Gambari.
We also extend our thanks to the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar for his statement.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to
Myanmar and his talks with the Government and other
parties on that occasion. At the same time, we note his
inability to meet with the opposition leader, Ms. Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi. We regret that failure, despite our
understanding of the position of the Myanmar
authorities, as outlined by the Permanent Representative
of that country earlier in this meeting.

09-40115

S/PV.6161

We fully understand that the Secretary-General’s
personal efforts and good offices, exercised through
Mr. Gambari, have led to real movement and positive
developments. While slow, such developments — first
among which is the commitment of the Myanmar
authorities to pursue their follow-up of the seven-step
road map and, at the appropriate moment, to enact a
law to regulate the 2010 elections — augur well for
real progress. We hope that these efforts will advance
the democratic process and achieve a lasting solution
to all Myanmar’s problems.
We believe that dialogue with the Myanmar
authorities must be pursued in order to encourage them
to achieve the aims we all support and aspire to, above
all the release of political prisoners and detainees,
continued dialogue among the various parties, and the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the
organization of elections, the promotion of the rule of
law and respect for human rights.
We hope that the Myanmar authorities will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and the
international community in order to ensure national
reconciliation, lay the foundations for the full
participation of all political actors in the 2010
elections, and establish stability throughout the
country. We believe that coordination between the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also critical to achieving tangible
and timely results.
In previous statements to the Council, my country
has stressed that issues relating to the internal affairs of
States must be addressed through consultation and
constructive dialogue between the Government and
political actors involved, with the assistance of the
international community. We reiterate that point of
view and commend the role played by ASEAN, its
support for the good offices of the United Nations and
its assistance to the people of Myanmar in achieving
national reconciliation in their country. We hope that
Myanmar will soon achieve political and economic
stability, development and national reconciliation, and
that its people will live in peace.
We emphasize that the future of Myanmar is
exclusively in the hands of its people, who must work
together to ensure that it will be a prosperous one.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his

09-40115

briefing this morning. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar for his statement.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s timely
visit to Myanmar represented an important milestone in
his good offices efforts in that country. Previous
gestures — in particular, the repeated visits undertaken
by Mr. Gambari — have embodied the international
community’s response. The Secretary-General’s
messages, we believe, have been especially apposite
and address the international community’s concerns. A
response to these messages would lend new impetus to
a process that should ultimately lead to the
normalization of national life and development in
Myanmar.
In that regard, Costa Rica is grateful for the
Secretary-General’s commitment to the ideals of the
United Nations, but regrets the behaviour of the
Government of Myanmar. We can neither claim that the
release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi would be the sole
benchmark of change within the Government, nor
ignore the fact that the Nobel Peace Prize laureate is a
disturbing symbol of the Government of Myanmar’s
oppressive response. Furthermore, the constant rise in
the number of political prisoners runs counter to the
continual demands of the international community.
While Costa Rica believes that there must be a
gradual shift from sanctions and isolation towards a
model of greater participation and international
cooperation that seeks to open doors, build bridges and
create opportunities for inclusive dialogue, reconciliation
and democracy, we also believe that such a shift will
depend on whether the Government of Myanmar works
actively to increase the international community’s
confidence in its political plans, particularly in the
areas highlighted by the Secretary-General.
A lasting peace and economic development in
Myanmar will depend on participation and joint action
by all social sectors without exclusion. Costa Rica
welcomes the statement by the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar that his Government places
priority on the transfer of power to a civilian
Government after next year’s elections. However, it
must be made clear that such a transfer will be
legitimate domestically and internationally only if it is
the result of a process that respects the rights of all and
provides guarantees for participation by all.
The day will come when power cannot be based
on the repression and denial of rights. Repression must

17

S/PV.6161

be ended. Costa Rica calls for the release of all
political prisoners and for the restoration of all rights
to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We believe that those are
the urgent steps required in order to begin a vigorous
process of national reconciliation leading to legitimate
elections next year. Those are basic prerequisites for
future development.
I conclude by expressing appreciation for the
Secretary-General’s concern that there be greater
access for humanitarian assistance, which continues to
be sorely needed. My delegation thanks him for his
efforts.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): We should like at the outset to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing following his visit to
Myanmar, the second of its kind within a year, to better
see first-hand the development of the socio-political
and humanitarian situation on the ground and to jumpstart the reconciliation and democratization process.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar for his statement.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s meeting
with the main political and national actors, particularly
General Than Shwe, and development partners,
including the diplomatic corps and non-governmental
organizations. However, we regret that it was not
possible for him to meet with the opposition leader
Aung San Suu Kyi.
In the political area, we should like to urge the
Government of Myanmar to continue the release of
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, to
establish ongoing dialogue with all political actors, and
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
pluralistic, free and transparent elections in 2010,
which is a necessary element for the return of lasting
stability, peace and development to the country.
Given the importance of the elections, we should
like to emphasize that it will be essential to adopt in
the near future appropriate legislation establishing a
competent structure for organizing and managing the
elections and, when the time comes, to accept the
assistance of the international community, in particular
the United Nations. We are encouraged by the
commitment of Myanmar’s authorities in that regard,
as expressed earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar.

18

In the humanitarian area, my delegation
welcomes the meeting between the Secretary-General
and the Tripartite Core Group, which is responsible for
rebuilding the areas devastated by Cyclone Nargis. We
welcome the progress made in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta
and, given the challenges yet to be addressed, we
request the Government to further facilitate
humanitarian access to those areas so that the
population can receive the assistance needed to
improve their living conditions.
We call on the Government to facilitate the
establishment of the national economic forum by
focusing on priority sectors, such as agriculture and
income-producing activities, that could improve the
population’s living conditions. We should like to
encourage the armed groups that have chosen to
observe the ceasefire to honour their obligations,
including the cessation of all recruitment and use of
children, and we urge other groups that have not yet
done so to join the process.
My delegation would like to recall that the path
towards national reconciliation, peace and lasting
development is long and requires the firm and
substantial commitment of all national actors and the
assistance of the international community. That is why
we call on the Government to take all appropriate
measures to find a lasting consensus solution to the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General.
Ultimately, it is primarily up to the people of Myanmar
as a whole to overcome the obstacles to building a
prosperous nation.
In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks and
encouragement to the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser for their efforts to help Myanmar
emerge from the impasse. We also call on the other
countries of the region, particularly the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, to maintain their spirit of
solidarity towards Myanmar.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Uganda.
I wish to salute the Secretary-General for his
briefing and to thank the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar for his statement.
As the Government of Myanmar pursues its
seven-stage road map to democracy, stage five —
which relates to next year’s elections — is important,
as the elections will contribute significantly to the

09-40115

S/PV.6161

democratization process in the country. We urge the
Government of Myanmar to ensure that the electoral
process is free, fair, transparent and inclusive and that
all sectors of Myanmar society fully participate.
We call on the Government and on all parties to
pursue dialogue and reconciliation. In that regard, we
call for the unconditional release of all political
prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi.

09-40115

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

19
