Resolutions adopted on the report■ of the Sixth Committee

Taking note of the observations which were submitted by Governments in response to the inquiry
made pursuant to resolution 2697 (XXV) and which
are set out in the report of the Secretary-General,111
Observing that less than a quarter of the Governments of Member States have replied to the SecretacyGeneral's inquiry and that no general trend of opinion
in the United Nations can be deduced from these
replies,
Recognizing that a review of the Charter which was
not generally supported would militate against the
desired result, that is, the strengthening of the effectiveness of the United Nations,
Considering that the effectiveness of the United
Nations depends in the first place on the conduct of
Member States,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States that have not already done so to communicate
to him, before 1 July 1974, their views on the desirability of a review of the Charter of the United
Nations and their actual suggestions in -this respect;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session a
report setting out the views and suggestions of Member
States which have been communicated to him in accordance with pangraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring up to
date as quickly as possible the Repertory of Practice
of United Nations Organs;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Need to
consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter
of the United Nations".
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
3032 (XXVII). Respect for human rights in
armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Conscious that only complete respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and general and complete
disarmament under effective international control can
bring about full guarantees against armed conflicts
and the suffering caused by such conflicts, and determined to continue all efforts to these ends,
Conscious that the development of many weapons
and methods of warfare has made modern armed
conflicts increasingly cruel and destructive of civilian
lives and property,
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full and
effective ap{>lication of existing legal rules relating to
armed conflicts and to supplement these rules by new
ones in order to take into account the modern developments in methods and means of warfare,
Noting with concern that the existing legal rules and
obligations relating to human rights in armed conflicts
are frequently being disregarded,
Recalling the successive resolutions adopted by the
United Nations relating to human rights in armed conflicts, in particular General Assembly resolutions 2852
(XXVI) and 2853 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
and resolution XIII adopted by the twenty-first Inter12 A/8746 and Corr.I and Add.1-3.

117

national Conference of the Red Cross, held at Istanbul
in 1969,13 concerning the reaffirmation and development of the laws and customs applicable in armed
conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral14 on the !l'esults of the second session of the
Conference of Government Experts on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian
Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, which was held
at Geneva from 3 May to 3 June 1972 at the invitation
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Having taken cognizance of the report prepared by
the International Committee of the Red Cross on the
work of the Conference of Government Experts, 111
Expressing appreciation to the International Committee of the Red Cross for its dedicated efforts to
promote the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian law applicable in armed conflicts,
Emphasizing the importance of continued close
collaboration between the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross,
Welcoming the progress achieved at the second
session of the Conference of Government Experts,
Noting with concern, nevertheless, that agreement
has not emerged among government experts on drafts
concerning a number of fundamental issues, such as:
(a) Methods to ensure a better application of existing
rules relating to armed conflicts,
( b) Definitions of military objectives and protected
objects, in order to counter the tendency in armed
conflicts to regard ever growing categories of objects
as permissible targets for attack,
( c) Definitions of protected persons and combatants,
responsive to the need for improved protection of
civilians and of combatants in modern armed conflicts,
( d) The question of guerrilla warl:aire,
(e) Prohibition of the use of weapons and methods
of warfare which indiscriminately affect civilians and
combatants,
(f) Prohibition or restriction of the use of specific
weapons which are deemed to cause unnecessary suffering,
(g) Rules facilitating humanitarian relief in armed
conflicts,
(h) Definition of those armed conflicts of a noninternational character which should be subject to rules
additional to those contained in the Geneva Conventions of 1949,16
Considering that substantial progress on fundamental
issues such as those enumerated above is indispensable
if the efforts to supplement international humanitarian
law by new rules are to become significant for the
alleviation of the suffering brought about by modem
armed conflicts,
Welcoming the readiness of the Swiss Federal Council,
as communicated to ithe Secretary-General, to convoke
a diplomatic conference on the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian law applicable
in armed conflicts,
Believing that the further preparations for that conference as well as its organization must be such that
13 See A/7720, annex I, sect. D.

14 A/8781 and Corr.I.

on the Work of the Conference (Geneva, July
1972).
16 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
Iii Report

General Aaaembly-Twenty-seventh Session

substantial progress is achieved on fundamental issues
which are as yet unresolved,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Committee of the Red Cross for undertaking a series of
consultations to ensure the complete preparation for
the conference,
1. Urges aU Governments and invites the International Committee of the Red Cross to continue to
seek through consultations to achieve a rapprochement
in the positions of Governments to ensure that the
diplomatic conference envisaged will adopt rules which
wm mark substantial progress on fundamental legal
issues connected with modern armed conflicts and
which will contribute significantly to the alleviation of
the suffering brought about by such conflicts;
2. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to
observe the international humanitarian rules which are
applicable, in particular the Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907,17 the Geneva Protocol of 1925 18 and
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, and, to this end, to
provide instruction concerning these rules to itheir armed
forces and information concerning the same rules to
the civilian population;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage
the study and teaching of principles of respect for
international humanitarian rules applicable in armed
confliots;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on
relevant developments concerning human rights in armed
conflicts and to prepare, as soon as possible, a survey
of existing rules of international law concerning the
prohibition or restriction of use of specific weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Human
rights in armed conflicts: respect for human rights in
armed confliots".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3033 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 19
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV) of
17 December 1970 and 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, in which it urged the Government of the
host country to make certain that the measures taken
to ensure the protection and security of permanent
missions to the United Nations and their personnel
were adequate to enable those missions to perform
properly the functions entrusted to them by their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the host country with respect to the United Nations
and the missions accredited to it, their personnel and
their correspondence under the Agreement between
the United Nations and the United States of America
1 7 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
1s League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
19 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/8726).

regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,2°
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 21 and general international law,
Recalling the duty of missions accredited to the
United Nations to respect the laws and regulations of
the host country,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, including the host country,
as well as to the Secretary-General,
Noting with satisfaction the ratification by the host
country of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 / 2
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country and of the recommendations contained therein,
1. Condemns all acts of violence, terrorist attacks
and harassment directed against the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or against their
personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status
of such missions and personnel under international
law and calls upon the host country to take all appropriate preventive measures;
2. Welcomes the adoption, on 24 October 1972, of
the Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and
Official Guests of the United States 23 and hopes that
this Act will form a basis for the application of effective
measures against acts of violence, terrorist attacks and
harassment directed at the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or their personnel,
including the application of effective measures against
the organization of demonstrations and picketing where
there is reason to believe that they may be accompanied by acts of violence or may prevent the conduct
of the normal business of missions accredited to the
United Nations;
3. Considers it necessary that active measures
should be taken on the part of the authorities of the
host country, the United Nations Secretariat and all
others concerned to enhance the relations between the
diplomatic community and the local community, in
order to ensure the existence of conditions conducive to
the effective functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
4. Decides that the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country should continue its work in 1973 in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI) with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish all
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
6. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session a report on the progress of
its work and to make, if it deems necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
20 See resolution 169 (11).
21 See resolution 22 A (I).
22 United Nations, Treaty Series,

2SSee A/8871/Rev.l.

vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
