S/PV.7024

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7024th meeting

Wednesday, 28 August 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rossi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2013/493)

13-45967 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1345967*

S/PV.7024

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

month, and to all members for organizing this meeting,
whose purpose is to present to the Council the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2013/493).

Expression of welcome to His Excellency Mr. Liu
Jieyi, Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like,
at the outset of the meeting, to extend, on behalf of
the Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of the People’s Republic of China to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Liu Jieyi, who will
join us for today’s meeting. We very much look forward
to collaborating closely with him.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in French)

The agenda was adopted.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in the Chamber of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2013/493)

(spoke in Spanish)

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Japan, Mexico, Peru,
Spain, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/493, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to the Republic of Argentina,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council this

2

I am also pleased to have an opportunity to share
with the Council, for the first time in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, an
assessment of the most recent developments in the
political and security situations in Haiti, as well as
an overview of MINUSTAH’s activities in the past
few months in supporting peacebuilding and political
stability and in strengthening the rule of law.

I would like to begin my report with special thanks
to all the countries that are contributing troops and
police units to MINUSTAH and to all those Member
States that have cooperated in the stabilization and
reconstruction process for their valuable support for the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Since my predecessor’s most recent briefing to
the Security Council last March (see S/PV.6936),
the overall security situation in Haiti has remained
relatively stable, with a decrease in both civil unrest
and major crimes. Statistics show a downward trend in
homicides, kidnappings and incidents of violent civil
unrest during the first half of the year, as compared
to the same period in 2012. However, we have recently
seen an increased occurrence of politically motivated
protests linking socioeconomic grievances with broader
anti-Government messages, including dissatisfaction
with the ongoing electoral stalemate.
With the support of the United Nations police,
the performance of the Haitian National Police has
improved as it has continued to assume increased
responsibility for the provision of internal security,
particularly in the 4 of the country’s 10 regions vacated
by MINUSTAH’s military component. Nevertheless,
MINUSTAH’s military and police continue to play
an important role in supporting the National Police in
maintaining overall security and stability. The further

13-45967

S/PV.7024

strengthening of the National Police remains a critical
stabilization benchmark, particularly as MINUSTAH
proceeds to consolidate.
Turning to the political situation, the continued
delay in the holding of long-overdue partial senatorial,
municipal and local elections is of increasing concern
and poses a series of risks to the stabilization process.
Yesterday’s long-awaited submission to Parliament
by President Martelly of the draft electoral law that
is required to launch the electoral process is a most
welcome development. However, there have been
protracted delays caused, in part, by the eight months that
it took the three branches of Government to designate
the nine members of the Electoral Council, which was
eventually established in April 2013, followed by the
delayed submission of the draft electoral law by the
Electoral Council to the executive, and by the executive
to Parliament.
Despite the executive branch’s repeated public
statements in favour of holding the elections as soon as
possible, those delays have led a number of political and
civil society actors to express skepticism concerning
the likelihood that elections will be held in 2013.
(spoke in French)
If the provisions of the 2008 electoral law were to be
implemented and the Senate elections were not held by
January 2014, the Senate, and, as a logical consequence,
the Parliament, could become ineffective. That would
represent a genuine setback in the democratic process,
which Haiti does not have the luxury to afford. In such
a case, a possible mobilization of opposition forces
and civil society could not be excluded, which would
destabilize the political and security situation.
(spoke in English)
Delays in the submission of the draft electoral
law by the executive to Parliament fuelled speculation
among legislators that the executive had intentionally
delayed the process to ensure that Parliament would
become non-functional. That perception united a
grouping of main opposition parties that repeatedly
and publicly called on President Martelly to uphold
the constitutional requirement of timely elections, or
else to resign, thus popularizing the chant calling for
“elections or resignation”.
Meanwhile, a controversy has erupted concerning
the sudden death, on 13 July, of a judge who had
subpoenaed the Prime Minister and other senior

Government officials in the context of an investigation
into allegations of corruption concerning members of
the first family. Observers have expressed concern about
the independence of the judiciary, following a series of
controversial arrest warrants issued against persons
related to the investigation of the alleged corruption
case. In the meantime, special commissions of the
Senate and Chamber of Deputies have investigated the
circumstances of the judge’s death.
In that climate of polarization and heightened
mutual suspicion, I have been engaging Haiti’s key
political actors on both sides of the divide to promote
dialogue aimed at reaching a minimum agreement
on the way forward, particularly concerning the
elections. I have also met regularly with members of the
diplomatic corps accredited in Haiti, including troopcontributing countries, to ensure that every effort
is made to guarantee the continuity of the country’s
institutions, most notably the continued functioning of
Parliament beyond January 2014. It is important that
we, as the international community, remain united in
our common message and speak with one voice.
With regard to MINUSTAH’s conditions-based
consolidation, the military and police components
completed their mandated reduction of personnel
during the reporting period, in accordance with
resolution 2070 (2012). The Mission stands ready to
proceed with further adjustments in troop strength as
may be mandated by the Council in October.
Concerning cholera, as of 29 June, the epidemic
had caused the deaths of 8,173 persons and infected
more than 660,000. The budget of the national plan for
the elimination of cholera amounts to $443.7 million
for the period 2013 to 2015, of which roughly 47 per
cent has been pledged. The United Nations continues to
support the Government of Haiti with the various shortand medium-term priorities that need to be addressed
to eliminate cholera transmission in the country.
My predecessor, as well as MINUSTAH’s
Deputy Special Representative, and I have met on
several occasions with President Martelly and Prime
Minister Lamothe to explain the ongoing reduction
of MINUSTAH’s footprint and the Mission’s
consolidation plan with its four areas of stabilization
benchmarks. Both leaders have expressed support for
a phased withdrawal of the Mission as the capacity
of national institutions increases. In that regard, a
joint Government-MINUSTAH working group was
established in April to monitor the gradual and orderly

13-459673

S/PV.7024

transfer of responsibilities to the Government. It is
vital that the Government, with MINUSTAH’s support,
continue to work on multiple fronts to advance progress
towards the stabilization benchmarks.
The gains in stability and security need to be
sustained in order for Haiti to succeed in its ongoing
effort to forge economic partnerships, attract foreign
investment and foster socioeconomic development — the
cornerstone of enduring stability.
Concerning the police development benchmarks,
achieving the targets of the 2012-2016 police
development plan will require the continued
commitment of the Government and Member States to
ensure that the appropriate funding is made available to
support a professional, reliable and accountable police
force. Outstanding challenges include insufficient
regional coverage by the police force, due to staffing
shortages, and the need to continue strengthening the
institution’s management and administrative capacity
and its Inspectorate General.
The delays in the establishment of the Electoral
Council and the lack of clarity on the electoral law
have so far impaired the electoral body’s capacity to
significantly advance preparations for the electoral
process. Nevertheless, the Electoral Council has issued
a request for its operational costs to be included in the
2013-2014 national budget and the Council’s Director
General and Council members have started their
electoral planning. MINUSTAH’s objective is to create
the conditions that will allow the Government of Haiti
to progressively assume greater responsibility for the
management of the electoral process.
With regard to respect for the rule of law, although
the oversight and accountability mechanisms provided
for in the Constitution have been established, it is critical
that the Government and its international partners
continue to build the capacity of those institutions.
For example, without the establishment of a strong
inspectorate for the vetting of judicial appointments,
the Superior Council of the Judiciary will not be able
to effectively exercise oversight. Strengthening the rule
of law also entails allowing key oversight institutions to
operate independently.
With regard to the Mission’s governance
benchmarks, MINUSTAH has concentrated its good
offices efforts on promoting dialogue among national
stakeholders to overcome the electoral stalemate.
During the reporting period, the strained relations

4

between the executive branch and Parliament impeded
the adoption of a consensual legislative agenda, another
key governance indicator. That situation impaired
progress on crucial legislative reform, such as the law
against money laundering, the law on the financing of
political parties and the revision of the criminal code
and the criminal procedure code.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, Haiti is at a critical juncture. Indeed,
progress in the fields of security and stabilization, as
well as the concerted efforts of the Martelly/Lamothe
Government for socioeconomic development, could
be jeopardized by the instability resulting from
the polarization linked to the election stalemate.
MINUSTAH, in close consultation with its international
partners, continues to work to convince national
stakeholders that a minimum political consensus that
makes it possible to hold elections as soon as possible
and an agreement on the continuity of institutions are
in their best interest and that of the nation.
To that end, the interest shown by national
stakeholders for dialogue as a means of a means
of reaching an agreement is one reason to remain
optimistic and should be encouraged. A mediation
initiative, as well our intensified efforts to promote
dialogue among national actors, could form the basis of
an inter-Haitian process that would be able to overcome
the current stalemate and prevent a potential crisis that
could have an affect on the stability of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
The search for avenues to facilitate dialogue and
consensus among Haitians is essential in building
a country able to stand on its own, with democratic
institutions that will give concrete answers to the
many challenges that lie ahead and take Haiti out of
the institutional cyclical crisis that has characterized it,
and very often paralyzed it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Honoré for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Sandra Honoré for her
briefing, which, together with the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/493), show that real progress is occurring
in Haiti, while more work is needed to ensure that it
lasts.
13-45967

S/PV.7024

The United States reaffirms its support for the
Secretary-General’s conditions-based consolidation
plan for MINUSTAH and his recommendation for the
withdrawal of additional military elements, provided
that conditions on the ground allow for it and that
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) maintains a robust, quick-reaction
capability. Political stability, in particular, is crucial to
continued progress in Haiti. The establishment of the
transitional Electoral Council was an important step, but
the ongoing delay in the scheduling of local municipal
and senatorial elections is worrying. The elections must
be held as soon as possible and need to be credible,
free, fair and inclusive. To that end, we welcome the
submission of the draft electoral law to the Parliament
and urge Haiti’s political leaders to work together now
to publish a new electoral law that fully accords with
Haiti’s Constitution. In that regard the United States
very much appreciates Special Representative Honoré’s
efforts to promote dialogue among Haiti’s political
actors.
Political stability requires security and, therefore,
that recent security gains be sustained, such as the
improved performance of the Haitian National Police
and reinvigorated police recruitment efforts, which are
critical for Haiti’s future. We encourage MINUSTAH
to maintain capacity-building of the Haitian National
Police as its highest priority. That should include strong
recruitment and retention efforts to ensure that the
force reaches its goal of 15,000 officers by 2016, with
an emphasis on recruiting women and expert personnel
capable of addressing the needs that the SecretaryGeneral identified in his report.
The United States would like to see MINUSTAH’s
community-violence reduction programmes sustained,
as they increase public safety by offering at-risk youth
productive employment and reduce their vulnerability
to gang recruitment. For the sake of long-term security,
better policing cannot happen in isolation but must be
accompanied by improvements in the rule of law. The
United States therefore strongly supports MINUSTAH’s
assistance to Haitian institutions responsible for
ensuring the rule of law. We also welcome the
new United Nations Rule of Law Working Group
coordination mechanism, which should coordinate
closely with civil society, donors and the Government
of Haiti to identify priorities for the justice sector and
set concrete, realistic benchmarks for Haiti’s rule-oflaw priorities, including the protection of human rights
for all Haitians.

In that vein, the Government’s establishment
of the interministerial commission on human rights
to promote and protect human rights is a positive
step. The Government’s statement in July calling for
tolerance and rejecting violence and discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people
was another welcome development.
Indeed, protecting Haiti’s most vulnerable citizens
must also remain a priority for the Haitian Government
and for MINUSTAH. Sexual and gender-based violence
tragically persists in Haiti. It is a significant problem,
one that MINUSTAH must continue to address,
including by training police to prevent and respond to
such crimes. Meanwhile, the voluntary resettlement
of displaced persons should continue in a manner that
fully respects the rights of the displaced, while those
in the camps must have adequate services and security.
The health and well-being of the Haitian people are
important to the United States. As part of our broad
assistance programme in Haiti, and in coordination
with the United Nations and other donors, we continue
to support the Haitian Government’s efforts to treat and
prevent cholera.
Before concluding, I want to reinforce our support
for MINUSTAH’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. Such incidents are unacceptable
stains on MINUSTAH and the United Nations. We
encourage continuing and determined efforts to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as other
misconduct by peacekeepers.
Finally, let me reiterate the deep gratitude of the
United States to those serving in MINUSTAH, who
work tirelessly every day to improve the lives of the
Haitian people.
As MINUSTAH moves forward with the conditionsbased consolidation plan, the United States welcomes
the Secretary-General’s forthcoming examination of
how the United Nations can best continue to contribute
to Haiti’s stabilization and development.
Although key challenges remain, Haiti is becoming
more stable. The United States remains committed to
working with the Government and people of Haiti, as
well as the United Nations and international partners,
to build a more secure and prosperous future for the
country.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): We are grateful to
the Secretary-General for submitting the report on

13-459675

S/PV.7024

the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2013/493), as well as providing an
update on progress made during the reporting period
towards the implementation of the mission consolidation
plan outlined in his previous report (S/2013/139). We
welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré, to the Council and thank
her for presenting the report of the Secretary-General.
I would like to take this opportunity once again to
commend MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team, which continue to play an important role in
supporting the recovery and stabilization of Haiti.
As the Secretary-General emphasized in his report,
the progress made in the stabilization of Haiti since
the initial deployment of MINUSTAH, in 2004, has
been considerable. The overall security situation in
the country remained relatively stable throughout the
reporting period, with a decrease in both civil unrest
and major crimes. The performance of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) continues to improve as it
assumes increased responsibility for the provision of
internal security. We also commend the Government
for its efforts to move forward with socioeconomic
development that has resulted, inter alia, in a significant
increase in economic partnership.
At the same time, Haiti continues to face numerous
challenges. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
democratic process in Haiti remains vulnerable to
setbacks linked to political instability and infighting
among the branches of the Government. It is important
that all political actors in Haiti engage in a constructive
dialogue to preserve the progress achieved so far and
address their differences in a spirit of compromise.
Such dialogue is particularly important for reaching a
minimum political consensus on holding long-overdue
elections as soon as possible and on the key legislative
priorities. It is essential that the United Nations continue
to support the upcoming elections and contribute to the
progress on the launch of the electoral process.
It is also important to maintain progress made in
building the capacity of the HNP. Further efforts are
needed to strengthen key rule-of-law institutions,
reform the security sector, attract investments, promote
sustainable development and advance the democratic
agenda. The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority. Significant strides were
made regarding the resettlement of persons displaced
by the 2010 earthquake, although their protection,
6

along with food insecurity, rapidly decreasing
humanitarian funding and continuing deep institutional
and structural weakness, remains a concern. Continued
strong international engagement and efforts by the
Haitian authorities are crucial to improve the current
humanitarian situation, in particular with regard to the
ongoing cholera epidemic.
In conclusion, we take note of the information
provided in the report of the Secretary-General that, in
accordance with resolution 2070 (2012), the military and
police components completed the mandated reduction
of their personnel during the reporting period. The role
of MINUSTAH in the maintenance of overall security
and stability in the country remains vital. Azerbaijan
supports the extension of the Mission’s mandate for
an additional year. It is important that the possible
further reduction in the Mission’s uniform strength,
as recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, be based on the security and political situation
on the ground. We look forward to the next report of
the Secretary-General and the proposals on the way
forward.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Argentina for organizing, under its
presidency of the Council, this debate on Haiti, which is
elevated by your presence, Mr. President. I would also
like to congratulate the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honoré, on her appointment, and I would
like to thank her for her very thorough briefing. We
wish her every success in carrying out her functions.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.
Like Ms. Honoré, we believe that Haiti is at a critical
turning point. We recognize the significant progress
that has been made in Haiti since the earthquake that
struck the country in January 2010. However, we are
also aware of the many difficulties that the stabilization
process continues to face.
In order to remedy that, priority must be given
to holding, as soon as possible, free, regular, credible
elections that are open to everyone. The establishment
of the transitional college of the Permanent Electoral
Council on 19 April was a step in the right direction.
We also welcome the establishment, on 24 June, of
a joint taskforce made up of representatives of the
transitional college, MINUSTAH, the United Nations

13-45967

S/PV.7024

Development Programme and of various ministries that
have been charged by the Prime Minister to accelerate
preparations for elections. We welcome the fact that the
path towards elections and the draft law was submitted
yesterday by President Martelly to the Parliament. That
action must be followed up by determined action on
behalf of all political actors to see that elections are
held as soon as possible.
Luxembourg supports the efforts of MINUSTAH to
assist with the electoral process, including the goal of
greater participation by women in the electoral process.
Given the scale of the challenges that need to be
confronted, it is essential that Haiti, with the support
of the international community, create a system of
governance that is effective and inclusive and capable of
meeting the needs of Haitians. The stalemate between
the executive and legislative branches cannot continue.
We fully support the assertion made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2013/493) that any consensus
on the issue of elections must be accompanied by the
identification of major legislative priorities to promote
the strengthening of institutions, protect investments
and ensure respect for human rights.
The establishment of the rule of law has only been
moving forward slowly, and the system of justice lacks
independence from political power. In his report, the
Secretary-General rightly mentions the need to bring
an end to the climate of impunity. The case that is
under way against former President Jean-Claude
Duvalier represents an important test in that regard.
It is also necessary to strengthen respect for human
rights, specifically by protecting as well as possible
vulnerable groups. In spite of the commendable efforts
of MINUSTAH’s group on the protection of children,
much violence, including sexual violence, is still being
committed against children. We noted with concern the
mention in the Secretary-General’s report of cases of
child slavery.
On a more positive note, we would like to note that
the security situation has remained relatively stable.
We can see a reduction in civil unrest and major crime.
The Haitian National Police is growing stronger, and
the police force has improved its services, specifically
in terms of ensuring security in the four departments
that MINUSTAH military forces have now left. We
should also welcome the more effective recruitment of
cadets in order to achieve the goal of recruiting 15,000
police officers by 2016. Of course, strengthening the
Haitian National Police must go hand in hand with

professionalism. In that regard, we are worried by cases
of the police resorting to excessive force.
The humanitarian situation in the country also
remains worrying. One and a half million people are
suffering from severe food insecurity, including a
significant number of children under 5. The cholera
epidemic, which has cost more than 8,000 lives, is
continuing to ravage the country. We welcome the
initiative launched last December by the SecretaryGeneral aimed at eliminating cholera in Haiti.
The international community must assist the
affected populations. For its part, Luxembourg remains
actively committed to helping Haiti overcome the
challenges of the humanitarian situation and those
associated with rebuilding the country.
To conclude, Luxembourg reaffirms its support
for MINUSTAH’s adaptable consolidation plan for the
stabilization of Haiti, which has been developed jointly
with Haitian authorities for the period 2013-2016. It is
important for MINUSTAH to focus its attention on the
main tasks that can be achieved within a reasonable
amount of time. We welcome the ideas and thought
processes under way to pursue MINUSTAH’s mid-term
reconfiguration. While we wait for the proposals that
will appear on that subject in the next report of the
Secretary-General, my country remains in favour of
renewing the mandate of MINUSTAH for one year,
until 15 October 2014.
Ms. King (Australia): We welcome your presence
here today, Mr. President. We also welcome the new
Permanent Representative of China. We congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her appointment, and
we thank her for her first briefing on the situation in
Haiti. We commend personnel from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who have
worked tirelessly on the ground with the Government
and the people of Haiti to rebuild that country. Much of
that work has been done in the face of natural disasters
and an ongoing cholera epidemic. While there is still
much work to be done, there has been much encouraging
news, including in the latest report (S/2013/493) of the
Secretary-General.
Since the Security Council last discussed Haiti, in
March (see S/PV.6936), some necessary steps towards
holding long overdue elections have been taken. The
President’s submission to Parliament of a draft electoral
law yesterday is the latest of those, and it is very

13-459677

S/PV.7024

welcome. It remains, however, a matter of great concern
that elections continue to be delayed. It is critical to
Haiti’s recovery, reconstruction and development that
free, fair, inclusive and credible elections be held as soon
as possible. We urge all political actors to work towards
building the political consensus required to establish
the legislation necessary for elections to be held and for
MINUSTAH to continue to provide electoral assistance
and logistical support for those elections.
Political stability and economic development in
Haiti are also closely linked. We welcome President
Martelly’s emphasis on strengthening institutions
so as to facilitate foreign investment in support of
socioeconomic development. We note that efforts to
attract foreign investment have resulted in a significant
increase in economic partnerships. Integration
into the Caribbean region should also assist Haiti’s
development. The Haitian President’s engagement with
the region is welcome. For the first time, Haiti assumed
the six-month rotating chairmanship of the Caribbean
Community and hosted the Caribbean Community
and Common Market Heads of Government meeting.
While those are all welcome developments, real change
requires sustainable development, growth and regional
cooperation and consistent efforts to ensure that the
ongoing risk of political instability, as outlined by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
jeopardize progress.
An emphasis by MINUSTAH on building the
capacity of the Haitian National Police continues to
show results, as demonstrated by increased policing, a
responsibility assumed by the local authorities. Close
cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police has shown results in combating
violence and crime. On that basis and conditioned
by the realities on the ground, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s proposal for a further reduction in
the military component of MINUSTAH.
We commend the Secretary-General’s ongoing
efforts to eliminate cholera in Haiti. Funding and
coordinating the activities of the various stakeholders
are, however, still a main challenge. To eradicate that
disease, coordination among Haitian national agencies,
multilateral organizations and other partners is crucial.
We remain deeply concerned by sexual and genderbased violence, including against minors. We are also
deeply concerned by the recent increase in homophobic
violence in Haiti.

8

We commend MINUSTAH for its swift response in
issuing a press release on 16 August calling for tolerance
amongt all Haitians. We urge the Haitian Government
to continue to work with MINUSTAH to increase
efforts to support the prevention of further incidents,
promote respect for human rights and strengthen the
judicial process.
We
appreciate
the
inclusion
in
the
Secretary-General’s report of a progress report
on MINUSTAH’s consolidation plan and note the
establishment of a joint Government-MINUSTAH
working group to monitor the gradual and orderly
transfer of responsibilities to the Government. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s intention,
in his next report, to present options for the involvement
of the United Nations in Haiti beyond 2016. We look
forward to engaging with Haiti and other Member
States on the best way for Haiti to transition away from
United Nations support, to strengthen institutions and
governance, which provide security, justice and jobs,
and to break the cycle of poverty and violence.
Mr. Loulichki. (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to express my congratulations for a
very successful Argentine presidency of the Security
Council during this month of August, which has been
very busy and has demanded the active participation of
the presidency and all members of the Council until the
very end of August. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Sandra Honoré on her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
I welcome her presence here and thank her for her
thorough briefing. We would also like to express our full
appreciation to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for the work accomplished so
far. Finally, I would like to welcome our new colleague,
the Permanent Representative of China, Mr. Liu Jieyi,
on the occasion of his first participation in our work. I
wish him all the very best.
Morocco welcomes the concerted efforts by the
Haitian authorities in various areas, especially those
to develop its police force, strengthen capacities for
elections and promote and ensure respect for human
rights, as well as good governance.
Politically speaking, the establishment of a
transitional college of the permanent Electoral Council,
as well as the advances made in the implementation
of the Government’s “five Es” policy programme,
are positive developments, which we welcome. Now

13-45967

S/PV.7024

the constitutional work needs to be finalized so as to
enable legislative, municipal and local elections to
take place as soon as possible. It is a positive sign that
yesterday, as the Special Representative indicated,
President Martelly submitted a draft law on elections
to the Parliament. We would like these elections to be
accelerated, and all parties, including MINUSTAH,
should assist. We would like to support Ms. Honoré’s
efforts in that regard, in particular the announcement
and adoption of electoral laws and the promotion of
dialogue among the various political stakeholders in
order to find a consensus that would enable elections to
be held as soon as possible .
Concerning security, the collective action
of MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police
are beginning to bear fruit, thus contributing to
progressive and noticeable improvements in the
country. The strengthening of recruitment for and
capacity development of the Haitian National Police,
in accordance with the 2012-2016 development plan,
has enabled the police to take on greater responsibility,
allowing the withdrawal of MINUSTAH from four
departments. In that regard, the decrease by 50 per
cent in the number of criminal acts and kidnappings as
compared to 2012 is also extremely reassuring.
On the humanitarian situation, although
encouraging results have been achieved in terms of
rehousing displaced persons by the end of 2013, 279,000
people continue to be housed in 352 camps in deplorable
sanitary conditions. Furthermore, the persistence of
food insecurity, which was exacerbated by the impact
of Hurricane Sandy in 2012, is still affecting almost
1.5 million people.
Aware of its primary responsibility in improving
the socioeconomic situation of its population, the
Government invested greatly during the reporting
period in promoting and attracting foreign investment.
Such efforts should be encouraged, especially given the
roll-back in international assistance.
Since its establishment, MINUSTAH has
decisively contributed to the efforts to stabilize the
country. We commend the Mission’s staff for the work
that they have accomplished up to this point in spite of
the difficulties and obstacles they have faced. While
we support the Haitian Government in its efforts to
assume its responsibilities, specifically for security and
socioeconomic development, we call on MINUSTAH to
continue to pursue its valuable support for the Haitian

authorities, in close collaboration with the country team
and Haiti’s regional and international partners.
A short time ago, the Special Representative
welcomed and underscored the efforts of senior
Haitian officials in the areas of security, reconstruction
and the economy. Also in that regard, it is correct to
insist on the importance of holding elections as soon
as possible. The Haitian political forces are therefore
urged at this very crucial stage of the modern history
of their country to transcend their differences and put
the national interests above their partisan interests in
order to ensure the stability of Haiti and the well-being
of its people. We hope that they will be up to the task of
assuming that responsibility. We are certain that they
will spare no effort to achieve that stability, bring Haiti
back to a state of normality and launch the sustainable
development of the country.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir,
for presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Sandra Honoré and thank her for her insightful
briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/493), which gives
concrete recommendations for the way forward.
Peace and progress in Haiti are shared objectives
of the Haitian people, the Security Council and the
international community. There has been an impressive
turnaround. The brave and resilient people of Haiti
have made important strides towards stability, growth
and development. The devastating earthquake in 2010
and Hurricane Sandy reversed the gains achieved over
many years. But today we see a new Haiti emerging
from those tragedies. Challenges persist, but the resolve
of the Haitian people to build their country is stronger.
Haiti has reached important milestones. It is on the
road to political stability and economic progress. The
consolidation plan seems to be on track, by and large.
President Martelly’s outreach for foreign investment in
support of job creation and socioeconomic development
has led to new economic partnerships and opportunities.
The implementation of projects for the construction
of roads, schools, clinics, agricultural production and
reforestation will give a much needed boost to the
economy.
There is progress in other areas, too. The
Government’s focus on national solidarity and
institution-building, especially the establishment of the
transitional Electoral Council, are positive signals for

13-459679

S/PV.7024

the Haitian people and the Council. The performance
of the National Police has improved. There has been
a decrease in civil unrest and major crimes. The
resettlement of people displaced by the 2010 earthquake
has been moving apace. President Martelly’s assumption
of the Chair of the Caribbean Community gives Haiti a
new stature in the region.
As pointed out by the Secretary-General, some
remaining serious problems could imperil the progress
made so far. The differences between the executive
and the Parliament should be resolved expeditiously to
reach consensus to hold partial senatorial, municipal
and local elections. Delay in those elections will
have a negative impact on the next set of elections
in 2014, undermine the ongoing democratic process
and adversely affect economic goals. The Haitian
Government and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should continue to
work together to achieve stabilization benchmarks. The
Haitian Government needs to allocate more funds to
the Electoral Council and National Police to ensure that
they stand on their feet and that their performance is
optimal. At the same time, the Haitian Government’s
requirements to overcome capacity impediments
and the management of the electoral process must be
recognized and met by international assistance.
Haiti needs a strong security sector. Steps
taken by Haitian authorities to reinvigorate police
recruitment and training are encouraging. Objectives
and benchmarks in development plans for the Haitian
National Police presented by MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police itself must be met to support a
professional, reliable and accountable police force.
With regard to rule-of-law institutions, two issues
are most important. Haiti’s international partners
should do all they can to build the capacities of those
institutions. For its part, the Haitian Government
should guarantee the independence of the National
Police, the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the
Anti-Corruption Unit. The goals of eradication of
cholera, food security and preparedness for natural
disasters must continue to be pursued vigorously. We
urge greater coordination and cohesion among different
actors engaged in humanitarian work. Donor fatigue can
result from protracted crises like the one in Haiti. It is
therefore imperative for the international community to
continue to provide funds and expertise to the country
for humanitarian purposes.

10

All indicators suggest that Haiti is moving towards
political stability and economic development. The
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti is a
success story. The reconfiguration of MINUSTAH is
under way. That process must continue. We hope that,
through consultations, the Council will be able to find
a plan for contributing to Haiti’s stability as it presses
ahead with its plans to scale down United Nations
assistance by 2016.
A word of caution, however — since 2004,
MINUSTAH has done a commendable job in the
stabilization of Haiti. The reconfiguration or drawdown
of MINUSTAH must therefore be carefully planned.
It should not lead to the reversal of gains made in the
country; there should be a gradual and orderly transfer
of responsibilities.
Pakistan has been a participant in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti since 1993. Presently,
one formed police unit from Pakistan comprising 140
personnel is serving in the country. Pakistan supports
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Haiti. We remain a sincere partner
of the people of the country in their quest for peace,
security, stability and progress.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): Your presence here
today, Mr. President, is a clear demonstration of the
importance you attach to the peace, stability, security
and development of the Haitian people. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré, for
her informative briefing on the current developments in
Haiti and the work of MINUSTAH. We warmly welcome
her to the Council, as this is her first briefing, and we
wish her all the best in her leadership of MINUSTAH.
We also join others in welcoming the Permanent
Representative of China, as this is his first Council
meeting. We wish him success in his duties.
At the outset, let me commend the tangible
progress achieved under the leadership of President
Michel Joseph Martelly, particularly in the security
sector, the reconstruction process and various
socioeconomic sectors. We welcome the commitment
of the Government and its partners to fostering greater
alignment of international systems with national
priorities, increase transparency and strengthen mutual
accountability. We hope that those efforts will lead to
the rapid recovery of the Haitian economy.

13-45967

S/PV.7024

Rwanda further acknowledges the importance of
the contribution of MINUSTAH and the international
community in supporting the stabilization process in
Haiti, including the strengthening of its legislative,
judicial and executive institutions.
It is indeed positive to also note that progress has
been made towards to the achievement of the four
stabilization benchmarks set out in the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan for Haiti. The Government-endorsed
United Nations integrated strategic framework for
Haiti is a good step in the right direction. It is in that
spirit that Rwanda calls upon all the relevant actors
and stakeholders to come together around a common
development strategy and ensure coherence among the
numerous initiatives in support of Haiti’s development.
We encourage MINUSTAH and the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
assistance to the Haitian authorities in strengthening
Haiti’s core governance structures and implementing
the Government’s action plan for national recovery and
development as an efficient and coherent framework.
Following the establishment of the transitional
Electoral Council, earlier this year, Rwanda encourages
all parties to engage in a constructive dialogue in
order to reach a political consensus on the holding of
the partial senatorial, municipal and local elections.
We believe that the completion of that process will
contribute to the consolidation of democracy, allow for
the completion of the constitutional reform and provide
a strong basis for continuing reconstruction efforts.
With regard to the possible drawdown of
MINUSTAH, Rwanda is of the view that the process
should be in line with the security and political
conditions on the ground, instead of being driven by
a stipulated time frame. Furthermore, the Security
Council should closely monitor achievements in the
implementation of the MINUSTAH consolidation plan.
On the cholera epidemic, Rwanda remains deeply
concerned about its devastating consequences for the
Haitian population and calls upon all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government, to continue to mobilize the
necessary resources and to assist in the efforts aimed at
treating and eradicating the cholera outbreak.
Equally important is the need for the international
community to invest more in quick-impact projects,
in partnership with the Haitian authorities and civil
society, in the areas of agriculture and environmental

protection in order to assist the Haitian Government
with the challenges in terms of food insecurity.
Finally, Rwanda will continue to support the
Government of Haiti in its reconstruction period, as a
police- and troop-contributing country to MINUSTAH.
Rwanda remains committed and stands ready to assist
the Government in professionalizing its police force.
It is also a great honour to have Haiti as a member
observer of the African Union, and we encourage the
Haitian authorities to further become a full member
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
Africa.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome
you to the Security Council, Sir, and Iwould like to
warmly welcome as well the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and to thank her for her
briefing. I would like to record our thanks here also to
Mr. Nigel Fisher for his leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) as interim
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We welcome Haiti’s progress since our most
recent debate on Haiti (see S/PV.6936) in assuming
responsibility for its own security and in fostering an
environment that can attract sustainable development.
We recognize the important contribution that
MINUSTAH is making. We welcome the transfer of
responsibility for security in some regions to the Haitian
National Police, in line with the core objectives of the
2013-2016 consolidation plan. We note the advances
made in Haitian National Police promotion, vetting and
training, and we would like to see continued progress
in that area.
We are pleased to see Haiti building partnerships
for sustainable economic development and taking an
increasing role in regional forums. That is crucial,
because economic investment will create the basis for
Haiti’s future stability.
Notwithstanding the progress that continues to
be made, we remain concerned that delays in crucial
political and democratic processes are holding back
the country’s development and stability. The continued
delay in the holding of planned elections and the
negative impact that could have on the ability of the
political institutions to function is of particular concern.
We call on the Government of Haiti to broker a political
agreement that would allow elections to be held this
year. Elections are vital to establishing political
stability and to building the trust and confidence of

13-4596711

S/PV.7024

the Haitian people, the international community and
potential investors.
An attractive investment climate will be
strengthened by Haiti’s ability to police itself. We
welcome the progress made by the Haitian National
Police towards reaching the target of 15,000 active
police officers by 2015, but further efforts are
required to build their institutional and operational
capabilities. As highlighted by the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/493), increased recruitment must be
accompanied by improvements in strategic planning,
administration, internal affairs and training. For the
Haitian National Police to be effective, there must also
be reform of the justice sector, to create an independent
and impartial judiciary at the regional and national
levels.
MINUSTAH should focus its resources and efforts
on supporting the Government of Haiti in meeting
its obligations to improve the political and security
situation in the country. That means getting the
configuration of troops and police right. Therefore,
while we recognize the positive results of the additional
work undertaken by the Mission’s engineering teams
in supporting quick-impact projects, including road
repair, well drilling, draining and canal cleaning, water
distribution and the erection of prefabricated units, we
believe that those tasks should now be handed over to
others — where possible, the local private sector. Where
national actors do not yet have the capacity to take on
those tasks, all elements of the United Nations system
in Haiti need to work together to build that capacity.
We believe that MINUSTAH’s continued presence
in Haiti remains necessary for now. However, we
support the reconfiguration of resources set out in the
consolidation plan for 2013-2016, and are encouraged
to see that the withdrawal of military peacekeepers
has not been detrimental to the security situation
in the areas that have been vacated. We support the
recommendation to continue, as the situation allows, a
balanced withdrawal of troops. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to explore the option of a
transition to a smaller, more focused assistance mission
by 2016, and look forward to hearing more about his
proposal. Any significant change to the Mission’s
configuration should come with credible benchmarks
to ensure that the Haitian Government has the support
and capacity to shoulder increasing responsibility.
The United Nations presence in Haiti must
adapt to the changing circumstances and challenges.
12

Challenges will continue, but will be increasingly
related to governance and economic development. The
nature of the United Nations presence should adjust
accordingly, shifting the balance from peacekeeping
to development assistance. The Secretary-General’s
report and its recommendations provide a good basis
for that transition.
MINUSTAH has made some progress over the
past 12 months, and we thank all those who have
contributed. Looking forward, efforts should focus on
further improving the security situation and helping to
break the political deadlock, building the conditions for
stability, development and growth. MINUSTAH must
ensure that the burden of progress is shared with the
Government and other partners, and, where appropriate,
transferred to them. In June, the United Kingdom
opened its first Embassy in Port-au-Prince since 1966,
a visible symbol to the Government of Haiti of British
support for it on the road to the stability and prosperity
that it and its people sorely need and deserve.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to welcome you here and thank you for
presiding over the Council this morning, Mr. President.
I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome to
New York the new Ambassador of China and to wish
him every success in carrying out his duties.
I would first like to once again congratulate
Ms. Sandra Honoré on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti and to
reiterate my country’s full support for her in her new
job. I would also like to thank her for her presentation
of the semi-annual report (S/2013/493) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
My statement will focus on the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of the current situation in Haiti.
The political situation remains worrying, due to
the recurring difficulties encountered by the Haitian
political class in finding solutions to institutional
problems and in working steadfastly to improve their
country’s governance. Indeed, we are sorry to see that
due to various differences, there have been delays
in organizing the senatorial, municipal and local
elections, despite the political agreement on 19 April
that established the transitional Electoral Council
and despite the willingness of all Haitian political
stakeholders to see the elections held before the end
of 2013. It is crucial that those elections, which have
been delayed for two years, be held this year in order
to ensure political stability, prevent any dysfunction of
13-45967

S/PV.7024

the country’s institutions and put legitimately elected
representatives in charge of the State. In that regard,
we welcome the establishment of the joint GovernmentMINUSTAH-United Nations task force responsible for
speeding up the preparation and organization of the
elections. We hope that it will bring a speedy end to the
delays in approving the electoral law, which is an crucial
component of the electoral machine. In that regard,
we note that, as Ms. Honoré said, President Martelly
brought such an electoral law before Parliament
yesterday.
In the area of security, Togo is pleased with the
general calm and stability in Haiti. There is no question
that the security sector is the most concrete example
not only of the country’s progress with reconstruction
and stabilization but in particular of the effectiveness
that local populations have the right to expect from
the cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
authorities. As the report indicates, political acts of
violence have visibly decreased, as has the percentage
of crimes such as murders, rapes and kidnappings. That
continuing improvement in the security climate has
been made possible by the continued efforts of Haitian
leaders, in cooperation with MINUSTAH, to strengthen,
train and equip Haitian National Police personnel.
Regular police operations, alone or in cooperation
with MINUSTAH units, have enabled them to break
up many gangs, prevent their criminal activity and
substantially reduce criminality and insecurity in the
country. Togo urges the Haitian authorities to continue
to expand the police force throughout the country and
to strengthen its operational capacity. We also call on
Haiti’s partners to continue to support it in making up
the deficit in financing the 2012-2016 development plan
for the National Police and enabling it to achieve all the
goals of the plan, particularly increasing the number of
police officers over the next two years.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, Togo notes
that significant progress has been made, especially
in resettling displaced persons and with regard to
sanitation measures. As the Secretary-General’s
report indicates, thanks to financial contributions
from the international community, more than 34,000
internally displaced persons have been resettled and
33 sites closed. Such significant efforts, however, are
counterbalanced by the need for aid, which remains
huge. The gradual withdrawal of humanitarian agencies
is making living conditions in the camps — where
a large number of internally displaced people are
still housed — increasingly precarious. Togo is also

concerned about the cases of famine and malnutrition,
which have been exacerbated in part because of the
vagaries of the climate. On top of that, the persisting
cases of cholera in weather particularly conducive to its
spread leads to fears of a resurgence of the epidemic if
the appropriate measures are not taken to suppress it,
particularly in the area of water treatment and sanitation.
My country urges the international community to
continue to stand by the Haitian authorities in order to
help them eradicate that scourge once and for all.
Togo believes that, despite the problems presented
by political misunderstandings and the threats due
to unstable weather and the cholera epidemic, Haiti’s
overall situation continues to improve, due to the joint
efforts of the Haitian Government, MINUSTAH and
other international organizations, which have helped to
gradually establish encouraging conditions for security,
stability and macro-economic performance.
I would like to conclude by commending the major
role that MINUSTAH continues to play in Haiti through
its involvement in programmes of reconstruction, the
maintenance of security and building the rule of law.
One of the Mission’s most remarkable efforts has been
in protecting vulnerable groups, particularly through
its fight against sexual and gender-based violence
and impunity for serious human-rights violations. We
support MINUSTAH’s announced restructuring and
urge the Haitian authorities to continue to take on the
process of restoring and developing their country so
that the Mission’s disengagement will not weaken the
Haitian State.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your participation in presiding
over the Security Council at today’s meeting, Sir,
thereby demonstrating the importance of the situation
in Haiti for the Latin American region. I would also like
to congratulate Ms. Sandra Honoré on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti and to wish her every success in her work.
We have recently seen signs of stabilization in Haiti,
and the country’s authorities have made significant
efforts, including in implementing the Government’s
programmes for improving jobs, education, the
environment, energy and the rule of law, as well as
with projects for improving the country’s investment
climate. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
guarantee security and provide assistance in the country’s
reconstruction, in accordance with its mandate as laid

13-4596713

S/PV.7024

down by the Security Council. It would be difficult to
overestimate the Mission’s long-term contribution to
improving the situation in Haiti. That said, in principle
we support the Secretary-General’s proposal for the
need to gradually draw down MINUSTAH. At the
same time, any reconfiguration must be approached
carefully, as reaffirmed by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2013/493), with regard to the real
possibility of new security risks developing during the
electoral period. That must be taken into account.
In discussing the possible reconfiguration of the
Mission we must be primarily guided by the actual
situation in the country. It is unfortunate that the
political process in Haiti remains unsustainable and
that the ongoing high level of political rhetoric has
prevented the resolution of the conflicts between the
executive branch and the Parliament. The holding of
partial senatorial and local elections by the end of the
year remains an ongoing question, therefore a matter
of continuing concern. My delegation hopes that the
Government will continue its effort to establish a
national dialogue and to hold elections this year.
One of MINUSTAH’s most important tasks is to
train the Haitian National Police. We are satisfied that
the effort is moving forward according to plan and that
the crime situation is gradually improving.
MINUSTAH must continue to provide support to
Haiti to improve governance and respect for the rule
of law, with the aim of Haiti’s national forces finally
guaranteeing the country’s security.
The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
remains challenging. In that regard, the increased active
engagement of United Nations agencies, programmes
and peacekeeping architecture and coordination among
donors aimed at rebuilding the country is important.
It is of concern that, despite broad international
effort, cholera has not yet been eradicated and the
number of cases remains high. In that respect, we note
MINUSTAH’s effort to combat the illness.
My country fully supports the proposals of the
Secretary-General to consolidate the Mission and its
transformation into a smaller mission with a narrower
mandate. In that context, we await with interest his
ideas in his next report.
Nevertheless, such a proposal must be approached
only in the presence of sufficiently stable country
conditions. To achieve that, all conflict among the

14

national authorities must cease. The establishment
of viable and fully staffed Government and national
security entities must be completed and the situation
of internally displaced persons, and the humanitarian
situation in general, must be markedly improved.
The current situation in the country demonstrates
that the Haitian authorities and the international
community, led by the United Nations, still face many
complex tasks. A leading role in addressing those tasks
must be played by the Government of Haiti, which bears
the responsibility to use the international community’s
assistance effectively and to participate in coordinating
the assistance.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, let me join the others in welcoming to the
Council Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I thank Ms. Honoré for her
comprehensive briefing.
First, it is encouraging to note that the overall
security situation in Haiti has steadily improved.
Stability, although fragile, has gradually taken root
in Haitian society, thanks to the resilient efforts of
the Haitian people themselves and the dedication of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).
Notably important progress has been made in
police capacity-building. Its performance has been
improved and training of the Haitian National Police
has proceeded as planned. While international support
is still needed to ensure the successful completion of the
important task of police capacity-building, we believe
that the recent developments provided fresh impetus
to the Mission to move forward in its conditions-based
consolidation plan.
On the political process, however, my delegation is
deeply concerned over the ongoing political stalemate,
including continuing delays in senatorial, municipal and
local elections. Particularly, further delay in senatorial
elections threatens dysfunction of the Senate and, by
extension, the National Assembly, thereby creating an
institutional vacuum in the legislative branch. Such a
setback could not only erode confidence in the political
system, but could undermine the valuable progress
achieved so far. It is something we cannot afford.
We once again urge that fair, inclusive and
transparent elections be held before the end of the
year. To that end, we hope that political leaders will
demonstrate their firm determination to reach the
13-45967

S/PV.7024

necessary agreement and compromise as soon as
possible.
Continued attention is needed in terms of the
humanitarian situation in Haiti. While the establishment
of the interministerial commission on human rights
was a positive step forward, the situation on the ground
has not kept pace with expectations. Sexual violence
and gender-based crimes persist. Perpetrators often go
unpunished.
Even more disturbing is the fact that more than half
of the crimes committed against minors relate to sexual
violence. We raise an urgent call for a strengthened
police and judicial response to sexual violence. In that
regard, we express our strong support for MINUSTAH’s
efforts to raise awareness on those issues through
workshops and police training programmes.
Finally, on MINUSTAH, it should be noted that
the political landscape surrounding MINUSTAH has
evolved since the Mission was deployed, in 2004.
The recent developments, such as police capacity
improvement, an improved security situation and
overall stability, demand the reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH in its nature and scope.
In that regard, we appreciate that MINUSTAH’s
consolidation plan has proceeded without disruption
or setback. We support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for a 15 per cent reduction in the
Mission’s uniformed strength. However, we believe
that the adjustment process should proceed with great
prudence and in response to developments on the
ground. We also support the extension of the Mission’s
mandate for another year.
In conclusion, we appreciate the dynamism
provided by the Special Representative to the Mission
during this crucial period. We assure the Special
Representative of our strong support in undertaking her
important responsibilities.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the Argentine delegation for organizing
this debate on a topic of such importance to our region.
We value your personal participation in the meeting,
Mr. President. We also appreciate the presence of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra Honoré. We wish her
every success in her endeavour and have no doubt that
she will continue the excellent performance of her
predecessors. We also thank the Secretary-General

for his report (S/2013/493), which forms the basis of
today’s debate. And we extend a warm welcome to our
new colleagues, namely, Ambassador Denis Regis of
Haiti and Ambassador Liu Jieyi of China.
In the current phase of evolution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
we find encouraging indicators, as well as risks that
could destabilize the real, but fragile, progress made
in Haiti. That is why, in order to maintain the positive
momentum, Haiti must continue occupying a privileged
place on the international agenda, including that of the
Council.
More specifically, I would like to first refer to the
holding of local, municipal and legislative elections. On
28 January, the Council underscored the importance
of Haiti holding elections before the end of the year.
Meeting that commitment in a timely manner is of
fundamental importance for both the democratization
process and stabilization process, both of which are
central elements in MINUSTAH’s mandate.
Although some steps have been taken towards
holding the elections, including that taken yesterday by
President Martelly by submitting a draft electoral law
to Parliament, those measures appear to be insufficient.
There is a delay of almost 18 months, and we still do not
have a precise timeline on the horizon. That is extremely
worrying, since it relates to fundamental aspects of the
Haitian constitutional system. Preserving the integrity
of the electoral process is crucial for the legitimacy of
the Government, the future stability of Haiti and the
development of Haitian society. For those reasons, we
trust that the electoral framework will promptly be
approved.
Secondly, we continue to believe that it is necessary
to define a governance pact that will foster a climate
that is conducive for transparent, democratic and
participatory management of public affairs. Without an
understanding among Haitians that puts a true national
accord into place, it is difficult to imagine that the
present political impasse can be overcome.
Thirdly, I wish to refer to the reform of the Haitian
National Police (HNP), which tends to be the main
criterion against which MINUSTAH’s performance
is measured. Maintaining the operational capacities
of the HNP is certainly essential to developing the
institutions necessary for strengthening the rule of law.
However, the professionalization of the police force is
not enough by itself. The judicial system also needs to

13-4596715

S/PV.7024

be strengthened. We acknowledge that some promising
steps in that regard have been taken.
Fourthly, the upcoming mandate renewal is a
unique opportunity to carefully consider the priorities
and critical tasks of the Mission. We continue to
examine the consolidation plan of MINUSTAH and
reiterate that the Mission’s evolution must be flexible
and adapted to the realities on the ground. From the
report of the Secretary General (S/2013/493), we gather
that the Mission has considerable work from now until
2016, including the task of fulfilling specific targets
related to the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and the preparation for presidential elections. While the
current consolidation plan remains in place and while
we have no certainty as to the logistical requirements
for the elections, we trust that any further reduction in
the capacity of the forces assigned to the Mission would
be based on objective criteria, and that such a reduction
would be applied in a gradual and progressive manner.
Fifthly, the level of security personnel has remained
relatively stable since 2004, now that the abrupt increase
provoked after the earthquake has drawn down.
That is an explicit acknowledgment by the Security
Council that long-term stability can be achieved
only if individual rights are protected and collective
threats to more vulnerable populations are eliminated.
Experience has shown us that the United Nations must
maintain an adequate level of presence in Haiti, both
through MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team. Our withdrawal from the country must therefore
be responsible to ensure that, when that time comes, the
Mission will never have to return.
At the same time, it should be recalled that the
crux of the instability problems facing Haiti does not
have a military solution alone. We must seek out the
root causes of instability, poverty, unemployment
and social inequality. For that reason, we believe that
the socioeconomic dimension cannot be overlooked.
The Government of Haiti, both the executive and
the legislative branches, as well as the international
community, must all demonstrate that they have the
political will and ability to combat extreme poverty and
to improve the socioeconomic conditions prevailing in
Haiti.
As we can observe, the architecture of the
international support has changed. It now reflects the
transition from a crisis phase to that of fashioning the
institutional mechanisms that allow for the assistance
provided for development to be adapted to Haiti’s
16

national priorities. In the humanitarian context, it is
correct to acknowledge that, after long delays, today
almost 82 per cent of the 1.5 million persons displaced
after the earthquake have returned to their homes or
have been relocated. The situation of those displaced by
the catastrophe three years ago needs to be regularized.
With the oncoming hurricane season, the situation is of
particular importance and we need to support the 2013
humanitarian action plan.
Now and in the future, we face challenges in
the maintenance of peace and security in Haiti in
order to guarantee the continuity of an irreversible
stabilization process. Guatemala is honoured to have
been part of MINUSTAH since its inception. We will
remain committed to both Haiti and to the United
Nations peacekeeping operation as long as it is deemed
necessary. We hope that by acting jointly we can give
back to Haiti the future that Haitians deserve.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the Defence Minister of
Argentina, Mr. Rossi, to the Council to preside over
today’s meeting. I thank you, Sir, and other colleagues
for the words of welcome extended to me. I look forward
to close cooperation with all colleagues in the future in
our joint efforts to advance the work of the Security
Council. China also thanks Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Honoré for her briefing on the
situation in Haiti.
The Haitian situation has continued to register good
progress. The Government has been making vigorous
efforts in implementing policies on employment,
education, the environment, energy and the rule of law, as
well as in enhancing its capacity-building. Remarkable
progress has been achieved in reconstruction after the
2010 earthquake. China welcomes those developments.
At the same time Haiti still faces challenges
in its political process, economic development and
the humanitarian situation. Peaceful reconstruction
remains an arduous task that requires the continuing
support and assistance of the international community.
I would like to focus on the following three points.
First, I should like to refer to the continuation of
the consolidation of a democratic stabilization process
in Haiti. We hope that all the relevant Haitian parties
will put the interests of the nation and the people first,
enhance their dialogue and political consultations,
achieve proper solutions of disputes, promptly reach
consensus on senatorial and local Government elections

13-45967

S/PV.7024

and further promote the Haitian democratic process
and political reconciliation.
Secondly, MINUSTAH should to continue to
advance the economic development and reconstruction
of Haiti. We call on the international community
to effectively honour its pledges of aid to Haiti and
be constructively engaged in the country’s national
reconstruction.
The cholera situation in Haiti remains grim. China
supports the Secretary-General’s initiative, announced
in February, to eradicate cholera in the country. We call
on Member States to continue to provide resources and
technical support in that regard.
Thirdly, MINUSTAH should continue to play the
important role of the United Nations in Haiti. China
appreciates the efforts and contributions by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré
and MINUSTAH for the maintenance of peace and
stability in Haiti. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation on a continued reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH and the extension of its mandate for an
additional year.
China hopes that MINUSTAH will continue to
implement Security Council mandates, help maintain
security and stability in Haiti, promote the political
process and strengthen the rule of law and the
capacity-building of Government institutions. In that
reconfiguration process, MINUSTAH would be well
advised to extensively heed the views of all sides and
proceed in a steady manner.
Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Honoré, for her statement.
The Argentine Minister of Defence’s presence in the
Council shows the importance that the Argentine
presidency attaches to the issue of Haiti.
France would like to associate itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union, as well as the statement to be made by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. I shall focus my statement on two
topics, which are at the heart of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
namely, the preparations for the elections and the
reform of the Haitian National Police.
We are of course concerned by the cumulative
delays in the organization of the electoral process,

and we welcome the establishment, on 19 April, of the
transitional College of the Permanent Electoral Council.
We regret that this measure, which was expected since
the end of last year, has remained for such a long time
without any further action due to a lack of an electoral
law and constructive political dialogue. Democracy
is fuelled by elections, and those elections, under the
terms of the press statement that the Security Council
adopted on 28 January, must be free, inclusive and
credible. The elections must also be carried out in line
with an electoral time line that is clear and stable. The
regularity of elections of course is a sign of the health
of a democracy. Partial legislative and local elections
have been delayed for too long, while other deadlines
are soon approaching. It is therefore essential that the
elections are held immediately.
We note with appreciation the information provided
by the Secretary-General on the strengthening of
the Haitian National Police. The reduction in certain
criminal acts and the presence of the police on an
increasingly larger territory in Haiti can be taken as
positive signs. We also note the quality of cooperation
between the Haitian National Police force and the
police component of MINUSTAH. We noted, and
I think it is very encouraging, that there is a lack of
increase in violence in departments where the military
component of MINUSTAH has withdrawn. Of course,
much remains to be done.
The national development plan for the Haitian
National Police foresees an increase from 10,000
to 15,000 officers by 2016, while the report of the
Secretary-General underscores the difficulties that
jeopardize the achievement of the goals of that plan.
MINUSTAH must therefore remain committed in the
collective effort to contribute to maintaining public
order, but also contribute to the national ownership
of the major instrument of the rule of law that a
professional police force represents.
With regard to the rule of law, we welcome the
signing of the decree that created the interministerial
commission on human rights in Haiti, on
13 May. However, we remain as troubled others are
by the persistent elements that call into question the
independence and effective functioning of the justice
system. In the area of human rights, we encourage the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH to integrate
the advice and assistance supplied by the independent
expert appointed by the Human Rights Council.

13-4596717

S/PV.7024

We support the commitment of the United Nations
and the personal efforts of the Secretary-General
to assist Haiti in eradicating cholera. We consider
it to be an attainable goal, and we encourage as a
priority targeted interventions to be taken at active
infection sites, as well as better coordination between
epidemiological services and field activities. It is also
necessary to pursue a sustainable policy for access to
water and sanitation.
The consolidation of MINUSTAH continues
according to the plan agreed by the international
community and the Haitian Government. The Mission
should continue to adapt to the evolving situation, both
in scope and in quality. We favourably welcome the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to renew the
mandate of the Mission, while pursuing its reduction by
15 per cent through a reduction of the military personnel,
specifically the engineering contingents, in order to
enable the development of a local entrepreneurial fabric.
We also urge — and this is a phrase that the Council has
often heard in this debate — the preservation of the
capacity of the Blue Helmets to communicate with the
population in French.
Finally, we note with satisfaction the prospect that
was suggested by the Secretary-General to undertake
important consideration of the post-2016 period. The
transformation of MINUSTAH must not be taboo; its
possibility should be a catalyst. We must create the
conditions for its success in the framework of a credible
time line. And we must consider the presence of the
United Nations after that deadline.
I would like to conclude by again commending
the staff of MINUSTAH for their dedication and the
Special Representative for her dynamic action in the
Mission’s transitional period. I would also like to pay
tribute to Mr. Nigel Fisher for the work that he carried
out as interim Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
On behalf of the Government of Argentina, I wish
to welcome the appointment of Ambassador Sandra
Honoré, while also highlighting the fact that she is the
first woman to be appointed Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

18

I again reaffirm the commitment and the firm
will of Argentina to support the people of Haiti. The
cooperation of our country has always adapted to the
needs stated by the Government of Haiti and the real
challenges on the ground in that country. The presence
of Argentina is characterized by strong emphasis on the
consolidation of Haitian institutions, respect for human
rights and the people’s full enjoyment of democracy.
That commitment is based on several pillars, but
essentially on a vision of South-South cooperation
through a considerable effort in human and financial
terms in more than 200 projects, which are not based
on assistance and which have as a central focus the
development of capacity among Haitians themselves. It
is only in that way that we can ensure true sustainability
to support the development of our brother country.
In that context, we mention as an example the
market garden programme Pro Huerta, which has meant
investment in technical assessment and agricultural
supplies, both of which essentially make it possible
for Haitians to generate their own productive capacity.
That does not mean that we are neglecting essential
emergency needs. We have demonstrated that in actions
such as support for the national programme for school
canteens, in response to the specific needs of Haitian
authorities for food donations, while at the same time
cooperating with the project itself.
Argentina’s commitment is also reflected in the
broader context of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, which has resolved to continue
making efforts to cooperate with the Government of
Haiti. I wish to highlight the activities of the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR), which committed
funds to rehabilitate the public hospital in Corail, in
the southernmost area of Haiti. That hospital bears the
name of President Néstor Kirchner, the first SecretaryGeneral of UNASUR. Measuring more than 1,200
square metres, it was inaugurated in June 2013. Together
with coordination efforts for health care between
the Governments of Cuba, Venezuela and Haiti, this
initiative resulted in the repair and expansion of the
community hospital. We believe that it is essential to
respond to the social and economic development needs
of the Haitian people and to strengthen institutions in
that country.
We note with satisfaction, therefore, new signs
of progress in Haiti, thanks to the efforts of its
Government, international assistance and the United

13-45967

S/PV.7024

Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in particular
the establishment of the transitional Electoral Council.
The decision taken yesterday by the President of Haiti
to send to the legislature an electoral time line was
auspicious. We are convinced that, with functioning
institutions that can ensure democracy, Haiti’s problems
would be resolved faster. There should be no reduction
in the number of democratic institutions for the Haitian
people.
A reduction in the number of displaced people
living in camps, after the relocation of more than
34,000 people, has brought about an 82 per cent decline
in internally displaced persons between 2010 and
2013. However, we are concerned about the decline in
international assistance and lapses in basic services,
especially drinking water, which is crucial in order to
overcome the spread of cholera.
On efforts by the Haitian Government to promote
development and institutional stability, especially the
“five Es” programme, we would like to point to the
establishment of institutions linked to the rule of law,
especially programmes to strengthen justice, municipal
administration and civic participation. I would like
also to highlight positive developments in the judiciary
with reference to several long-standing cases of severe
violations of human rights.
There has been progress in the strategic
development plan in accordance with the priorities for
economic and social development established by the
Government of the Republic of Haiti. Haiti has also
played a remarkable role as the temporary chair of the
Caribbean Community and Common Market.
We appeal for the continued efforts of Haitian
political actors to reach consensus, which could lead to
the long-postponed elections, thereby overcoming the
political impasse.
During this period, the security situation has
shown relative stability, with some clear indications of
a drop in crime rates. From that point of view, we can
highlight that MINUSTAH has reached its objective of
creating a secure and stable environment, but it remains
to be seen if that will be sustainable.
The Haitian National Police has shown significant
progress, both in the number and training of cadets. We
applaud the fact that, by November, the Haitian police
force will be over 11,200 strong. However, we stress
the need to be cautious when subcontracting civilian
personnel to fulfil security roles. In such cases, the

responsibility of ensuring competence always lies
with the State. As a result, the efforts of countries
that are members of the Mission should from now on
be focused on specific actions aimed at developing a
training programme for Haitian security forces, thereby
strengthening the Haitian National Police, which is key
when it comes to the process of genuinely reducing
the number of personnel in MINUSTAH. A gradual
and orderly transfer of the responsibility for ensuring
security to the Haitian authorities must be achieved.
Continuing with the current trend of progress in
security and gradually strengthening the capacity of
the Haitian National Police are complex variables on
which compliance with the guidelines established
by the Mission consolidation plan depend to a great
degree. If the conditions of those two variables are not
met, we run the risk of a vicious cycle, which could
extend the presence of MINUSTAH, with a further risk
of the situation deteriorating.
Argentina supports the continued presence of
MINUSTAH, as long as it is required by local authorities
and is justified by the prevailing security situation and
the requirements for reconstruction. For that reason, we
wish to highlight that our country supports the Mission
consolidation plan for 2013-2016, and we share the
objectives to reduce MINUSTAH forces in accordance
with the proposal in the plan, based on improvements
in capacity-building among the police, the development
of electoral capacity, the rule of law, human rights
and good governance. In that sense, we understand
that all missions need to have time tables and dates,
but a day on a calendar does not always represent the
whole day. A day on a calendar is just a number on the
calendar. Bearing in mind that it might be cloudy, or
there are chances of storms or rain, let such days serve
as a warning, The forecast for the day might be rain,
showers or even storms, but that forecast might also be
sunny, with clear skies. We believe and are convinced
that MINUSTAH should not only set a date but also a
forecast and that forecast should be one when the sun
starts coming out for the entire people of Haiti, a sun
that represents hope, ensures sustainable development,
harmonious development with respect for institutions,
economic development and the full and legitimate
enjoyment of democracy.
Beyond our bilateral commitment towards Haiti
and the efforts Argentina is promoting through regional
organizations such as UNASUR, I wish to remind
everyone that our commitment is also demonstrated

13-4596719

S/PV.7024

by the presence of more than 572 personnel, 38 of
whom are women. Since 2004, when MINUSTAH was
established, Argentina, through its armed forces, has
mobilized more than 12,000 personnel who have been
present in various contingents within Haiti. In that
military component, we wish to highlight the existence
of the field hospital, which is a resource for health care
and hospital assistance for the entire United Nations
contingent, and highly valued by the entire mission.
Lastly, I wish to conclude by highlighting
Argentina’s interest in continuing to participate in the
efforts of the international community in the interest of
peace and security. In that context, I wish to highlight a
particular commitment we naturally have in our region
of Latin America and the Caribbean. For us, Haiti is
part of our region. My presence here today is intended to
demonstrate the special interest we, as Argentina, have
in the region, with all of our mechanisms of integration.
I hope that Haiti will find its path as an autonomous
nation, one in which it can deploy its full potential. We
are doubly committed to the United Nations through
the Security Council because of what the Stabilization
Mission means, and we are also committed as Latin
American brethren.
To conclude, I wish to briefly refer to something
I believe is important when it comes to the spirit that
should guide us through this mission in Haiti.
Fifty years ago today, not far from here, in
Washington, D.C., on 28 August 1963, Martin Luther
King, Jr., gave that memorable speech where he spoke
about his dream. “I have a dream” are the words he
used. To conclude, I would like to read a very short part
of that speech.
“I have a dream that one day every valley shall
be exalted, every hill and mountain shall be made
low, the rough places will be made plain, and the
crooked places will be made straight, and the glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
it together.”
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would like,
first of all, to extend my warmest congratulations, on
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Haiti, to the
Ambassador of Argentina, Her Excellency Mrs. María
Cristina Perceval, who is presiding over the Security

20

Council for the month of August. I would like to reiterate
the profound gratitude of the authorities of my country
and myself for taking the initiative to convene today’s
debate on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the eve of the expiration
of its mandate, as provided for in resolution 2070
(2012), of 12 October 2012. My Government expresses
its sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his balanced and detailed report (S/2013/493), which
touches upon many aspects of the political, economic,
financial, health and security situation in Haiti. The
Haitian Government supports the observations and
recommendations contained in the report, in particular
the extension of MINUSTAH’s mandate for another
year.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for the high quality of her briefing
and the relevance of her comments. I extend to her my
best wishes for success as she takes on her mission in
Haiti.
The Haitian delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
whose comments and expressed concerns strongly
coincide with the views and concerns of President
Michel Joseph Martelly, Prime Minister Laurent
Salvador Lamothe and the entire Government. I would
also like to thank the members of the Security Council
for their moderation, their reserve and the sense of
proportion that they have shown in assessing the facts
and events in my country.
I have the privilege today to make the following
comments before the Security Council, which is playing
such an essential and indispensable role in the future
of our world, and before Ambassadors who embody
the mind to such a high degree and who contribute
unceasingly and with talent to the standing of the
Organization and the pursuit of its noble objectives.
The Republic of Haiti, as is well known,
is experiencing a very particular time which is
undoubtedly decisive in its history. It seeks to strengthen
its democratic institutions, while working relentlessly
after so many lost decades to re-establish growth and
finally commit to a path where the economy takes off
and development is sustainable. Directly in line with its
efforts to strengthen and see to the good functioning
of the Republic’s institutions, the President solemnly
invited, on 14 August, the transitional College of the
Permanent Electoral Council to take all necessary
13-45967

S/PV.7024

measures in order to organize partial senatorial and
local elections no later than December 2013. Yesterday,
Tuesday, the executive power, through the Minister of
Justice and Public Safety, submitted the draft electoral
law governing the elections to the Chamber of Deputies.
Over the past two years, significant advances and
notable and indisputable progress, underscored almost
unanimously by observers in good faith and by the
Secretary-General in his report, have been made in
all areas — institutional, socioeconomic, cultural and
security. However, the task is immense, the challenges
are great and the obstacles are formidable. That is why
we attach a particular value to understanding, solidarity
and cooperation with the international community, and
primarily the United Nations.
In addition, while welcoming the fact that Haiti, in
the view of the Security Council, no longer constitutes
a threat or a danger to international peace and security
in the region, we believe that it is necessary to launch
and deepen consideration of the post-MINUSTAH
period with responsible partners through discussions
that are calm and without preconceptions. As has been
emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report, voices
are being raised in the country to call into question the
presence of MINUSTAH. It would be desirable that all
possible scenarios for disengagement be considered in
order to avoid a repetition of history.
The historic and unique ties that exist between
Haiti and the United Nations are more relevant than
ever. Haiti is an original member of the Organization
which, from the very first cooperation mission of the
Economic and Social Council pursuant to resolution 51
(IV), of 26 March 1947, has brought unceasing support
to us in our development efforts. In that regard, Haiti
can be proud to have a special and unique relationship
with the United Nations. The time has therefore come
to work to expand and redefine, as is clearly necessary,
that cooperation, which of course has proven itself, so
that it can be given a new impetus and a new dynamism
and so that it can be better able to meet the needs of
the times and more coherent with respect to national
priorities. In that regard, I am certain that I can count
on the nobility of the Council’s views and its attachment
to the Republic of Haiti, whose stability, development
and progress it has always particularly valued.
I would like to convey to the Council the willingness
of the Haitian Government, in solidarity with the ideals,
principles and objectives defined by the Charter of the
United Nations, to work tirelessly with the Council for

international peace and security, development and the
promotion and protection of human rights and political,
economic, social and cultural rights. In that regard,
in addition to ongoing efforts in the country to build
the rule of law, which is inseparable from promoting
respect for differences despite disagreements, the
Government of Haiti has reached a new milestone in its
commitment to the pre-eminent dignity of the human
person. On 16 August, here at the United Nations,
Haiti signed the 1984 Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly on
10 December 1984.
In that spirit, the Government of Haiti will
continue to support the efforts of the Organization and
the personal efforts of its representatives and staff to
promote human rights in all their dimensions, which
is a very real exercise in universal solidarity, tolerance
and respect for cultural identities. These are all values​​
that have never been more relevant to and necessary for
the building of a national and international order that is
more just, more human and more fraternal, an order to
which humankind has aspired since 1945.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General,
which is balanced and, overall, in line with the previous
report (S/2013/139). It reports the facts, highlights
the efforts of the Haitian authorities to strengthen
political, economic and security governance and lists
the existing limits and shortcomings in terms of what
remains to be done. I reiterate, on behalf of my country
and its Government, my faith in the many United
Nations initiatives, both in Haiti and elsewhere, to
resolve and overcome conflict, reduce poverty, promote
development and bring people together.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru,
the United States and my country, Uruguay. I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President and Minister of
Defence of the Argentine Republic, and your delegation
for holding this debate to discuss the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/493) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

13-4596721

S/PV.7024

for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and her intensive work during
her few first months in Haiti.
The Group of Friends notes the progress achieved
in Haiti since the previous reporting period in key areas
for Haiti’s development such as employment, education,
the environment, energy and the rule of law, which are
the Government’s five policy priorities, known as the
“five Es”.
The Group also notes with satisfaction that, during
the reporting period, the levels of civil unrest and major
crimes, in particular homicides and kidnappings, have
decreased. The significant decrease in the number of
people displaced by the 2010 earthquake is another
encouraging trend. However, the Group would like
to underscore the fact that Haiti continues to face
significant humanitarian challenges, especially with
respect to women and children, with over 279,000
internally displaced persons still dependent on
humanitarian assistance for their basic survival and
extremely vulnerable to natural disasters.
The ongoing cholera epidemic is a major concern
for the Group of Friends. In that regard, we highlight
the importance of redoubling the efforts by the United
Nations and the broader international community
to assist the Haitian Government in preventing and
treating the disease and to achieve crucial structural
improvements in Haiti’s water and sanitation sector. To
that end, it is urgent and critical to fund the national plan
for the elimination of cholera in a sustainable manner
and to seize any opportunity to reduce the threat posed
by that disease by means of targeted actions.

in Haiti work cooperatively and constructively towards
a resolution of that matter.
The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti remained relatively stable during the
reporting period. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
continue its drawdown in accordance with its conditionsbased consolidation plan without undermining the
security and stability of Haiti.
The Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes
MINUSTAH’s critical role in ensuring stability and
security in Haiti and commends MINUSTAH for
continuing to assist the Government of Haiti in ensuring
a secure and stable environment.
The Group of Friends notes the commitment by
the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of law
and to make further progress in security sector reform.
In that respect, the Group would like to highlight the
critical role of the Haitian National Police (HNP)
in Haiti’s security and stability, and to stress the
importance of completing the ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the Haitian National
Police so that it can assume full responsibility for
Haiti’s security. In that regard, the Group notes the
progress made in the implementation of the five-year
Haitian National Police development plan 2012-2016
and reiterates the importance of maintaining support
for the plan.

On the political front, the Group of Friends notes the
establishment of the transitional Electoral Council, an
important step towards the holding of the long-overdue
partial legislative, municipal and local elections. The
Group notes, however, that preparations for the elections
are still experiencing significant delays, including
the pending approval of the electoral law. The Group
calls on the Haitian Government and all the relevant
stakeholders to redouble their efforts to allow those
elections to take place in 2013 in a transparent, fair
and credible manner, which will strengthen democratic
institutions.

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
development and stability are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore underscore the need
to address the issues of unemployment, education,
the delivery of basic social services and ensuring
women’s economic and political empowerment. At
the same time, the Group stresses that there can be no
genuine stability or sustainable development in Haiti
without strengthening democratic institutions and a
credible democratic process. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law by strengthening Haitian institutions, including
an independent judiciary, and reaffirms MINUSTAH’s
responsibility for supporting the Haitian State in the
areas of democratic governance, the expansion of the
State’s authority and the promotion and protection of
human rights, in accordance with its mandate.

With regard tp the differing interpretations of when
the term of the second of the three groups of senators
will expire, it is important that all political stakeholders

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates the
importance of respecting the zero-tolerance policy
against sexual exploitation and abuse. It expects all

22

13-45967

S/PV.7024

United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct and urges all the actors involved to
make every effort and to shoulder their responsibilities
in order to prevent cases of misconduct, investigate
allegations and hold those responsible to account.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the Group of
Friends will exhaustively consider the recommendations
in the report in the next few days with the aim of making
a substantive and constructive contribution to the
discussions in the Security Council on MINUSTAH’s
mandate, so that the Mission can continue to discharge
its responsibilities and consolidate its presence.
The Group of Friends of Haiti would like to express
its support and gratitude to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts in
supporting the goals of recovery and stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): It is an honour to have His
Excellency Mr. Agustín Rossi, Minister of Defence of
the Argentine Republic, presiding over today’s debate
on a matter that is so important to our region and
our countries. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative Sandra Honoré and thank her for her
presentation. Brazil would like to reiterate its wishes
for her success in all her endeavours. And I appreciate
the contribution of the Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Ambassador Regis.
Today Haiti has an opportunity to consolidate
stability, to continue to pursue a number of initiatives
aimed at creating jobs, generating income and promoting
investment, and to strengthen its institutions. Its efforts
to establish an enhanced platform for coordinating
international cooperation, to allocate budgetary
resources to cover part of the costs of pending elections,
as well as its social programmes aimed at combating
poverty, are promising indications, among others,
of significant progress. We encourage our Haitian
partners to continue on that path towards development
with social justice.
We also reiterate our call to all friends of Haiti to
commit the resources necessary to help Haiti invest
in key development projects, including infrastructure.
Brazil is doing its part. We continue to cooperate with
the Haitian authorities in searching for partners willing
to complement the $40 million we have provided for
the construction of the Artibonite hydropower plant,
which would truly help to transform the country.

Unfortunately, not enough support from Governments
and international financial organizations has been
secured so far.
Development is not a purely economic concept. It
is also a political one, since development both benefits
from and strengthens democracy. In the case of Haiti
today, it is of paramount importance that all political
actors and parties engage constructively in a genuine
political dialogue in order to uphold democratic
consolidation, institution-building, national ownership,
human rights and the rule of law. Consolidating
democracy in Haiti is as crucial to its future as are
investment and infrastructure, agriculture and industry,
health and education.
The Security Council has called for pending
legislative and local elections to be held this year.
Brazil hopes that elections can be conducted as soon
as possible; otherwise Haiti runs the risk of having its
Parliament reduced to only a third of the current number
of seats, which could severely impair the political
role of the legislative branch, breaking the functional
symmetry of the three branches of Government. We
are confident that concrete steps are being taken in
that direction and urge all Haitian political actors to
promote inclusive dialogue to expedite the preparations.
President Martelly’s leadership is key to the process.
Brazil stands ready to support the democratic process
in Haiti and has already delivered on its pledge for
support for the upcoming electoral cycle.
Progress in the security situation continues to be
the main pillar of the consolidation plan of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We welcome the enhanced recruitment to the Haitian
National Police, the ongoing vetting process and the
increased joint operations between the Haitian National
Police and MINUSTAH. It is crucial that the Haitian
National Police absorb best practices and lessons
from MINUSTAH’s experience and benefit from the
Mission’s ability to provide conditions adequate to
a successful handover of security responsibilities in
critical areas.
We concur with the gradual, carefully planned
reduction of troop levels proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, attuned to the realities on the ground. The
Secretary-General is also right about the need to
assess, beyond the 2016 horizon, whether MINUSTAH
remains the most suitable configuration for the United
Nations presence in Haiti. Ensuring a balanced and
holistic consolidation strategy for MINUSTAH is

13-4596723

S/PV.7024

critical to Haiti’s long-term stability. As the Mission
reduces its military footprint, development assistance,
from both the United Nations and other actors, should
be scaled up. It is crucial to underline that need at this
juncture in the life of MINUSTAH because very often
as troops depart, development and humanitarian actors
and resources follow suit. We must not repeat that grave
error in Haiti. A future United Nations presence in Haiti
should be able to reverse that trend and should be based
on the broad consensus being developed in the Council
on the relationships between security and development,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and sustainable peace
and sound transitions, as set out in resolution 2086
(2013).
MINUSTAH’s experience has demonstrated the
potential of innovative approaches when combined with
the well-established structure of a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation. Tools such as quick-impact
projects and military engineers play a crucial role in
supporting core stabilization objectives. In that regard,
we welcome the broadened scope for community
violence reduction projects in support of initiatives
promoting the rule of law in Haiti. The successful
experience of legal aid offices supported through
community violence reduction projects in Haiti, which
are responsible for freeing hundreds from pre-trial
detention, demonstrates the wide-ranging potential
of such programmes, including from a human rights
perspective. We hope that all of those experiences
and best practices, rather than short-term financial
considerations, will form the basis of our evaluation of
future options next year.
The contribution of the United Nations in Haiti
and that of the international community will be
judged by its legacy. We remain committed to the
objective of ensuring that the stability gains secured
so far are sustainable. In other words, we must get this
transition right. A close working relationship between
the Mission and its counterparts in the Government
is key to avoiding substantial gaps in critical areas,
especially in security. As we have stated in the past,
the consolidation plan must be owned by the Haitian
leadership as a platform for taking over their primary
responsibilities in a sustainable manner.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil’s long-term
commitment and solidarity with Haiti, and also our
confidence in the Haitian people’s determination to
persevere and succeed in their quest for independence,
stability, democracy and prosperity.

24

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2013/493) and his recommendation that the
international community continue to support to that
fraternal country. I also appreciate the briefing by
Ms. Sandra Honoré on the situation on the ground
in Haiti, which is clearly of great importance to the
Council.
As the report indicates, the situation in Haiti has
made encouraging progress in the area of security and
strengthening the rule of law. It is clear that MINUSTAH
has played a key role in achieving that progress. In
close coordination with the Government, the Mission
has supported the institution-building of the Haitian
National Police, in order that it may eventually ensure
security in the country. The Mission also has promoted
projects to assist stabilization, dealing with important
matters such as the protection of vulnerable groups,
community violence reduction and the prevention of
gender-based violence.
Mexico recognizes the will of the Haitian
Government to make progress in those fundamental
areas in order to strengthen democracy and to lay a
firm foundation to foster economic development and
improve the situation of those who remain in the camps
for internally displaced persons.
It is necessary to redouble efforts in order that
those initiatives may produce tangible dividends for
Haitian society. In that sense, there is concern that
a possible postponement of partial elections could
produce and exacerbate political tensions and hinder
further progress on priority issues.
It is clear that MINUSTAH and the international
community are prepared to support the electoral process
and the priority initiatives defined by Haiti’s legislative
authorities, who have the final word in such matters.
I note that Mexico provides support to Haiti
through its electoral institutions, which help to
strengthen institutions and professionalize and
enhance the country’s electoral system. On 4 July,
Mexico’s Federal Electoral Institute and Electoral
Tribunal signed a cooperation agreement with Haiti’s
permanent Electoral Council concerning electoral
systems, voter registration, organization and logistics,

13-45967

S/PV.7024

the development of democratic political culture and
electoral voter education — which are all essential.
Along with the United Nations involvement in
promoting the democratic process, my delegation
emphasizes and reiterates the importance of the
relevance and presence of the Organization in Haiti
in promoting economic recovery strategies and
medium — and long-term projects to meet ongoing
needs in terms of humanitarian assistance, health, food
security and infrastructure.
In that regard, we support continuation of
quick-impact projects as well as the involvement
of MINUSTAH and the country team in vital areas
such as education, food and agriculture, which, if not
addressed, can lead to instability in the long run.
The report of the Secretary-General indicates
progress in implementing MINUSTAH’s consolidation
plan for 2013-2016, and suggests further reconfiguration
of the Mission, in view of a possible transition to a
different United Nations presence in Haiti. For the
transition to be successful, such evaluation must be
supported by both the institutional factors reflected in
the proposed indicators, as well as the actual conditions
prevailing on the ground. It is important not to neglect
unpredictable factors such as natural disasters, which
can trigger a loss of life and infrastructure, with
attendant social, political and economic consequences.
We also wish to emphasize the intrinsic link
between development, security and human rights as
a fundamental element in implementing measures to
ensure the restoration of stability and harmony in the
country.
Mexico considers essential the sustained presence
of MINUSTAH to consolidate the progress made
and to continue to support the Haitian Government
in addressing pending challenges. In that regard, the
Mexican Government reiterates its full support to the
Haitian Government.
Mexico reiterates its full support for the Mission
and highlights the contributions of its men and women
to improve the situation in Haiti.
My delegation also highlights the efforts of
the Haitian Government and reaffirms its strong
commitment to strengthening its institutions through
medium and long-term projects.
We hope that the Mission’s consolidation plan
will result in a successful transition process leading to

the eventual departure of MINUSTAH, once we have
reached the goals of stability and development in Haiti
and achieved the long-term goals.
The challenges of the immediate future are
arduous; only international solidarity will help to
overcome them. We reiterate our commitment to that
end so that the efforts of the Organization and, above
all, those made by the Haitian people over decades, will
be rewarded by democratic stability and the country’s
long-awaited development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries of Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, let me first commend the
outgoing interim Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, and thank him
for his excellent cooperation with the European Union
and its member States throughout the various positions
that he has held in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Honoré on
her appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, and to
wish her every success in carrying out her mandate.
The European Union shares the analysis of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/493) concerning the
political situation in Haiti. While we can recognize a
relative stabilization of the political context in the past
12 months, the situation nevertheless remains fragile
and is characterized by an uncooperative attitude
among the various institutional sectors, while the
enormous challenges Haiti still faces require a broad
national consensus.
The European Union fully shares the concerns of
the Secretary-General regarding the significant delays
that have accumulated in the electoral process vis-à-vis
the possibility of holding the next elections before the
end of 2013. The consolidation of democracy and the
rule of law in Haiti, as well as progress in the process
of reconstruction and economic recovery, require

13-4596725

S/PV.7024

strong democratic institutions that are able to operate
according to the constitutional rules.
The European Union encourages regularly in its
high-level political contacts with all parties concerned
to adopt a cooperative and responsible approach. It is
essential that the institutions concerned accelerate the
legislative and preparatory work to allow the elections
to be held as soon as possible. For its part, the European
Union contributes €4 million to the “basket fund”
managed by United Nations Development Programme
to organize the upcoming elections, and it has released
an additional €2 million to support the capacitybuilding of the future Permanent Electoral Council.
Delays in reforming the justice sector are another
source of concern. In the observations contained in the
conclusion of hit latest report, the Secretary-General
refers, inter alia, to the need to end the prevailing
climate of impunity.
The European Union welcomes the positive
results achieved by MINUSTAH in several areas of
its mandate, in particular with regard to advancing
the programme for strengthening the Haitian National
Police, significantly reducing crime as a result of
increased joint patrols with the Haitian National Police,
efforts to mitigate the most serious deficiencies in the
penal system, and improving the capacity of interim
municipal councils.
The European Union also notes progress in the
implementation of the four key objectives in the fields
of security, elections, the rule of law and governance,
related to the gradual reconfiguration of MINUSTAH.
It seems essential that Haiti’s international partners
continue to coordinate their efforts to support the
achievement of those objectives, with a view towards
achieve the normalization of the political and security
situation, as well as strengthening governance and the
rule of law.
The European Union welcomes the progressive
reduction in the number of internally displaced
persons still living in camps. The European Union is
nevertheless particularly concerned about the fate of
thousands of vulnerable families who are facing forced
evictions and who have no solution for decent housing,
a situation that puts them at risk of abuse. In a context
where many humanitarian assistance organizations
have decided to cease operations in Haiti, despite the
persistence of significant need, the European Union

26

continues to provide indispensable humanitarian aid
to internally displaced persons and victims of natural
disasters, while supporting resettlement in dignified
and decent conditions. With its humanitarian assistance,
the European Union also continues to support the fight
against cholera, which has become endemic with peak
periods during the rainy season.
With regard to development assistance, the
European Union, together with its members States,
is currently planning cooperation with Haiti for the
period 2014-2020. Haiti should benefit from a volume of
assistance at least equal to that of the previous period,
which confirms our ongoing commitment to continue
to work alongside Haiti.
Among other things, the European Union is
contemplating supporting the reform programme of
public Administration announced by the Prime Minister
in November 2012, including aspects related to reform
of the security sector. The rule of law, presented in
the report of the Secretary-General as fundamental
to the advancement of the country, and food security,
mentioned as one of the major humanitarian concerns,
should also be subject of our assistance. Negotiations
with the Government on the areas of intervention and
our future cooperation will take place this fall.
Advances in the area of democratic institutions
will not be sufficient to ensure stability and security
in Haiti while the current socioeconomic conditions
persist. Haiti is one of the most unequal countries in
the world, and extreme poverty affects most of the
population. If the data does not change, the security
situation will remain highly volatile.
In conclusion, the European Union shares the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for a
progressive reconfiguration of MINUSTAH. However,
that process must balance the momentum of the
progress that seems to be taking place in Haiti and
the continuing fragility of its institutions, in order to
avoid the significant advances in recent years being
undermined. The Haitian authorities must continue
to implement reforms to consolidate security and
democratic stabilization related to the progressive
transfer of powers from MINUSTAH. The next
test of that effort will be the holding of the electoral
process that has been delayed for nearly two years. The
European Union and its member States will continue to
be fully committed to support the Haitian authorities in
accomplishing that goal.

13-45967

S/PV.7024

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, I would like
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
presiding over this important debate. I would also like
to congratulate Ms. Sandra Honoré on assuming the
post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and I would like to thank her for her
comprehensive briefing today as well as her significant
contribution to the Mission. I also pay tribute to the
men and women of MINUSTAH for the commitment
and fortitude they have demonstrated under difficult
circumstances.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
MINUSTAH issued on 19 August (S/2013/493). As the
report mentions, we are very pleased to note that Haiti
has made progress. The Government of Haiti established
a transitional Electoral Council on 19 April and has been
advancing President Martelly’s Administration’s “five
Es” policy of employment, education, the environment,
energy and the establishment of the rule of law. With
regard to the recovery process, since the earthquake in
2010, more than 10 million cubic metres of debris, which
amounts to almost 80 per cent of the total debris, has
been removed. And the number of internally displaced
persons has been reduced by 82 per cent, according to
the Secretary-General’s report.
In recognition of that change on the ground, Japan
withdrew its ground Self-Defence Force’s engineering
unit in Haiti last December. The number of personnel
who have served in the Japanese contingent since
2010 totals approximately 2,200. In that regard, Japan
welcomes the MINUSTAH consolidation plan referred
to in the previous report (S/2013/139)of the SecretaryGeneral and the fact that the plan has been progressing
in cooperation with the Government of Haiti.
Haiti certainly continues to face many challenges.
As the Secretary-General’s report points out, continued
delays in the implementation of long-overdue elections
and strained relations between the executive and
legislative branches of the Government risk thwarting
progress in the stabilization process. Japan welcomes
the fact that Haiti established its transitional Electoral
Council in April, but more work will be needed for the
Government to carry out its next elections in a peaceful
and democratic manner.

Basic infrastructure in the country remains fragile.
In addition to the earthquake in 2010, Hurricane Sandy
last October brought significant damage to the country.
Although the international community responded right
after the hurricane, Haiti still needs to improve its basic
infrastructure, including roads, electricity and potable
water, as well as social services, including access to
education and medicine. High unemployment also
remains a big concern.
To respond to those important needs, the
Government of Japan has already disbursed more than
$150 million, exceeding the $100 million pledged in the
New York conference in 2010. Even after the withdrawal
of its Ground Self-Defense Force’s engineering unit,
Japan intends to continue supporting and cooperating
with Haiti. When the engineering unit left Haiti,
Japan donated engineering equipment to the Haitian
Government and contributed to human resources
development in the country through the sharing of
its expertise in the use of that equipment. Japan also
currently supports strengthening the capacity of national
authorities in the areas of debris management and the
operation of engineering equipment. The Government
of Japan will continue to provide support to Haiti as it
restores or establishes basic social services, mainly in
the fields of health, hygiene and education.
As you are aware, Mr. President, the Great East
Japan Earthquake struck our country in March 2011,
about a year after the significant earthquake that hit
Haiti. Like Haiti, Japan is a country where natural
disasters occur frequently; that is why Japan firmly
intends to continue collaborating with Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Argentina for having organized this
debate on Haiti. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, for her briefing and to assure her of Canada’s
continued support to her and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Canada has shared a partnership with Haiti for
decades and is one of the most generous donors to Haiti.
Since 2006, Canada has provided Haiti with more than
$1 billion in support to Haitian development priorities,
in particular with respect to economic growth, food
security and maternal and child health, through

13-4596727

S/PV.7024

Canada’s commitments undertaken in the framework
of the Group of Eight’s Muskoka initiative. Canada
has also provided substantial humanitarian assistance
to meet the immediate needs of the Haitian population
after the 2010 earthquake. In March of this year, we
responded to the 2013 consolidated appeal to help
provide life-saving humanitarian assistance, addressing
immediate needs in emergency food assistance, health
services, water provision, sanitation and cholera
prevention. Meanwhile, our development assistance
continues to help women and children gain access to
health facilities and enjoy a better quality of life. Their
well-being is essential to the successful development of
key Haitian institutions. Those are the kinds of results
we want to continue seeing in Haiti.
Through our stabilization and reconstruction task
force, the Government of Canada has contributed to
Haiti’s ongoing security sector reform by focusing on
increasing the capacity of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). We have done so by rebuilding or refurbishing
police commissariats and by providing equipment and
training to HNP officers. Those contributions help
empower Haitians to provide for their own needs in
security.
For Canada, Haiti remains a priority in the
Americas and worldwide. That is why Canada’s new
Minister of International Development, Mr. Christian
Paradis, chose Haiti for his first official visit, thus
demonstrating Canada’s commitment to Haiti. Minister
Paradis arrived on Monday in Port-au-Prince and
leaves today, having had a number of successful and
informative meetings and discussions in the country.
He met with Haitian Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe
and other Government officials, as well as some of
the Haitian people who are benefitting from Canada’s
development assistance. He witnessed the impacts that
natural disasters have had and the humanitarian needs
that continue to challenge Haiti. He also witnessed
the strength of the Haitian people and the resolve of
their Government to move towards greater stability
and long-term development. During his visit, Minister
Paradis reiterated his wish that Haiti assume strong
leadership and accountability for its own development.
He also announced that Canada stood ready to support
the Government of Haiti in better coordinating the
non-governmental organizations, donors and partners
currently operating in the country through Haiti’s new
development coordination mechanism.

28

(spoke in English)
Minister Paradis’ visit, as well as the visit of our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. John Baird, earlier
this year, reflects our interest in the future of Haiti.
Those visits have also helped to inform the review we
are presently conducting of our long-term engagement
in Haiti. We are looking forward to completing that
review so that we can maximize our investments to
support accountable and sustainable results for the
Haitian people, especially those most in need.
Haiti has made broad-based economic development,
including through trade and investment, a top priority.
Canada welcomes the spirit of those efforts and
strongly encourages actions that lead to further gains
in transparent governance, economic development
and sustainable job creation. Initiatives in the Haitian
tourism sector have shown what can be achieved
when the Government and the private sector work
together. Accountability, economic competitiveness
and diversification are essential to achieving poverty
reduction and increased revenue generation for the
Government. We encourage continued action in
improving the business environment, which can
transform Haiti’s economic potential into concrete
outcomes for the Haitian people.
For Haiti to succeed on the path of development
in accordance with its own objectives and plans, it is
necessary to have a supportive environment and, in
particular, institutional and political stability. In that
context, we note with concern that the long overdue
senatorial, municipal and local elections prescribed
by the Constitution still have not taken place, despite
repeated calls by Haitian political actors and members
of the Security Council that they be held this year.
Moreover, such delays significantly disrupt the normal
operations of Haiti’s Parliament, and therefore the
country’s governing institutions. It is critical for
all political actors to spare no effort to carry out the
elections in a free and transparent manner as soon as
possible.
Entering yet another phase of political and
institutional instability would undermine the
development and security gains made by Haiti thus
far and compromise further progress. Canada urges
all political actors to work together to find the path
towards a transparent and continued operation of key
institutions of democratic governance and to ensure
political stability. In that context, the submission by

13-45967

S/PV.7024

the President of the draft electoral law to Parliament
yesterday is a welcome development.
(spoke in French)
Canada continues to support the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and thanks MINUSTAH
for its contribution and all its efforts to bring stability to
Haiti. With respect to the evolution of the MINUSTAH
force, it is important not to sacrifice the security
gains made thus far on the security front and that the
decisions taken in this area be based on the situation
on the ground and the capacity of the Haitian State to
guarantee security for its population.
Canada was pleased to note the progress made by
the Haitian National Police in recent years as it assumes
increasing responsibility for security for the Haitian
people. We thank MINUSTAH for its support to Haiti’s
security institutions and encourage the Mission to build
upon the progress achieved thus far. We also appreciate
the relevant efforts of the Haitian Government and
strongly urge it to continue to implement the police
development plan. The rule of law and a professional
and capable police force are critical for Haiti’s security
and its future. I can assure you, Mr. President, that
Canada will continue to support Haiti in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the initiative by your
presidency of the Security Council, Sir, to convene
a debate on the situation in Haiti. We also welcome
the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and
we are grateful for the briefing on the report of the
Secretary General (S/2013/493) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We would
like to extend a special greeting and our congratulations
to the Argentine presidency of the Council and welcome
your presence at this meeting in particular, Mr. Agustín
Rossi, Minister of Defence of the Argentine Republic.
Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and
institutional strengthening in Haiti. That is why my
country has actively participated in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti since 2004, with a
military contingent consisting of 366 troops, including
female staff in the field, and military officers among
the chiefs of staff of the Mission. Peru is also a member

of the Group of Friends of Haiti, the Economic and
Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti,
the Group of Friends of Haiti of the Organization of
American States and the Latin American mechanism
on political coordination on Haiti.
On that basis, my delegation would like to align
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, in
particular the recognition that the work carried out by
MINUSTAH has been crucial to achieving significant
progress in Haiti’s stabilization and security and in
terms of strengthening democratic institutions and the
rule of law in the country. We also believe that this
work continues to be essential to providing the Haitian
authorities with the security and support needed to
facilitate the process of democratic consolidation.
Peru recognizes the importance of the appointment
of the members of the transitional Electoral Council
as an important advance towards realizing the longpostponed partial legislative, municipal and local
elections. However, we are concerned that the failure
to hold the elections in the short term may create a
climate of political instability and a lack of governance
in Haiti. Therefore, while recognizing the Haitian
people’s democratic aspirations and emphasizing the
importance of democratic stability in the countries of
our region, my delegation calls on all political forces in
Haiti to reach the necessary agreements to enable the
timely holding of the elections, which will strengthen
the functioning of key institutions for democratic
governance in Haiti.
While the security situation in Haiti remains
relatively stable, owing mainly to the crucial work
of MINUSTAH, we must note that there have
been massive protests in Haiti, mainly related to
socioeconomic problems such as food insecurity and a
lack of basic services. That serves to remind us that
the United Nations system should promote even greater
cooperation in the three areas that have a direct impact
on the ongoing process of recovery and reconstruction
in Haiti, namely, governance, security and sustainable
development.
In reiterating our appreciation for the work
of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti, we would like to express our satisfaction
with the progress made in the institutionalization,
professionalism and strengthening of the Haitian
National Police as part of its five-year development

13-4596729

S/PV.7024

plan for 2012-2016. That will enable that institution to
have the troops necessary to maintain public order and
ensure the security of the population throughout the
country. In turn, that will allow for a solid institutional
framework that promotes the strengthening of the rule
of law and respect for human rights.
The progress made by MINUSTAH in stabilizing
Haiti over the past few years allows us to look towards
the future with optimism. We therefore believe that the
time is coming to start a gradual and orderly transition
to a second phase of cooperation by the United Nations
system on Haiti. In that respect, we welcome the plan for
the reconfiguration and consolidation of MINUSTAH,
which is aimed at consolidating the gains achieved
thus far and laying the foundations for a long-term
development plan. The plan contains useful parameters
and indicators to measure the progress achieved by the
Government of Haiti in areas that are crucial to safety
and the institutional and democratic strengthening of
the country.
My delegation believes that a future reduction in
MINUSTAH staff, or even a change in the nature of the
Mission, should only be decided upon after a serious
evaluation of the progress made in the field in terms of
the parameters and indicators set out in the MINUSTAH
reconfiguration and consolidation plan. We are aware
of the importance of peacekeeping missions having exit
strategies in the medium term. However, we believe
that such strategies should be flexible enough to reflect
the realities on the ground.
In conclusion, it is my duty to stress that
MINUSTAH’s significant achievements to date should
not give us the false impression that the work of the
United Nations in Haiti is finished, or even close to
it. Experience has shown the serious consequences
suffered in some countries when the Organization
has decided to withdraw its presence from the field
too soon. We therefore call on States Members of the
Organization and the entire international community to
maintain their continued and ongoing support for the
people and Government of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate and express our gratitude to the delegation
of Argentina for having organized this debate and
providing us with a new opportunity to consider the
situation in Haiti, in particular through the most

30

recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/493)
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which we of course also welcome.
We welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms.Sandra Honoré, and wish her success in her work
leading the assistance efforts in that Caribbean nation
and helping the Haitian authorities in strengthening
democracy and promoting long-term development.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We reiterate our commitment made in February
2004 to the stabilization and peacebuilding process
in Haiti and the work of MINUSTAH in favour of the
security, stability, institution-building and development
of Haiti and its people. In that regard, we also welcome
the participation of new countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean in MINUSTAH by contributing either
troops or police contingents. That allows us to express
our ongoing regional commitment towards Haiti.
We recognize the progress made in the security and
humanitarian spheres in the period covered in the latest
report of the Secretary-General. In particular, we want
to stress the closure of 33 sites for displaced persons and
the relocation of 34,000 Haitians. However, significant
challenges remain to which the Haitian authorities
must respond with the support of the international
community. We also highlight the institutional progress
made in some areas — for example, in the area of
human rights and, specifically, with regard to the
establishment of the interministerial commission on
human rights. However, much remains to be done.
For my delegation, security, stability and
development are interrelated elements. The latest
report of the Secretary-General once again makes it
clear that MINUSTAH remains essential to achieving
those objectives. In that regard, the consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH must be implemented bearing in mind
the needs identified in the field, and with a view to the
future that makes it possible to strengthen institutional
capacity in Haiti under the principle of national
ownership, such that the Haitian people will gradually
take over the various responsibilities.
In that regard, on the understanding that the
priority is to strengthen the rule of law and improve
the political environment in Haiti, especially with
regard to the electoral sphere, we encourage the Special
13-45967

S/PV.7024

Representative of the Secretary-General to continue
working so that the Haitian authorities will respond to
the ongoing institutional processes through a political
dialogue and social inclusion, the best path to the
desired end.
On that front, we urgently call for the partial
senatorial, municipal and local elections to take place
in a fair, credible and transparent manner as quickly as
possible. In that sense, the adoption and promotion of
the draft electoral law that was submitted to Parliament
yesterday seems to us to be of the greatest urgency.
The recent report of the Secretary-General notes
a stable, but fragile, situation where the process of
training police continues to be a priority. In that regard,
while reiterating that this process must take place in a
democratic framework with respect for human rights,
we also highlight the efforts of MINUSTAH and local
authorities to comply with the strategic development
plan for the Haitian National Police, as well as the
progress made in that area. Chile reaffirms that it will
continue to cooperate on a bilateral basis in the area of​​
police training, as it has done in recent years. We call on
the Haitian authorities and the international community
to continue to support and fund those efforts.
My delegation reiterates the importance of
MINUSTAH’s role in the protection of vulnerable
groups, especially with regard to sexual and genderbased violence. We also stress once again the need for
these elements to be dealt with appropriately by the
local authorities. We also support the Mission’s zerotolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse.
We also highlight our concern with regard to the
prevention and treatment of the cholera epidemic,
and we stress the importance of supporting the
Secretary-General’s initiative in favour of the national
plan for the elimination of cholera. We also urge donors
to fund the programme.
We also wish to highlight the role played by
MINUSTAH through its battalions of engineers in the
so-called quick-impact projects and its programmes to
reduce community violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by congratulating the Argentine presidency
for its initiative to hold a debate on the situation in
Haiti, an issue accorded the greatest importance by

my country. I also wish to acknowledge your presence
here in New York, Sir, to preside over the debate, an
effort that, as you said in your statement, demonstrates
Argentina’s support for Haiti, the same support that the
entire Latin American and Caribbean community gives
to Haiti.
I welcome the new Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Mr. Denis Regis, and extend to him our full
cooperation. I also congratulate and thank Ms. Sandra
Honoré for the report she has presented to the Council
(S/2013/493).
I would also like to associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
When we see the progress in Haiti, we note that
the country is moving along the right path, although a
lot of issues and challenges in different spheres need
to be addressed. The consolidation of the physical and
political reconstruction of the country will depend upon
institutional stability, the strengthening of the State and
the increased entrenchment of democracy in Haiti. We
therefore respectfully call on the Government and all
political institutions to guarantee the holding of partial
local and legislative elections. Haiti cannot backtrack
on its process of political and institutional stabilization.
Colombia takes this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Sandra Honoré, whose excellent
credentials make her an outstanding person for the work
being conducted in Haiti, especially at this defining
moment for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We wish her much success in her
role and reiterate to her our full support.
Our country supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, in particular with regard to
the extension of the Mission’s mandate until October
2014. We also support the initiative for the Mission’s
possible downsizing in the near future, with a focus on
a gradual and orderly transfer of responsibilities that
serves to strengthen institutions and security in Haiti.
We welcome the establishment of the joint task force
between the Government and the Mission, a mechanism
for establishing criteria and determining the best timing
and ways to transfer responsibilities.
The Government of Colombia has emphasized that
the solution of the problems in Haiti must come from
the Haitians themselves. As their friends, we must
contribute to that process. We have therefore focused
on strengthening national capacity.

13-4596731

S/PV.7024

My Government has supported MINUSTAH since
September 2006. We currently have a police contingent
in Haiti that includes experts in various areas, including
community policing and the fight against drugs and
transnational organized crime. On the bilateral level,
with the cooperation of the Government of the United
States, Colombia has trained 100 personnel in specific
areas such as extortion and kidnapping, sniffer dog
handlers in the detection of illicit substances, criminal
intelligence and strategic analysis and management.
The Government of Colombia, in accordance
with appeals by the Security Council to increase the
role of women in peacekeeping, is training 10 women
from the Haitian National Police as part of a yearlong programme whose curriculum includes learning
Spanish. The programme will continue to grow in order
to fulfil two objectives, namely, training staff to ensure
that the Haitian National Police can continue to assume
responsibility for the country’s security and providing
better tools for confronting security challenges from a
gender perspective.
I should like to point out that, at this very moment,
the MINUSTAH Police Commissioner, Mr. Luis
Carrilho, and the Director-General of the Haitian
National Police, General Godson Orelus, are on a visit
to Colombia’s national police to gain field experience
on good practices and lessons learned from Colombia’s
programme on strengthening institutions that could be
adapted for the work being done by the Haitian National
Police.
It is important to mention that Colombia is also
developing an agenda for bilateral cooperation with
Haiti that includes projects such as strengthening the
coffee production chain, which aims to establish a
sustainable and inclusive value chain that increases the
income of small producers, strengthens the cooperative
system and increases the export of good quality
coffee; developing processes for integrated solid waste
management, which began the implementation of a
solid-waste plant in the Cabaret area; contributions
towards recovery and strengthening food security and
nutrition, in response to a request by the national food
security coordinator in Haiti; strengthening Haiti’s
national vocational training institute by way of our
national job training service model workshop, including
developing a cooperative initiative to strengthen the
institute; and, lastly, a community, neighbourhood and
housing recovery initiative that aims to contribute to

32

the organizational plan carried out by Haiti, mainly in
Port-au-Prince.
Colombia reiterates its commitment to fully
supporting Haiti and to the process of strengthening its
institutions and promoting development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I very much
appreciate the Argentine presidency’s inviation for
Spain to participate in this bi-annual debate on the
situation in Haiti. I see that as an acknowledgment
of my country’s commitment to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to
strengthening institutions and the socioeconomic
development of Haiti.
I welcome the presence among us, for the first time,
of the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra
Honoré. I wish her every success in her new. important
and difficult role. I would like to welcome the
Ambassador of Haiti, Mr. Denis Regis, and I wish him
all the best in his new and important role.
The Secretary-General has submitted a detailed
report (S/2013/493), which has already been referred
to and which I value and appreciate a great deal.
Spain shares the concern reflected in the report as to
the stagnation in the political situation in Haiti and
the apparent deadlock in the holding of the partial
legislative and municipal elections that are supposed to
take place before the end of the year. Like MINUSTAH
and the rest of the international community in Haiti, we
call on representatives of the executive and legislative
branches of Haiti to reach an agreement on this matter
in the coming weeks. If they manage to do so, it would
be an expression of mutual goodwill and a sense of
statehood as reflected specifically in progress towards
the formation of a transitional Electoral Council.
Spain welcomes the progress in the area of security
made by Haiti throughout 2013. Given that positive
development, Spain reaffirms its commitment to
the current security model in Haiti, which relies on
MINUSTAH staff for the maintenance of a safe and
stable environment throughout the country, as well
as with police forces to meet tasks associated with
prosecuting crime.
However, we agree that MINUSTAH should be
looking to reconfigure gradually, eventually reducing

13-45967

S/PV.7024

its number of troops with missions focusing on
assisting civilian populations over the medium-term,
especially during emergencies. We very much look
forward to a report to that effect, due to be submitted
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council in
March 2014. At the same time, the Haitian National
Police should continue to be strengthened so that it can
assume the functions turned over to it by MINUSTAH.
In terms of human rights, we encourage the
Government of Haiti to move forward with its
commitment to ratify various United Nations
Conventions on the matter, and to take measures for
the fulfilment of recommendations made to Haiti in
the context of the latest universal periodic review
carried out in Geneva. In particular, Spain is concerned
about sexual and gender-based violence, with alarming
figures in Haiti made worse by frequent impunity for
such crimes.
In the field of development cooperation, Spain
reiterates its commitment to Haiti. My country is one
of the major donors in Haiti, with our cooperation
especially focused on access to safe drinking water,
the education sector, rural development and the fight
against malnutrition. We believe that the cooperation
of all stakeholders with the coordination mechanism
for external support put in place by the Government
of Haiti in late 2012 is very important to the efficiency
and transparency of aid.
We want to increase the number of Spanish
businesses in Haiti, which are clearly still insufficient.
We forecast that foreign investment will be a key
instrument to promote socioeconomic development in
the country. To that end, it is necessary to ensure legal
certainty for foreign investment, strengthen Haitian
institutions such as the investment facilitation centre,
and implement agreements pertaining to the promotion
and reciprocal protection of investments.
Both from a development cooperation and
investment point of view, it is essential to maintain
political stability, over which some doubts currently
exist. For that, the role and work of MINUSTAH
is indispensable. Therefore, we reiterate our strong
support and commitment to the renewal of the mandate
of MINUSTAH and its presence in Haiti over the
coming years.
Spain of course associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Deputy Head of the delegation of the
European Union.

In conclusion, as Argentina’s presidency comes to
an end this month of August, I am pleased to have this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, and your country
for your active and successful role during this period.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
CARICOM wishes to commend Argentina, our
sister Member State in the Group of Latin Americas and
Caribbean States, for its outstanding work as President
of the Security Council during the month of August.
We are also heartened by the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to appoint one of our nationals, Ambassador
Sandra Honoré, as his Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We express our deepest confidence
in her ability to oversee the work of the United
Nations system in Haiti, working along with Haitian
authorities to discharge the mandate of the Mission.
At the same time, CARICOM acknowledges the work
of former acting Deputy Special Representative for
Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his valuable contribution to
MINUSTAH and the development of Haiti.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/493)
provides useful information on the progress of
the efforts of the United Nations to bring lasting
peace and stability to Haiti through its Mission. For
us in CARICOM, Haiti’s stability and economic
development are inextricably linked to the wider
development agenda of our subregion. CARICOM
consequently lauds MINUSTAH’s efforts, which have
promoted increased stability in Haiti. We also welcome
the decision of the Security Council, as expressed
in resolution 2070 (2012), to renew MINUSTAH’s
mandate until 15 October 2013, and we support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that it be further
extended until 2014.
CARICOM also welcomes plans for encouraging
investment, which will play a critical role in spurring
Haiti’s social and economic development. Nevertheless,
we submit that international assistance must be aligned
with Haiti’s national priorities, so as to ensure that
there is appropriate national ownership of programmes
intended to benefit the Haitian people.

13-4596733

S/PV.7024

We also applaud the strides made by the Haitian
Government in reaching certain political milestones
that are indicative of progress. We remain optimistic
that the forward momentum achieved thus far will be
sustained and that all parties involved in the political
process will be able to rise above the differences that
exist between them and, in the spirit of compromise,
work together to put in place the machinery for holding
the overdue partial senatorial, municipal and local
elections.
CARICOM notes the progress made in upholding
the rule of law in Haiti, as exemplified in the
Government’s “five Es” policy programme, which lists
the rule of law as one of its pillars. We are heartened
by the reductions in civil unrest, homicides and
kidnappings, as well as the fact that the political and
security situation in the country has remained relatively
stable, with a notable decrease in major crimes. We are
encouraged by the appearance in court in February of
two former presidents. We view that as positive signals
of an emerging trend towards stability and evidence of
the increasing acceptance of the judicial process, which
is an indispensable ingredient in the maintenance of the
rule of law.
We are further encouraged that the performance of
the Haitian National Police has continued to improve
since it assumed increasing responsibility for the
provision of internal security. We note, however, that the
targets of the National Police development plan require
continued commitment on the part of the Government
and Haiti’s partners in order to ensure that adequate
resources are available to support the plan’s viability.
There have been a number of other positive
developments in Haiti following the devastating
earthquake in 2010 and the further destruction
following Hurricane Sandy last year. They include
the establishment of an interministerial commission
on human rights, the resettlement of a number of
formerly displaced persons and efforts to address the
cholera epidemic, including those undertaken in line
with the Secretary-General’s initiative for supporting
national plans in that area. The efforts made by Haitian
authorities to promote socioeconomic development,
including strides made by President Martelly to attract
foreign direct investment, are also noteworthy.
CARICOM remains, however, gravely concerned
about the declining international aid for sustaining
the work of rehabilitation in Haiti. That situation is
worrying in the midst of hurricane season, when Haiti
34

is vulnerable to the effects of devastating storms. We
therefore urge all parties with contributions outstanding
to pay them in order to ensure the timely execution
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, whose work is crucial to fostering peace,
security, stability, the protection of human rights and
the promotion of development in the States concerned.
While progress has been made in several areas, Haiti
continues to experience a political, social and economic
crisis, and, with that in view, the discussion at hand
should not be whether MINUSTAH should conclude its
operations but should, rather, focus on addressing the
changes required in Haiti and the Mission to ensure that
a phased withdrawal is linked to stronger institutions
and underpinned by progress towards lasting stability.
In conclusion, CARICOM remains committed to
working together with other partners in the international
community in support of the agenda of the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH’s efforts in that regard,
in order to facilitate lasting stability and the social and
economic development of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Sandra Honoré to respond to the comments
made.
Ms. Honoré: I would first like to join other speakers
in welcoming the initiative of Argentina during its
presidency of the Security Council in placing on the
Council’s agenda the question concerning Haiti and
the attendant consideration of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/493) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I deeply appreciate the
support expressed for the work of my predecessors in the
post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the work of the military, police and civilian
personnel, including United Nations volunteers, as well
as the support expressed for the efforts of the United
Nations country team in Haiti, as we continue to assist
the Government of Haiti in ensuring an environment
of stability and security. I have also noted the support
expressed by members of the Council and other Member
States for the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the mandate of the Mission be extended by an additional
year.
Careful note has been taken of the concerns,
recommendations and timely advice to the Mission on
critical aspects of its work with the Government of Haiti,
in keeping with the conditions-based consolidation
plan 2013-2016 submitted by the Secretary-General in

13-45967

S/PV.7024

March in the core areas of police development, electoral
capacity-building, the rule of law and key governance
issues, including the promotion of a dialogue on a
minimum political consensus regarding elections,
the legislative agenda and the strengthening of State
institutions. The progress that has been highlighted by
speakers today in those core areas and the benchmarks
yet to be attained are vital to the creation of a framework
that will contribute to attaining the socioeconomic
goals outlined by the Administration of President
Martelly n his Government’s plans, in particular the
“five Es” priorities of education, employment, energy,
the environment and the rule of law.
I have also noted the comments on the challenges
and systemic deficiencies facing Haiti and on the
support that MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country teams should provide in the humanitarian field
and in efforts of a social-developmental-stabilizing
nature, such as the reduction of community violence
and quick-impact projects.
The Council should rest assured that members’
entreaties that the Mission, in its work on human rights,

pay particular attention to the rights of women and
children have been noted and will continue to inform
our work.
I indicated earlier that the stakeholders in Haiti
have all expressed support for dialogue as a means
of arriving at an understanding on strengthening the
pillars of democratic governance in the country. I cannot
overemphasize the importance of such an all-inclusive
process in order to overcome the impasse and create
a framework in which the efforts of the Government
and society can be concentrated with serenity on
the country’s pressing socioeconomic development
requirements. MINUSTAH will continue to support all
good-faith efforts in that direction and appreciates the
Security Council’s continued support for it, as well as
all the other mandated tasks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

13-4596735
