UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SIXTN

YEAR

rd
MEET ING: 24 APR
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2273) . . . , . , . . , , . . . , . , . , . , , , . . , . . , . , . . . , . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . , . +, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) . . * . *, *. . * *. . . . . . * * *. . . . . . . * *. * . *. . . . . . . . *. . . * * *. *. *. *. . .

1

SIPV .2273

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pplr~~w~~ts
of the Qfficial Reco~~is of the Security Cmmil.
The date
of the document indicates the suppIement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rc~sol~r~inns uml
Decisiotzs of t/lc Src//rity
Corlrlcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2273rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 24 April X981, at 3.30 p.m.
president: Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).
preseljt; The representatives of the following States:
China,France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
UnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2273)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings [2267th to 2272nd
nlcetings], I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Burundi, Canada,
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica,Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania, Senegal, Sierra
LeolIe, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Togo, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia Zaire, Zambia
andZimbabwe to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
19
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Benyahia
(Ak’eriuJ, Mr. Josge (Angola), Mr. Kaiser (Bang‘adeJlz), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Cow& da Costa
(Brazil), Mr. S’rm 1x~nauiye (Brrrundi), Mr. Morden
(Canada), Mr. M n [ mierca (Cuhu), Mr. Ashtal (Demo~atic Yemen), Mr. Gedle-Giorgis (Ethiopia), Mr, Jelomk ~Fdwl Republic (1.fGemrrny), Mr, ~oun~hms.sa

(Guinea), Mr. Rae (India), Mr. Kusumua fmadju
(Indonesia),
Mr. Shearer (Jamaica),
Mr. Kasina
(Kenya), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Asub Jamahiriya),
Mr. Mortteiro (Mozambique),
Mr. Baha (Nigeria),
Mr. Slraki (Pakistan),
Mr. Marinescsr (Romallia),
Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Fowie (South Africa), Mr. Balasubramaniam
(Sri Larrka), Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Snlim
(United Republic qf Tunzania), Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia), Mr. Kamanda WI Kamanda (Zaire), Mr. Goma
(Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende (Zimbuhwe) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation
of the Council to take places at the Security Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusuka
(President of the United Natioru Council for Namibia)
and the other members of the delegation took places
at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken also at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation qf the President, Mr. Mueshihange
took a place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Burundi. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. SIMBANANIYE (Burundi) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, the delegation of Burundi

would like to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April. The acutenessof the problem which is
currently being debated and the hope placed in this
debate by the international community as a whole
called for a statesmanof your wisdom, far-sightedness
and diplomatic experience to preside over these
deliberations. Your thorough knowledge of the Namibian issue and your dedication to an appropriate
end to the Namibian crisis will certainly impart to these
deliberations the dynamism and energy called for by the
seriousnessof the question before us.

6. We should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Florin of the German Democratic
Republic, for the very exemplary manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council last month,
7. Finally, we wish to thank all the members of the
Council for their generosity in allowing us to participate
in this historic debate on Namibia.
8, South Africa’s constant refusal to abide by the
resolutions of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council as well as the judgment of the
International Court of Justice’ enjoining it to put an end
immediately to its illegal occupation of the Territory of
Namibia; Pretoria’s rejection-which
has now been
demonstrated-of any dialogue aimed at peacefully
leading Namibia to independence; the strengthening of
its repressive machinery against Namibian patriots;
the highly explosive situation inherent in such brutality-all those elements together explain sufficiently
well the urgency of once more seizing the Council of
the question of Namibia.
9. The failure last January of the Geneva meeting
on Namibia, the new public outburst of sympathy from
certain quarters for the policy ofupmtheid, the political
closed-mindedness and the further manifestation of
the arrogance of the racist South African regime as
natural consequences of that new support, require
from the Council and the entire international community a thorough reassessment of what therapy is
needed to treat the virus of trpcwtkeid.
10. Now that the illegality of the occupation of Namibia by Pretoria no longer needs to be demonstrated,
now that the legitimacy of the struggle of the Namibian
people and the fact that that people is represented
solely by its national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), have
won universal endorsement, the time has come to
wonder about both the true reasons and the underlying
motives for the present impasse in the process of the
decolonization of Namibia, as well as about the relevance of the strategy used thus far to end the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa.
11a Similarly, the hotbeds of tension, the permanent
instability and insecurity which Pretoria is fostering
and sustaining in the region and the punitive murderous
raids which South Africa is repeatedly carrying out
against the front-line States oblige us today to remind
the Council of its primary responsibility as the principal
organ charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security.
12. Now that the legal basis for the decolonization
of Namibia has been clearly laid down, the maintenance
of the South African occupation in Namibia makes
sense only if we put it within the framework of a manysided geo-political struggle where the economic,
ideological, strategic, military and racial factors explain
Pretoria’s stubbornness and the complicity of its allies.

The stakes involved for the latter are twofold: On the
one hand, they want to ensure for their industries a
continuous flow of strategic raw materials with which
Namibia is replete and, on the other, they want to
justify before the world the plundering of Namibian
resources which they are carrying out in violation of
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,* enacted on 27 September 1974 by
the United Nations Council for Namibia.
13. Not being able to base themselves on law or
morality in this case, they had but one way out to
soothe their conscience, namely, to persuade the rest
of the world community of some alleged imminent
danger of communist invasion in the region. Pretoria
wished in that way to get a tacit mandate from its allies
to throw the menacing hypothetical demons of communism back into the sea. By thus transforming the
genuine problem of decolonization into a false ideological conflict, Namibia remains, because of the
abundance of its mineral wealth and its exploited manpower, the milch cow of the transnational corporations.
14. Since Pretoria’s defeat in Namibia would sound
the death-knell for this disgraceful exploitation, one
can easily see how clever South Africa’s allies are in
piling up solutions to the Namibian question, one less
credible than the other.
15. The so-called internal solution which would
confer legitimacy on the traitors of the Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) still haunts Pretoria and
its allies. Recognition by the international community
of mini-groups of DTA would, according to the latter’s
supporters, meet a concern for democracy, justice and
equity, The ulterior reason none the less remains true:
such recognition would have the sad merit of weakening SWAPO, dividing the Namibians, making
Namibia’s independence illusory and thus perpetuating
its present exploitation.
16. That South Africa is today intensifying its intransigency by burdening the negotiations with a new
element-the phantom of DTA-means that it places
some hope in a Muzorewa-style internal solution. That
did not succeed in Zimbabwe; it has no reason to
succeed in Namibia: for the sameillness, the same cure.
17. ,The convening of the Council now would hardly
have beenjustified if South Africa had not replied to the
appeal by the international community at the Geneva
meeting on Namibia with political closed-mindedness,
with false leads, with exaggeration and with blackmail,
which have always characterized the South African
attitude in any negotiation on the Namibian question.
In so doing, of its own will it closed the door to any
dialogue.
18. South Africa had no other ambition at Geneva
than that of having the United Nations approve the
legitimacy of its slaves in DTA, the very ones whose
request to participate in the present debate has been

rejected by the Council-a decision which did honour
to it. Indeed, it could not listen to two representatives
of the South African delegation-just as it could not
do justice to the Namibian fighters who are falling on
the field of honour-by listening to mini-groups which
are identified with the executioners of their people.

25. Are we to understand that safeguarding the
interests and the freedom of this world which C~HS
itself free must include the oppression and suppression
of the freedom of the black peoples of South Africa
and Namibia?
26. Such a notion on the part of Pretoria’s allies is
neither in keeping with their long-term interests nor
faithful to the teachings of their own history. The
experience of some in the matter of decolonization,
the attempts of others to subject entire peoples to their
will, have proved to them in the rather recent past that
a people’s thirst for freedom, dignity and sovereignty
is at the same time irresistible, irreducible and irreversible. The struggle of the Namibian people, as
painful and aslong as it may be, is that kind of struggle.
The Pretoria rigime, by its obstinacy and its refusal to
face reality, carries within itself the seeds of its own
destruction.

19. If South Africa had been able to carry out its
macabre strategy at Geneva, it would have had a free
hand to fashion Namibia in its own image, to complete
the dismemberment of that Territory by the savage
exportation of bantrrstanization, thus putting an end for
all time to the very existence of the Namibian nation.
The resistance of SWAP0 and the United Nations
to this machiavellian plan, the rejection of the representativeness of the puppets of DTA explain the wrath
of South Africa and the undue, ill-considered charges
brought against the United Nations-cavalier charges
of partiality and irresponsibility.
20.

27. We have not come here today to prove the illegality of South Africa’s occupation of Namibia. The
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice did that in the past, Nor have we come here to
expose the hideousness of the apartheid regime. A
long time ago, the General Assembly described rcpnrtheid as a crime against humanity. We have come here
to ask the Council to measure up to its responsibilities
and to apply against South Africa the sanctions it
deserves becauseof the illegality of its behaviour-that
is, to apply fully and strictly the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

21. The intransigence and arrogance of Pretoria
spring from the many-sided support of its allies and
from the flabbiness and indulgence of the Council when
it is a question of applying to South Africa the economic sanctions required in such circumstances by
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Such
a procedure, we were often told, sins by being unrealistic, inoperative and harmful to the very ones whom
we are trying to save from South African tyranny.
22. The only viable alternative, we were then told,
is that of negotiation and non-violence. We accepted
that game, hoping that those who gave us such counsel
would use their influence with Pretoria to bring it back
to reason and legality.

28. In particular, we would remind the permanent
members of the Security Council, especially those
which initiated resolution 435 (1978), that the reversal
and hardening of the South African position with regard
to Namibia neither changes nor in any way dilutes the
responsibilities they bear under that resolution.

23. The debacle of the Geneva meeting on Namibia
will have at least had the merit of unmasking the inconsistency of speaking with a forked tongue: on the one
hand, providing Pretoria with capital and strengthening
its war machine and, on the other, offering nothing
more than an olive branch in the form of a negotiation that is still-born because Pretoria has always
opposed it.

29. Any withdrawal, any abandonment, any evasion
whatsoever on their part in regard to the commitments
of resolution 435 (1978) would deeply erode their
credibility not only in the Council and in the United
Nations as a whole, but also in the eyes of public
opinion in their respective countries. We dare to hope
that they will face up to the new challenge of South
Africa with the firmness required by the seriousness of
the present situation.

24. In presenting itself as the region’s guarantor and
defender of the interests of the Western world, Pretoria
today finds itself the subject of new outbursts of
sympathy on the part of certain Powers. Now, in the
name of safeguarding those interests, Pretoria’s
accessto the capital and arsenals of those samePowers
is not only guaranteed but further strengthened: hence
the constant attempt of Pretoria to extend its murderous reach as far as its firepower will allow. The
front-line States, the constant targets of its wrath,
whose only crime has been to harbour refugees fleeing
from clpcrrtheid~ find themselves attacked with regularity. They will have to bewail their dead, contemplate the ruins of their infrastructure, while the Security Council remains indifferent, paralysed by the very
ones who are arming South Africa.

30. Our appeal is not in any way prompted by feelings
either of unreality or of frustration, as certain members of the Council would have people believe; rather,
it has been prompted by our objective analysisof the
bitter experience of unkept promises by partners in
whom we had placed our trust.
31. For almost two decadesnow, the consideration of
the question of Namibia in the Council has metamorphised into a rock of Sisyphus. We believe that any
further hesitation by the Council would not be in the
interest of the Council nor in that of the Namibians
3

generations: they will be discarded in the dustbin of
history by their own past masters.

54. Have we not seen South Africa-and this takes
the cake-demand guarantees of protection for minorities and a democratic system in Namibia while the
majority in South Africa does not yet enjoy the most
elementary of the rights that are enjoyed by the minority?

46. It is quite clear that the intention was to sabotage
Geneva in order not to have to implement resolution
435 (1978), in particular as regards democratic elections. There was the red herring, the false problem of
the impartiality of the United Nations, which was
publicized by the world press. In passing, we must say
that sometimes we were taken in by that game.

55. The African countries and the countries members
of the non-aligned movement fee1 abused in this
exercise because of the refusal of the Government of
South Africa to keep its word. Is this behaviour of
South Africa normal? What is this South Africa, that
it has such effrontery?

47. Does anyone seriously believe today that the
reason for the blocking of resolution 435 (1978) by the
South African racists is any doubt about United Nations impartiality in supervising an electoral process
which, let me remind representatives, is to be organized by the authorities of South Africa themselves?

56. South Africa is a minority rCgime, colonialist,
aggressive and sanguinary. It is a country in which the
overwhelming majority of the population is foreign
in its own homeland, where whites are kept apart
from blacks, where bantustanization separates blacks
from other blacks in a machiavellian plan.

48. In fact what is this racist South African Government-a Government that bases its action on the
institutionalized denial of democracy and whose
philosophy is white power at any price-which dares
to question the’ impartiality of the United Nations,
its General Assembly, its Security Council and its
Secretary-General, who so strictly carry out their
work?

57. South Africa is Sharpeville; it is Sharpeville
every day in Johannesburg, in Durban, in the mines
and in the schools. It is the country in which 600 children were killed in cold blood in the streets of Soweto,
without any indictments, without any guilty parties,
without any sentences being passed, for the simple
reason that no crime had been committed!

49. In our opinion there are two parallel plans with
a few points of contact: the first is that of the United
Nations, whose goal is to achieve the independence of
Namibia; the other is that of South Africa, which,
unable to maintain the status ~1110,tries to create a
puppet Government in order to keep Namibia under
South Africa’s political and economic power.

58. South Africa is the country in which simple friendship between persons of different races constitutes a
crime. It is the country in which the colour of one’s
skin determines where one sits, where one eats, where
one lives and with whom one may speak. It is the
country in which many among us here would have to
live apart from our wives and children because we
are of different races.

50. One of the peculiarities of the South African plan
is that it uses the United Nations plan, forums, our
honesty, our good will, our candour, our word and our
principles whenever that suits it. That is total hypocrisy.

59. When the Government of the United States of
America declares that the liberation movements are
terrorist they are thus reinforcing the racist and colonialist aggressors. Statements to the effect that the
national liberation movements are not fighting for their
own people but are agents of a third party not only
offend the dignity of a people but serve to justify
massacres, Statements to the effect that the struggle
against “terrorism” has priority give free rein to the
most sanguinary instincts, which leads to inevitable
aggression against the front-line States.

51. In this context, the requests for participation by
DTA, presented in the name of democracy, are not
likely to bring about the success of this process but,
rather, will lead to sabotaging it. As experience has
proved, each concession that we make moves us
farther away from our goal.
52. I should like the countries that have submitted
these requests to realize that it is their own plan that
they are jeopardizing.

60. Those who make public statements in support
of the armed groups in South Africa in order to destabilize the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola are flagrantly interfering in the internal affairs
of a State member of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the non-aligned movement and the United
Nations. Every country’s stability is threatened, AI1
these statements and actions constitute unparalleled
support for the homeland of apartheid.

53. We have heard Mr. Pik Botha getting upset
because his official was not accepted at this series of
meetings, Why, then, has he not invited him to speak
in his Parliament, which is 100per cent white, or to be
a member of his Government, which is 100 per cent
white, or to visit him in his home, which is 100 per
cent white, or his neighbourhood, which is 100per cent
white? Why does he not at the very least shake his
hand?

61. We must also say that the present situation and the
failure of so much effort and sacrifice are linked with
5

71. If one is concerned about the fate of people, one
must remember that they are generous. People who
have been freed from colonialism know all too well
what oppression is, and they certainly would not want
to oppress others. No one has the right to stand in for
the sovereign people of Namibia.
SWAPO, which
represents the legitimate aspirations of the people of
Namibia-a
fact that has been proved in the political
and armed struggle and is now uncontested-stated
in
clear terms that it was prepared to implement resolu.
tion 435 (1978).

the failure of those who were to take the necessary
steps to put pressure on South Africa-especially
the
Western countries that have sponsored the plan-to
do so. At the first confrontation, using whatever
artifice, they abandoned and went back on the principles and methods agreed upon in Security Council
resolution 435 (1978).
62. What further concessions are we called upon to
make? We categorically refuse to be accomplices in this
stupid game. We refuse to allow ourselves to be used
in this South African game.

We say, enough! There has been enough procrastination. People are dying. Let us apply the United
Nations plan quickly, without any change, qualification
or prevarication.

72.

63. We are told to put forward constructive proposals
instead of resolutions or sanctions. But, in reality, for
the last four years serious and constructive people
have been engaged in taking serious and constructive
actions. The result is there, and, what is more, it has
the stamp of approval of the international community:
resolution 435 (1978).

73. The economic and financial relations between the
Western Powers and South Africa make it possible for
the apartheid regime to maintain its illegal occupation
of Namibia, to wage acts of aggression against neighbouring countries and constantly to refuse to implement the decisions of the international
community,
It is therefore incumbent upon the Western countries
to put an end to their collusion with South Africa. In
order to be consistent with the plan, they must apply
effective comprehensive mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

64. When some speak of building they should first
remember not to neglect or destroy what has been built
by others.
65. We are told not to abandon the search for a
peaceful settlement, but we are the ones who have not
abandoned it. It is the United States Administration
that has sabotaged resolution 435 (1978) and is attempting to replace it by other proposals.

74. The choice is not between the raw materials of
South Africa and the raw materials of the rest of Africa,
It is not a matter of choosing between East and West.
The choice is between apurtheid and human dignity;
between aiding oppression or upholding freedom. ,

66. The proposals for action before the Council
constitute precisely the last-ditch effort-before force
is used-to make South Africa put an end to armed
oppression and war and acts of aggression against the
Namibian people and other African peoples. Is there
a better way to find peace?

75. Instability
and subversion reign in southern
Africa, perpetrated by the apartheid regime. The raciit
minority regime seems to feel it has the right to intervene militarily
everywhere in Africa south of the
equator. It uses the pretext that it is defending its own
borders against communism and the liberation movements, SWAP0 and the African National Congress
(ANC). But when South Africa invaded Angolain 1975,
there were no SWAP0 or ANC bases. South African
troops joined the Portuguese colonial army to fight
against FRELIMO
(Frente de Liberta@o de Mo~ambique) in 1965, when the war zone was 2,000 kilometres
to the north of the South African border. Now they Ml1
refugees and proclaim that they have destroyed ANC
military bases. They emplace bombs in Swaziland and
Botswana, and organize armed subversion in Zambia.
They attack Lesotho in a so-called crusade against
communism. They invade and bombard the territory
of Angola. South Africa’s true objective is to try by
all means to frustrate the intentions of its neighbours
to liberate themselves economically.

67. We were told to wait until the new United States
Administration
had taken over, and we are now told to
wait until the West undertakes a new initiative. The
purpose is to oblige us to make yet further concessions
and to give further guarantees to colonialism in Namibia.
68. Resolution 435 (1978) is resolution 435 (1978). It is
indivisible. We cannot accept it and not accept it at the
same time, nor can we play on words to go back on
agreements that have been accepted formally by our
Governments.
69. We should recall that a few months ago it was in
fact the five Western Powers that told us that their
original plan had become a Security Council resolution
and could therefore not be amended, and that the South
African Government had agreed.
70. We will never accept the argument that Namibia
will become independent more quickly if we give colonialism further guarantees. After all, the colonialist
settlers have had guarantees for the last 50 years, and
that certainly has not brought about the independence
of the Namibian people.

76. South Africa has already proved, by its behaviout
towards Africa and the rest of the world, that it repre
sents a threat to international peace and security. The
United Nations has the historic and urgent task 0j
neutralizing that threat by taking specific steps to pul
6

pendence of Namibia, By that resolution, the Council
decided to establish a United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG), in order to assist the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
implementing the mandate conferred upon him by the
Council’s earlier resolution, namely 431 (1978), to
ensure the early independence of Namibia through
free elections under the supervision and control of
the United Nations.

an end to colonialism in Namibia and to crpurtheid
in South Africa.
.77. We are here along with so many other sovereign
States because the United Nations acted at the right
time to assume its responsibilities. I wanted to recall
that at a time when, in order to cover up complicity,
we once again hear sung the siren song of defeatism
regarding the limitations of the United Nations. If
there are limitations, they are those of some Members
of the Organization, who are thus accountable to the
world and to history.

85. The adoption of those resolutions, with the
concurrence of the permanent members of the Security Council, led the world to hope that the colonial
chapter in the history of Namibia would soon be
closed. The third world countries, in particular, which
share a common historical experience with the Namibian people, welcomed that development. The
Security Council decision in resolution 435 (1978) was
endorsed by all the important international forums,
including the OAU, the non-aligned movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

78. We call upon the Security Council to act swiftly.
With every passing day people are dying-many
people, according to the war commercials from South
Africa itself. We would sound the call to action, so that
illegality does not become a habit, so that justice, racial
equality, may finally be called by its only right name:
freedom.
79. The struggle continues!

86. Nearly three years have elapsed since the adoption of this Council resolution but no progress has been
made towards the realization of its promise. The preimplementation talks at Geneva last January, which
were designed to set a date for the commencement
of the implementation of the United Nations plan,
collapsed in consequence of South Africa’s unwarranted accusation against the United Nations of
partiality, its questioning of the competence of the
United Nations to supervise free and fair elections in
Namibia.

80. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Mr. Agha
Shahi. I welcome him here and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
81. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address this important series of meetings
of the Security Council on the question of Namibia.
I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express to you, Mr. President, the congratulations of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. Pakistan and Ireland enjoy
cordial relations and co-operate closely in international
forums.

87. The failure of the Geneva talks has exposed the
real motives of the racist colonial regime in Pretoria,
which continues to deny the people of Namibia its
inalienable right to self-determination and to control
and exploit the natural resources of its land. The Government of South Africa could not have spurned the
United Nations initiative were it not sustained by the
support of external forces which stand to profit by the
continued subjugation of the Namibian people. Another factor contributing to South Africa’s growing
aggressiveness is its massive arms buildup through
the importation of sophisticated armaments and the
development of its nuclear-weapons capability, the
purpose of which is to intimidate the front-line States
and to strengthen its colonial hold over Namibia.

82. May I also voice our appreciation of the able
conduct of the work of the Council last month by
Ambassador Florin of the German Democratic Republic.
83. These meetings of the Council are an expression
of the universal concern over the attempt to frustrate
an important initiative of the United Nations to bring
to an end the colonial era in Namibia. The Council is
once again confronted with the defiance of the will of
the world community by a racist colonial Power, whose
massive and persistent violations of human rights in
pursuit of its inhuman policies of apartheid led to its
exclusion from participation in the proceedings of the
General Assembly. The situation created by South
Africa’s rejection of the Security Council’s plan for
Namibia jeopardizes the peace and security of the
African continent. The Council cannot therefore shirk
its responsibility to meet this situation, It must act in
total solidarity with the liberation struggle of the Namibian people until the process of decolonization is
carried to its logical end in South West Africa.

88. Viewed in the historical perspective, South
Africa’s behaviour at Geneva is hardly a matter for
surprise. Rationality and respect for international law
and morality have no place in colonial and racist
thinking. But the international community cannot
view with indifference South Africa’s repudiation of
the Security Council’s decision. It cannot permit
South Africa to continue its exploitation of Namibia
and to frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people to self-determination and national
independence. The universally acclaimed United Nations plan, which envisaged the signing of a cease-fire,

84. In 1978, the Security Council adopted resolution
435 (1978), which provided a framework for the inde7

for the liberation of their country. We believe that&
of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions
against South Africa by the Security Council at this
critical juncture will give a powerful impetus to this #
historic process.

the establishment of a demilitarized zone, the deployment of UNTAG and the holding of free and fair elections under the supervision and control of the United
Nations, has by no means lost its relevance and validity. It cannot be abandoned. The Council has an inescapable responsibility
to compel South Africa to
implement resolution 435 (1978) within a given timeframe.

application

93. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): This series of meet&
,#
of the Security Council is a dramatic demonstrgtioh ,&
of the importance which the international comm&k
‘,d
i >*,,jI ,,^<.$
.,‘I
a$*
attaches to the question of Namibia. My delegatror&
~4
.b ,‘);(7$.
i ‘@L
particularly impressed by the presence of the Mmrsfer&?:#
$’2~.<%
~&j
for Foreign Affairs of numerous Member Statt%#$%&@
regard their active participation in the deliberations&q
the Council as a reflection of their countries’ co&t&
‘8
ment to finding a solution to the question of Namibia.:\:‘$
I assure the Council that Japan fully shares their j, $
commitment, and is determined to facilitate, in any’wsy ,’ $
it can, peaceful and constructive efforts towards -the, :<
achievement of Namibia’s independence.
‘~d$ ,:, ;:?
,I :,I I’/,>
,x;
;:>“;,’‘x,’
94. Almost three months ago, on 30 Januaryj&e?~
Security Council met to consider the outcome of&e X;,$
pre-implementation
meeting on Namibia whichl#a#$
been convened at Geneva with the aim of creatiQg;an :)$d
atmosphere of trust and understanding and of exp@ “‘3
diting an agreement on the date for a cease-fire~@nd@ .2
the implementation
of the settlement plan. The@he ?g
General Assembly resumed its thirty-fifth session for .:$i
a week in early March to discuss further the question ;<$
of Namibia. It is important that the South A@iicay:$
Government
understand
the grave interna,tion+l$$
concern which was expressed at those meetings, #
and which continues to be expressed at these pre=sem’#
::&
meetings of the Council.
,I
’8’
95. On 3 March, during the deliberations at, ithe ‘4
resumed thirty-fifth session of the General Assemb[y$ ;t
my delegation strongly expressed its regret over;the’y$
intransigent attitude taken by the South Africa@~v~,~:~
emment at the Geneva meeting. We also expressed’:,;2
the hope that the South African Government wduld:‘?$
correctly understand the present situation and ,the::‘flj
growing indignation of the world community, and ‘tha$$
it would not stymie efforts for a peaceful solution tothi&. 3
problem. The Government of South Africa should be;;
aware of the fact that there is a mounting intemationril, :;
demand, as -evidenced by the convening of the Securrty z
Council, for consideration of further measures to ;
secure South Africa’s compliance with the impie-a ‘I:$
mentation of resolution 435 (1978). My delegation, ;
hopes that the South African Government will review, 1:;
the implications of the failure of the pre-implementation
;
meeting, and urgently reconsider its position with >Srmi
view to resolving at an early date the question of 1
Namibia on the basis of resolution 435 (1978). The I
precious opportunity to achieve a long-awaited and
internationally acceptable solution must not be lost, i

89. The indignation of the third world countries over
the failure of the Geneva talks has been voiced loud
and clear. At the New Delhi Conference in February
last, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the NonAligned Countries strongly condemned the South
African racist regime for its persistent refusal to withdraw from Namibia and its deliberate sabotage of the
Geneva meeting. They declared that those acts constituted a threat to peace. The Ministers called upon
the Security Council to impose urgently comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions against South
Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, so as to compel the Pretoria regime to terminate its illegal occupation of Namibian3 The same call
was repeated when the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned
Countries met at the ministerial level
at Algiers last week. The OAU Co-ordinating Committee for the Liberation of Africa, held at Arusha
last January, and the thirty-sixth ordinary session ofthe
Council of Ministers of OAU, held recently at Addis
Ababa, have also called for effective measures against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter.
90. The call for comprehensive mandatory economic
sanctions against the racist colonialist regime is fully
justified. Unless the United Nations imposes coercive
measures, South Africa will not cease and desist in its
evil design to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia and its plunder of the country’s natural resources, The Security Council must not fail to give
heed to the concern of the world community and must
not resile from its own commitment to the liberation
of Namibia. It must act firmly to compel South Africa
to withdraw from all Namibian territories.
91. As a non-aligned Islamic country, Pakistan has
always extended full support to the just struggle of all
peoples against colonialism, imperialism and racism
in all their manifestations, and to the efforts of the
United Nations towards decolonization. Our stand is
based on the ideological foundations of our State
which rest on respect for human dignity, universal
brotherhood
and equality, and on our immutable
commitment
to the right of all peoples to self-determination.
Consistent with that position, we have
extended unqualified support to the courageous people
of Namibia, who are waging a determined struggle,
under the leadership of SWAPO, against one of the
vilest forms of racism and colonial domination.

96. Japan has consistently supported, and highly ci
evaluated, the efforts of the five Western countries
in seeking an early and peaceful solution to this prob ‘ii
lem. Such efforts include their settlement proposal i

92. I should like once again to reiterate Pakistan’s
steadfast support for the people of Namibia. We look
forward to an early triumph of their heroic struggle
8

[S/12636], the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), and
their initiatives for conciliation and mediation,

102. The Government of Japan extends such cooperation to its friends in Africa in the hope of mitigating their suffering and of helping their nationbuilding efforts. And when independence is finally
achieved in Namibia, Japan will be ready to extend COoperation to nation-building efforts there as well.

97. In this connection, my delegation notes with
sincere appreciation the ongoing efforts of the five
Western States, and particularly the meeting convened
in London on 22 and 23 April by senior officials of those
Governments. My delegation has examined with great
interest the joint press statement issued at the conclusion of that meeting, and is in complete agreement with
their assessment that resolution 435 (1978) continues
to provide a solid basis for a transition to independence
in Namibia. We welcome the decision to continue
intensive consultations among the contact group representatives, and to convene in Rome at an early date a
meeting of the five Ministers for Foreign Affairs. We
earnestly hope that these efforts will facilitate the
achievement of a solution to the Namibian question.
The commitment of the five Western Powers to search
for an internationally acceptable settlement underlines
my delegation’s belief that any constructive means
towards a peaceful solution should be thoroughly
explored. Japan is prepared to examine seriously all
constructive proposals which may be presented.

103. I should like to close my remarks today by
expressingmy delegation’s sincere wish that the people
of Namibia will in the very near future be able to enjoy,
as citizens of a free and independent State, the fundamental rights, privileges and responsibilities for which
they have been struggling so courageously.
104. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Mr. President, let
me begin by congratulating you on your assumption of
the high office of President of the Security Council for
the month of April and to offer to you my delegation’s
whole-hearted co-operation and support in the performance of your duties, In the short time that you
have represented Ireland on the Security Council, you
have fully demonstrated the skills and qualities of an
accomplished diplomatist and of atactful and seasoned
negotiator. Let me add that you epitomize the commendable traits of determination, patience and fairness. We have no doubt that under your leadership the
Security Council will be able to discharge its responsibilities effectively.

98. My Government has repeatedly expressed its
intention to co-operate to the best of its ability with the
efforts of the international community aimed at
achieving an early solution, through peaceful means,
of the question of Namibia.

105. My delegation takesthis occasion also to express
its deep appreciation to the repr&entative of the
German Democratic Republic, Ambassador Florin,
for the splendid manner in which he steered the business of the Council last month.

99. Japan recognizes the significant role being played
by SWAP0 in the movement for Namibian independence, and pays a high tribute to the position it took
at the Geneva meeting in expressing its readiness to
sign a cease-fire agreement. At this juncture, my delegation would like to confirm Japan’s position that,
ultimately, representation of the Namibian people
should be determined by the :Namibian people themselves, through free and fair elections.

106. For the past few days, we have been deliberating
the situation in Namibia that has resulted from the
refusal of the racist regime of Pretoria to comply
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
-in particular Security Council resolutions 385 (1976),
435 (1978) and 439 (1978).

100. I have on previous occasions-most recently in
my speech before the General Assembly on 3 Marchexplained the measures which the Government of
Japan has taken in conjunction with the international
community’s efforts to bring independence to Namibia. I shall not reiterate those measures here. Rather,
I wish to inform the Council of two examples of my
Government’s latest efforts to help the people of Namibia and their African neighbours,

107. My delegation, like the other members of the
international community, had every fervent hope that,
with the adoption of these Council resolutions, the
South African regime would decide to abandon its
attitude towards Namibia and respond constructively
to the universal call for the speedy implementation
of the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia.

101. On the occasion of the observance of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Japan pledged on 19March a substantial voluntary
contribution to the trust funds and programme for
southern Africa, including the United Nations Institute
for Namibia. Moreover, at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, which was
recently held at Geneva, Japan pledged a $20 million
voluntary contribution to the African refugee programmes. This is in addition to its regular contribution
of $16 million to international organizations which
deal with refugee and humanitarian problems.

108. However, the continued intransigence, prevarication and hollow excuses of the colonialist and
racist regime of South Africa once again surfaced at the
multi-party pre-implementation meeting on Namibia,
which was held at Geneva from 7 to 14 January 1981.
The Geneva talks were intended to reach agreement
on a date for the cease-fire and the start of the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
The Secretary-General’s report [S/14333], which is
factual and comprehensive, vividly depicts the stance
adopted by South Africa and clearly shows where the
blame for the failure of the Geneva talks should lie.
9

109. In the face of South Africa’s callous disregard
of the will of the international community and its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, it behoves us at this juncture to act firmly
and decisivety to bring about South Africa’s compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations-compliance
which is long overdue.
In this connection, we wish to call upon the members of
the contact group of Western States to do their utmost
to achieve this objective. They have already done
very much in the past, to their great credit, but a final
push is necessary on their part, as they are the countries that could greatly and truly influence the thinking
of South Africa.
110. The position of my delegation is clear. The
Philippines has constantly adhered to the view that the
process of decolonization should be achieved by negotiations and peaceful change. Based on that yardstick,
we have welcomed and supported the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia, initiated by the
contact group of Western States. As a consequence,
the Philippines
has supported all positive moves
towards the early implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978). It is precisely
because of our commitment to the process of decolonization and our unflinching support for the efforts of
the United Nations to bring Namibia to genuine independence that we feel that urgent measures as a last
resort should now be taken against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, after
all these years of patient but fruitless negotiations.
111. To allow South Africa to persist in its arrogance
and in its defiance of the resolutions of the United
Nations would only serve to erode the credibility of the
Security Council in the eyes of the international community. It thus becomes necessary to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa.
112. Once comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions
are imposed against South Africa, it is to be hoped that
it will abandon its baseless ambitions towards Namibia and, consequently, agree to a process leading
to the attainment by the Namibian people of genuine
independence.

cannot continue its illegal occupalion of Namibia,
its persistent defiance of the United Nations, its war
of repression
against the people of Namibia, its repeated acts of aggression launched from bases in
Namibia against independent African States and its
policy
of colonialist expansion-all
of which constitute a serious threat to international
peace and
security.
115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Mr. Salim A. Salim. I welcome him here and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
116. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I want to thank you and the other
members of the Council for affording me the opportunity to address this august body. I do so as one of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs given a specific mandate
by the OAU through the decision of the session of its
Council of Ministers held last February at Addis
Ababa. In giving a mandate to several Ministers for
Foreign Affairs to come to this session, the OAU was
underscoring the importance we attach to the current
deliberations of the Council on the issue of Namibia.
Similarly, the decision of the extraordinary ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries, held at Algiers, to request several
Ministers for Foreign Affairs to participate in this
debate in the name of the non-aligned movement is
testimony to the seriousness with which the nonaligned countries view this series of meetings. The fact
that so many Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other
Cabinet Ministers from Africa, Asia, Latin America
and Europe have been in New York for several days to
participate in and follow very closely the Council’s
deliberations attests not only to our collective commitment to the struggle of the people of Namibia but also
to our belief and confidence in the responsibilities and
capabilities of this institution. Clearly, therefore, we
have not come to NewYork simply for the purpose of
debate for debate’s sake. Neither have we come to New
York only to go through familiar ground or engage
in sterile and acrimonious exchanges.
117. We are here because we believe that the evolution of the situation with respect to Namibia has
reached a crossroads. The challenges before the Council, therefore, are enormous. Through its actions the
Council can make easier the path towards the freedom
of Namibia and thus minimize the dangers of the
growing confrontation
in southern Africa. On the
other hand, if the Council is to be immobilized and fails
to respond to the needs of the hour, those who cause
such immobilization
will not escape the judgement of
history as having contributed to further violence,
misery and confrontation in that part of our continent,
with serious and imponderable
consequences for
international peace and security.

113. However, any negotiated settlement of the
question of Namibia outside the framework of the
United Nations plan and without the participation of
SWAP0 as the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people would only further heighten tension in
southern Africa, with dire consequences for international peace and security.
114. The hour is long past: the moment of truth has
come. The choice is now left to us. The attention of
the entire international community is riveted on the
outcome of this debate. We must take resolute and bold
action and, with firmness of conviction and political
courage, send a clear message to South Africa that it

118. My delegation is extremely gratified that this
debate is being held under your stewardship, Mr, Presi10

dent, The credentials of your country as a firm opponent of colonialism and injustice and a faithful
defender of United Nations principles, goals and
objectives are well known. It is particularly fitting
that an Irish representative should be presiding over
deliberations of the Council on an issue which is of
immediate and unquestionable concern to the United
Nations. As a Tanzanian I take comfort in your presidency, conscious of the very warm and friendly
relations that exist between our two countries; as an
African I am equally happy to see you presiding, because we are familiar with your country’s consistent
support of the struggle of our peoples for self-determination and independence and against racial tyranny;
and as an individual who has had the benefit and
privilege of knowing you I feel particularly reassured by
your presidency since your skills, talents and ability are
a matter of record.
119. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other
representatives of the African and non-aligned countries who have preceded me in this debate have eloquently and forcefully articulated our concerns about
the present situation. They have gone through the
history of the Namibian question before the United
Nations. They have effectively exposed South Africa’s
consistent and persistent defiance of the will of the
international community and, in particular, the decisions and resolutions of the Security Council. It should
therefore not be necessary for me to engagein a lenghty
expos6 on the fact of South Africa’s continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, notwithstanding the decision
of the General Assembly in 1966 [rvsofution 2145
(XXJ~] to revoke its mandate and the decisions of this
Council to call upon it to withdraw from Namibia or,
for that matter, the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice’ affirming the illegality of South
Africa’s presence in Namibia. Indeed, one would have
thought that, considering what we all perceive to be
an international consensus on the issue of Namibia,
it would not be necessary for us to explain why it is
incumbent upon the Council to exert the necessary
pressure with a view to implementation of its own
decisions. But as the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria, my brother Alhaji Ali Baba, rightly
observed [227&h m~ciina], there are those who have
even questioned the propriety of convening this series
of meetings of the Council, arguing that the Council’s
deliberations will not enhance the path towards the
resolution of the Namibian conflict. We are quite
frankly flabbergasted by such positions. We are no less
amazed by the exhortations for the patience, tolerance
and realism that are expected of the African States.
120. For the truth is that in the history of the evolution of the Namibian question Africa and its leaders
at all levels have been more than patient and have
exercised not only utmost restraint in the face of
constant provocations but also an extraordinary degree
of statesmanship. Those who would deny us of this
position are not only being uncharitable to history but
also doing injustice to the very process of negotiations.
I should like briefly to elucidate on this point.
11

121. I had the singular honour and privilege of Presiding over the Security Councilswhen it adopted resolution 385 (1976) in 1976. I remember very vividly
how that resolution was hailed as eloquent testimony
to reason and statesmanship.It is interesting to observe
that, before the adoption of that resolution, one of the
consistent appeals made by our friends the Western
representatives in the Council both in public and
private meetings was an appeal to the African States to
be realistic, to be patient and to work for a negotiated
solution, Resolution 385 (1976) was therefore considered to provide a basisfor South African withdrawal
from Namibia without delay. But South Africa remained defiant.
122. Again, in the same exhortations for realism,
Africa was urged to exercise restraint and to support
efforts aimed at putting into operation resolution 385
(1976).
123. It was against that background that Africa was
requested to report and did respond positively to the
initiative of the five Western members of the Security
Council-the representatives of Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Prance, the United Kingdom
and the United States.That initiative culminated in the
Western proposal [S/12636]-and here T wish to
emphasizethat it was a Western proposal-which was
ultimately adopted as a United Nations plan through
Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

124. We all realize that there has been a new Admlnistration in the United States. But we do hope that the
representatives of the other four Western countries
will have fully apprised the representatives of the new
Administration of the tremendous eff’drts which were
made, culminating in the adoption of that resolution.
We particularly hope that all our Western colleagues
will recall the solid backing that they consistently
received from the African States-first, in the process
leading to the preparation of that plan and, secondly,
in the negotiations which culminated in the adoption
of that plan by the United Nations. Those negotiations
were long, arduous and painstaking. Prom Africa’s
perspective, they involved many of our beads of State,
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other representatives, and throughout we have supported the contact
group of Western States.Throughout we have done so
in the belief that they would exercise their enormous
influence with South Africa by virtue of their extensive links in order to urge upon the Pretoria rigime the
implementation of the United Nations decision on
Namibia. It is to be regretted, therefore, that in the light
of that background, and in particular in the light of one
concession after another made by SWAP0 in the
course of the negotiations, and supported by the
African States, the negotiations have continued to be
blocked by the Sourh African rbgime, as was recently
manifested in its sabotaging of the pre-implementation meeting at Geneva.
125. It has now been three years since Security Council resolution 435 (1978) endorsing the Western plan

lans similarly are victims. The constant harassment
of Zambia is a matter of record. For Africa, therefore,
the freedom and independence of Namibia is a crucial
issue. It is, indeed, a life-and-death issue. That is why
we have consistently supported the five Western
Powers in their plan, and that is why we remain very
concerned over the failure of the implementation
of the
United Nations plan.

was adopted. The representative of the United Kingdom [227/sr mcefirrg] was right in pinpointing the
disappointment,
the anger and the frustration which
have been expressed by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs from Africa and other non-aligned countries.
It should, however, be noted that the frustrations that
we all feel and the indignation that we all share are
stronger-and
justifiably so-than those expressed in
those statements. That is because, in the last five years
or so, both before and subsequent to the adoption of
resolution 435 (1978), we have been subjected to one
frustrating experience after another. At every critical
moment of the negotiations, when the international
community was led to believe that implementation
of
the plan was imminent, the South African regime has
invariably come out with new demands, new prevarications and new pretexts, all aimed at effectively
blocking the path to negotiations. And during these
experiences, it has been SWAP0 and the African
States which have been urged to make concessions in
order to accommodate South Africa. And, incredible
as it may sound, those concessions have indeed been
made-only
to find South Africa coming up with
something new. The five Western Powers know this.

128. We have not come to the Council merely because we are interested in yet another resolution on
the issue of Namibia. The United Nations has adopted
enough resolutions on this issue. We have come to the
Council in order to urge it to shoulder its responsibilities seriously and ensure the implementation
of
its own decisions. We have come to the Council also
to impress on the three Western permanent members
of the Council their own responsibility in working for
the scrupulous implementation
of a plan of which
they and their colleagues of Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany were the authors. Is it not ironical
that it should be up to us to make appeals to our Western colleagues to work for the implementation
of their
own plan?

126. Before the pre-implementation
meeting at
Geneva, for example, when al! the tangible demands
of South Africa had been met, the Pretoria regime then
brought up an intangible one, namely, the so-called
creation of a climate of trust and confidence. Before
we went to Geneva, the representatives of the five
Western Powers, with whom we had extensive contacts, expressed confidence that Geneva would produce the required results. Yet, as we all know, Geneva
failed and it failed precisely because the South African
regime did not, and apparently does not, want a negotiated solution.

129. The representative of the United Kingdom,
speaking on behalf of the contact group yesterday,
inter alicr referred to the successful Lancaster House
Conference on Zimbabwe and pointed out that “it was
always clear that it was in the long-term interest of all
the parties that Zimbabwe should proceed to independence by negotiated settlement rather than by ulti- i
mate resolution through armed struggle”
[ibid,,
pm-a. 911. I should like to make one or two observations
in respect of that statement. In the first place, there
has never been any doubt on the part of Africa that
negotiated solutions were always preferred to the
necessity of armed resistance. The Lusaka Manifesto
on Southern Africa,S adopted in 1969, made this point
unequivocally
clear. Yet, as the Manifesto itself
pointed out, the alternative to a negotiated solution
is not the status quo. When the path to a negotiated
solution is blocked, the freedom fighters have no
option but to fight for their freedom, and free Africa’s
obligation and commitment in that context are unambiguously clear.

127. In the light of this defiance, therefore, what
are we expected to do? Are we seriously, in the name of
realism and patience, expected to fold our hands and
await Namibia’s salvation until such time that the
South African regime has decided that sufficient conditions have been created to install a puppet regime
in perpetuity? Are we seriously expected, in the name
of realism, to acquiesce in the massive repressions
that the ~parrheid regime has embarked upon against
the freedom fighters and other patriots in Namibia7
Are we seriously expected, in the name of realism,
patience and moderation, to stand idly by while South
Africa uses Namibia as a springboard for constant
aggression against Angola and Zambia’? Are we
seriously expected, in the name of realism, to allow
South Africa to embark on calculated and systematic
international terrorism, not only within Namibia, but
beyond its own borders as manifested in its recent
criminal acts of aggression against the People’s Republic of Mozambique? Those are serious and legitimate questions. They are not academic questions.
The people of southern Africa have to experience daily
the arrogance and defiance of the South African
Government. Namibians lose their lives daily. Ango-

130. In this context it should be recalled that while
we have all hailed the results of Lancaster and have all
paid a deserved tribute to the United Kingdom Government for its decision to shoulder seriously its responsibility over Zimbabwe, we have never been in doubt
that Lancaster was made possible only by at least two
crucial factors: first, the armed resistance waged by the
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and, consequently, the
enormous sacrifice made by Zimbabweans in that
struggle; and, secondly, the pressure of the international community,
including, notwithstanding
its
limitation, the pressure of sanctions.
131. Consequently, one of the lessons of the Zimbabwe experience that becomes quite clear is that for
12

as long as the road to negotiations continues to be
blocked, a combination
of pressures, both internal
and external, is an essential prerequisite for a just and
lasting solution. What was true of Zimbabwe is no less
true of Namibia.
For as long as the South African
Government continues to act in a defiant and recalcitrant manner, emulating in the process the behaviour
which was consistently adopted by the Smith regime,
our responsibility
becomes evident. It is to exert
maximum pressure on the South African regime in
order to ensure the implementation
of United Nations
decisions and in particular
Council resolution 435
(1978).
132. We in Africa believe that the Council can act
decisively towards that path by invoking enforcement
measures provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. At the same time, Africa is under
no illusions about its own responsibilities.
That is why
at the meeting held at Lusaka, Zambia, in February
of this year, the front-line States and Nigeria, as stated
in the Lusaka communique:

Summit

135. Let me say in all solemnity that ein Africa do
not view this situation lightly. Let me st ess that it took
a lot of reflection and considered ju clgement before
we came to the Council. It would have’tieen logical for
us to have asked for a meeting of the Council immediately after the failure of the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva. That we did not do so is testimony
to our patience and our preparedness to be as accommodating as humanly possible.
136. Those who are familiar with the realities of
southern Africa would not fail to appreciate the degree
of patience and reasonableness demonstrated
thus
far by the African States. We have been reasonable and
patient even when our people have faced death and
devastation. Has the Council forgotten the Cassinga
massacre carried out by the South African authorities
on the eve of Security Council deliberations on the
Namibian question in May 1978? Has the Council
forgotten that, more often than not when there appeared to be a ray of hope in breaking one deadlock
or another in the negotiations, the South Africans used
the opportunity to commit callous acts of aggression
against African States? Has the Council forgotten that
the South African regime not only has defied every
resolution on Namibia adopted by the Council but has
proceeded to intensify its own repression in Namibia?
Has it been forgotten that when the United Nations
called for the holding of free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision and control and when we
were being informed that the South African Government had accepted the United Nations plan, the
Pretoria regime embarked on a series of measures
within Namibia calculated to create onefilfilit uccompli
after another in contravention of United Nations decisions? Yet we are told that we have not been patient;
yet we are being exhorted to be realistic. Have words
lost their meaning? Are patience and reason tantamount to acquiescence in continued defiance of
United Nations decisions?

“ . . . concluded that with the failure of the Geneva
conference, SWAP0
had no alternative
but to
intensify the liberation war in Namibia and in this
connexion reaffirmed the unflinching support for
SWAPO. They also appealed to all freedom- and
peace-loving countries of the world to support
SWAP0 in all fields, including economic, diplomatic and military assistance.”
At the same time, the Lusaka
according to the communique:

on South Africa with a view to getting a negotiated
solution and thus minimizing the suffering of all concerned? For the issue at stake before the Council is
not to devise means in order to “settle down for the long
siege”. The issue is how the Council can assume its
responsibilities in a situation which clearly threatens
international peace and security.

reaffirmed,

“ * . , their conviction that the South African racist
regime can only be brought to the negotiating table
for peaceful settlement of the Namibian question if
economic and political pressure was brought to
bear on her by the contact group of the five Western
States and the international community as a whole.”
133. The spirit and letter of that position were further endorsed and reinforced by the Council of Ministers of the OAU when it met at Addis Ababa in
February and March last and decided to intensify
support for SWAPO. Clearly, therefore, Africa takes
seriously its responsibility
with respect to the Namibian question.
Happily,
also, the non-aligned
movement as a whole has taken the issue with the
seriousness that it deserves, as manifested by the
ministerial
i’ important decision of the extraordinary
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries held at Algiers.

137. Let me emphasize that we have not come to the
Council seeking confrontation with anyone, but certainly not with the Western States. But we have come
to this august body which is primarily responsible for
international
peace and security to seek measures
which would in fact reduce the suffering of the people,
of Namibia in particular and those of southern Africa
in general and consequently arrest what is clearly a
rapidly deteriorating
situation threatening
international peace and security. In short, the African States,
which have come to the Council have come seeking
the implementation
of the United Nations plan as
embodied in resolution 435 (1978).

134. But what of the Security Council? And, more
specifically,
what about the responsibilities
of the
five Western Powers? Do the Western countries,
particularly
those that are members of the contact
, group, want to see the intensification
of the armed
, struggle in Namibia before they can recognize that the
time has come for them to exert the necessary pressure
13

138. Supporting
this plan without equivocation
means supporting an end to violence in Namibia.
Working for the implementation
of this plan means
encouraging the path to a negotiated solution in the
crisis in southern Africa, What we ask of the Council
is to do no more than enforce its own decisions. What
we expect of the Western countries members of the
contact group is simply and clearly to support their
own plan.

African Government. The Council would be making
an important contribution to the solution of the Namibian problem and to international peace and security
if it acted firmly and decisively by adopting measures
aimed at the scrupulous implementation
of its resolution 435 (1978).
142. I cannot conclude without paying a well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General
and his collaborators in the Secretariat for their untiring efforts,
patience and determination in pursuit of the objectives
of the United Nations concerning Namibia.

139. It is imperative to emphasize that the road to
negotiation has been blocked not because of a lack of
a framework for a solution, What has been missing has
been South Africa’s commitment to implement the
plan. Geneva failed not because there were some shortcomings as far as the United Nations plan was concerned, but rather owing to the fact that South Africa
used Geneva simply to perpetuate its known opposition to a genuinely negotiated solution. If, therefore, we
are interested in getting a negotiated solution to the
problem of Namibia we should not be searching for red
herrings; we should address ourselves to the problem
squarely-and
the problem remains South Africa’s
intransigence,

143, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
144. Mr. BURWTN
(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to take this
opportunity to thank you, and through you the other
Security Council members, for allowing me to participate in these deliberations.
145. I take this opportunity also to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I am pleased to see you, an
able diplomat with high qualities, presiding over the
Council at this crucial stage. We are sure that under
your wise leadership the Council will be able to discharge its important duties.

140. We listened yesterday with the utmost attention
to the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom on behalf of the five Western Powers
[227fsr meering]. We noted with interest the communique issued by the senior officials of the five
Western Powers meeting in London [ibid., para. 881.
We are seriously concerned that instead of addressing
itself to the nitty-gritty of the issue-namely,
the
failure of the South African regime to comply with
resolution
435 (1978)-the
London communique
seems to provide grounds for further prevarication on
the part of the South African regime. On the one hand,
we are told that resolution 435 (1978) provides a solid
basis for transition to independence in Namibia. Yet,
on the other hand, we are told that the plan needs to
be strengthened, One wonders whether the word
“strengthened”
is not a euphemism for revision of the
plan. And if that is the case, then the fears and apprehension of SWAPO, of the African States and of the
overwhelming majority of the international community
are more than justified. For, as the front-line States
clearly declared at the summit meeting which took
place at Luanda on 15 April of this year, what is urgently needed at this point in time is the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) without
any further delay, prevarication,
qualification
or
modification.
To proceed on the path of amending
the plan-which,
as I stated earlier, is a product of
arduous and prolonged negotiations-would
seriously
risk side-tracking the plan itself and would in the process frustrate the entire negotiating process.

146. I should like also to extend my delegation’s
warmest congratulations to Ambassador Florin of the
German Democratic Republic, who presided over
the Council last month.
147. Close to 15 years have passed since the General
Assembly adopted its resolution 2145 (XXI), which
provided for the termination of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and placed administration
of Namibia under the direct responsibility
of the United
Nations. Since then South Africa’s administration
of
the region has been illegal. The International Court of
Justice confirmed that in the advisory opinion it
issued on 21 June 1971’ upon the request of the Council. In turn, in its resolution 301 (1971), the Council
confirmed the Court’s opinion. Since then the United
Nations has been calling upon South Africa to withdraw from the region to enable the Namibian people
to exercise the right to self-determination
and independence. Regrettably,
however, South Africa’s
regime paid no attention to all those calls or to resolutions of the United Nations. Thus we now find ourselves discussing this issue, which has been on the
agenda of the General Assembly for the past 35 years.

141. We sincerely hope, therefore, that the Governments of the contact group will bear in mind these considerations and, rather than proceed with an exercise
which can only lead to further delay and further frustration, use their influence to exert pressure where it is
absolutely and urgently needed-namely,
on the South

148. This series of meetings of the Council is of
special significance because it comes at a time when all
the peaceful international efforts to find a solution to
the problem of Namibia, including the recent preimplementation meeting at Geneva, have failed. It also
comes at a time when the tense situation in southern
.4

153. The implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
has become an imperative and urgent matter in view of
the current situation in the region. It is incumbent upon
the Council to seek the implementation
of that resolution by all means. The five Western States must prove
that they are just as sincere about this by exercising
pressure on South Africa for the implementation
of the
United Nations plan, without delay or amendment.

Africa has escalated to a degree which threatens peace
and security in the region because of the intensification
of the campaigns of oppression, detention and execution conducted by South Africa’s racist rCgime against
the black citizens of Namibia and the increasing aggression against the front-line States. That regime has also
increased its evil manoeuvres inside the Namibian
region in a desperate attempt to eliminate SWAPO,
the sole and legitimate representative of the Namibian
people, and to grant legitimacy to the surrogate Government it has established there.

154. It is high time for the Council fully to shoulder
its responsibilities
by applying comprehensive
economic sanctions against South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter and in compliance with the wish of
the majority of members of the international community as expressed in the communiquC of the Conference of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at New Delhi,A and also in
compliance with the resolution of the thirty-sixth
ordinary session of the OAU Council of Ministers, held
at Addis Ababa last February [S//4390, nnnex], as
well as with the programme of action endorsed by the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the .Non-Aligned Countries
in its extraordinary ministerial meeting held at Algiers
from 16 to 18 April [S/1445& nnnex].

149. The whole international
community
acknowledges that South Africa’s occupation of Namibia
is illegal. Yet all international
efforts to force South
Africa to withdraw from the region have failed because
that regime still refuses to implement
any United
Nations resolutions on this issue. The recent Geneva
meeting proved beyond any doubt the intransigence of
that rkgime and its refusal to implement United Nations resolutions, and particularly
Security Council
resolution 435 (1978), despite SWAPO’s declaration
that it was prepared to cease fire and immediately to
commence implementing
the United Nations plan
for Namibia.

155. The application of such sanctions will strengthen the confidence of the world’s peoples in this international instrument and in its ability to carry out its
responsibilities
in maintaining
international
peace
and security. It will also be a proper step towards
forcing South Africa to withdraw its forces and administration from the region and to begin negotiations
with SWAPO, as the sole and legitimate representative
of the Namibian people, so that the region will gain
independence before the end of this year.

150. South Africa’s racist rCgime persists in challenging the United Nations resolutions on Namibia.
That is not peculiar, coming from a such a racist
rCgime, which is established on the most repugnant
and loathsome policy known to man and whose existence lacks any legitimacy. But what is truly peculiar
is that the regime finds States-permanent
members
of the Council-which
co-operate with it, while those
States claim to be concerned with human rights and
the defence of man’s freedom.

156. The failure of the Security Council to take
deterrent measures against South Africa with regard
to Namibia is the result of the positions taken by the
Western States which are permanent members of the
Security Council and their use of the veto in the Council. We hope that those States will review their positions and weigh their interests in South Africa against
their interests in 50 African States. They must realize
that the patience of the African peoples will not last
forever, while they are witnessing their brethren in
southern Africa suffering all kinds of oppression and
being denied their right to freedom and a decent life.

151. Those States which have strategic economic
interests and investments in South Africa and Namibia find it in their interest to have South Africa continue its control over the region and maintain the slaf~ls
qrro in Namibia so that they may maintain their investments and accumulate enormous wealth at the expense
of the Namibian people.

152. South Africa’s racist rbgime would not have
persisted in challenging United Nations resolutions
had it not been for the direct and indirect support a.nd
approval it receives from the Western States, foremost
among them the United States of America, It is regrettable that we find those States, which care for none but
their own interests, even at the expense of human
, values and morality, persisting in violating resolutions
of the United Nations and of all other international
organizations by providing both moral and material
support to South Africa’s racist entity. They also
provide South Africa with arms and technical expertise
to develop its military capability, which it applies in the
massacres and other atrocious acts it commits against
the African peoples in Namibia and South Africa, and
in its acts of aggression against the neighbouring
States, particularly Angola, Botswana, Mozambique
and Zambia.

157. I do not wish to conclude without thanking the
Secretary-General for the efforts he is making to find
a solution for this issue.
158. In conclusion, we hope that this series of
meetings will arrive at solemn and stern resolutions
against South Africa. We reaffirm our country’s
solidarity with the Namibian people in its just struggle
for self-determination
and independence and we shall
continue to provide all moral and material assistance
to SWAPO, as it is the sole and legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

15

1

16
