United Nations

A/RES/59/164

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 98

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/496)]

59/164. Improvement of the status of women in the United Nations
system
The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 1 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
Article 8, which provides that the United Nations shall place no restrictions on the
eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under conditions of
equality in its principal and subsidiary organs,
Recalling also the goal, contained in the Platform for Action adopted by the
Fourth World Conference on Women, 1 of achieving overall gender equality,
particularly at the Professional level and above, by 2000 and the further actions and
initiatives set out in the outcome document adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-third special session, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development
and peace for the twenty-first century”, 2
1.

Takes note with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.

Welcomes:

(a) The commitment of the Secretary-General to meeting the goal of gender
equality and his assurance that gender balance will be given the highest priority in
his continuing efforts to bring about a new management culture in the Organization;
(b) The new initiatives and strategies undertaken system-wide and at the
Secretariat level to achieve gender balance, including paying special attention to the
identification of suitably qualified women candidates, strengthening of recruitment
sources for women, development of recruitment strategies in substantive areas,
enhancing women’s career development, fostering attitudinal changes and
introducing family-friendly policies;
(c) The increase in the proportion of women in the Professional and higher
categories of staff with appointments of one year or more;
_______________
1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
3
A/59/357.

04-48610

A/RES/59/164

3.
Regrets that the goal of 50/50 gender distribution has not been met and
that overall progress in achieving this goal remains limited;
4.
Notes with concern the continuing lack of representation of women at
higher levels of decision-making, especially at the Under-Secretary-General level;
5.
Notes with particular concern that gender balance considerations have
yet to be effectively integrated throughout the human resources management
policies of the United Nations;
Reaffirms the urgent goal of achieving 50/50 gender distribution in all
6.
categories of posts within the United Nations system, especially at senior and
policy-making levels, with full respect for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations;
Stresses the need to address the continuing lack of representation or
7.
underrepresentation of women from certain countries, in particular from developing
and least developed countries, from countries with economies in transition and from
unrepresented or largely underrepresented Member States;
Reaffirms the need to continue to develop innovative recruitment
8.
strategies to identify and attract suitably qualified women candidates, in particular
from, and in, developing and least developed countries and countries with
economies in transition and other Member States that are unrepresented or
underrepresented in the Secretariat;
Reaffirms also its resolution 58/144 of 22 December 2003, and requests
9.
increased and sustained efforts towards its full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the
organizations of the United Nations system to ensure that recruitment strategies,
promotion and retention policies, career development, justice, anti-harassment and
sexual harassment policies, human resources and succession planning, work/family
policies, management culture and mechanisms for managerial accountability
accelerate the goal of 50/50 gender distribution;
11. Urges the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the organizations
of the United Nations system to redouble their efforts to realize significant progress
towards the goal of 50/50 gender distribution in the very near future;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to enable the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women to effectively contribute to,
monitor and facilitate the setting and achievement of gender targets in human
resource action plans, including by ensuring access to the information required to
carry out that work;
13. Strongly encourages Member States to support the efforts of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, funds and programmes to achieve the goal of
50/50 gender distribution, especially at senior and policy-making levels, by
identifying and regularly submitting more women candidates for appointment to
positions in the United Nations system, by identifying and proposing national
recruitment sources in cooperation with national women’s machineries and
professional organization networks and by encouraging more women to apply for
positions within the Secretariat, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes and
the regional commissions, including in areas in which women are underrepresented,
such as peacekeeping, peacebuilding and other non-traditional areas;

2

A/RES/59/164

14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide an oral report to the
Commission on the Status of Women at its forty-ninth and fiftieth sessions and to
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation of the
present resolution, including by providing up-to-date statistics on all levels of the
United Nations system.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

3
