United Nations

S/PV.6154

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6154th meeting
Tuesday, 30 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Hernández-Milian
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2009/323)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38690 (E)

*0938690*

S/PV.6154

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/323)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, the
Czech Republic, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway
and Pakistan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency The
Honourable Lawrence Cannon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Canada.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/323, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Eide: The current situation in Afghanistan is
certainly the most complex that we have witnessed in
many years. However, if managed well, I believe that it
could also become a turning point in our efforts to
bring the conflict to an end. The situation is complex
because we have to keep so many perspectives and
processes in mind at the same time, namely, the need to
ensure an election process that is credible and where
the result can be accepted by the people, the need to
stimulate promising and positive developments in
several sectors in spite of the noise from the election
campaign and an intense fighting season, and the need
to look beyond the elections and shape a more focused
agenda for the next five years, one that will have to
include a credible peace process as an integral part of
the overall strategy. I say we, but, of course, in all
those processes it is the Afghan institutions and the
Afghan people who will have to take the lead. As
always, the role of the international community must
be to provide full support.
The August elections are about more than
choosing Afghanistan’s future leaders. They are about
strengthening the people’s confidence in democratic
processes and about strengthening Afghanistan’s
democratic institutions. They are not only about who
will lead, but also about the legitimacy of leadership. I
have therefore urged all candidates to campaign with
dignity and with fairness. An election campaign will
always be divisive, but in this country at this juncture it
is critically important that campaign disagreements are
managed and are replaced by unity of purpose in
building the country when the next presidential
inauguration takes place. All candidates must keep that
long-term perspective in mind.
I have called on Government institutions and
officials to maintain impartiality during all phases of
the election process. As the Council knows, the
President has issued a decree on non-interference by
State institutions. Ministers and heads of security
institutions have assured me, in my many discussions
with them, of their determination to protect the
integrity of their institutions. We will maintain a

09-38690

S/PV.6154

continuous dialogue with all of them to address cases
of interference if and when they occur.
I have also called on all candidates to avoid any
inflammatory language and to conduct campaigns
focused on their vision for Afghanistan’s future. We
need campaigns that are focused not only on who will
lead the country but on where they will lead it. And I
have called on the international community to avoid
any interference or appearance of interference in the
election process. Any such interference would
undermine the legitimacy of the process, as well as
people’s confidence in their future leaders. In
particular, it would harm the future Government’s
ability to bring the Afghan people together in a
credible peace process. No one’s interests can be
served by an election result that is disputed by the
people and affects the legitimacy of the future
Government.
Those elements — non-interference, a dignified
policy-oriented debate and total international
impartiality — are critical elements of the level playing
field that we all seek to establish. Of course, another
element is the ability of candidates to conduct their
campaigns. I am encouraged to see that the Afghan
media will hold a significant number of presidential
debates during the campaign. I appeal to all media,
including the public media, to ensure that candidates
have fair access. The Minister of the Interior has
offered to provide close protection to candidates during
their campaigning. The Minister of Defence has offered
transportation for candidates, within the limits of his
capabilities. Both measures will contribute to a
credible campaign.
Two weeks ago, I visited a so-called call centre,
where voters can call in to ask questions about the
elections. The centre now receives around 25,000 calls
every week from voters across the country, in
particular young voters. It is an important part of the
efforts of the Independent Election Commission’s
outreach programme to mobilize voters. The United
Nations has and will continue to appeal to all voters to
take part in the election process. Such participation is
essential to the legitimacy of the election results and to
the future strength of democratically elected
institutions. Our call goes to all Afghans without any
exceptions.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/323)
describes some of the progress we have seen during

09-38690

recent months in strengthening security institutions,
reforming the agricultural and private sectors,
improving revenue collection and the Government’s
internal coordination and developing comprehensive
civilian capacity-building programmes. I must say that
there is a totally new momentum in those areas. My
fear, however, is that the noise from the election
campaign and the fighting season will absorb so much
energy and attention that it will overshadow the
positive trends and affect the momentum that has now
developed. If we do not succeed in maintaining that
momentum, then I am afraid we will witness new
stagnation and more disillusionment among the public.
Those positive trends are of course primarily the
result of competent Afghan ministries. But they are
also a result of a strong and long-term commitment by
the international community. We must remain firm in
that long-term commitment, on which continued
progress will depend. However, progress will also
depend upon the short-term ability to respond to new
opportunities.
The work now under way in the Ministry of
Agriculture will result in a gap assessment and
proposals for how to reform the agricultural sector. The
work under way in the Ministry of Finance will result
in a list of priorities for civilian capacity-building
efforts. All those topics will be discussed in the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board (JCMB) meeting to be
held in a few days’ time. That work will also result in a
plan for more ambitious revenue collection. The efforts
under way by the Ministry of Interior and the
international community will result in proposals for a
stronger and reformed Afghan National Police. When
those proposals are presented to us, we must be able to
respond quickly and flexibly. It cannot be that we ask
Afghan authorities year after year to address our
concerns, but when a minister responds we reply that
this year’s budget will not allow us to react. Let me
give one example.
This spring, the Ministry of Agriculture asked for
an urgent contribution of $5.5 million for the purchase
of wheat seed, to allow farmers to plant next year’s
crop. In spite of a number of appeals, it has not been
possible to provide the resources required. We cannot
end up in a situation where we have to turn to Bill
Gates to meet urgent requirements of that nature. If we
respond quickly and effectively where encouraging
new developments occur, it will stimulate similar
developments in other sectors. But if we fail to

3

S/PV.6154

respond, then I fear that we could face setbacks even
where progress can now be seen.
But I must emphasize that we are also seeing
some new and promising trends in the international
community’s performance. In particular, the review of
United States development policies over the past weeks
has produced important results. I welcome the
readiness to support the new national agriculture
programme and the Government’s plans for civilian
capacity-building and for revenue collection. There is a
trend to support Afghan plans and Afghan priorities
much more generously than before. This could
represent a major shift and lead to greater aid
effectiveness and better donor coordination. The shift
in United States counter-narcotics policies, combined
with the new Afghan programme for the development
of alternative livelihoods, could also have a significant
impact on our efforts to combat poppy production.
However, the inequitable distribution of resources
within Afghanistan continues, making it easier for the
insurgency to destabilize previously stable provinces
and districts. There is still a serious lack of reporting
on how and where development resources are spent,
which complicates, of course, planning and
coordination. I hope that the ongoing gap assessment in
key sectors will lead donors to provide more
information about their spending and to a distribution
of resources that provides greater resources for underfunded provinces.
The United Nations has of course worked closely
with the relevant ministries during the elaboration of
the new plans, which have now been presented. We
will
continue
this
cooperation
during
the
implementation phase. We are already working with
other ministries to address serious imbalances, such as
the entire educational sector.
There is still much talk about the lack of
coordination, and it is justified. However, I do feel, on
this subject, that many are still discussing yesterday’s
debate. The situation has changed over the past few
months, and I believe that we are now turning a corner.
The Afghan Government is better coordinated, there
are encouraging signs in the international community
of better coordination, and the ability of the United
Nations to carry out its coordination mandate has
improved.
More effective and coordinated development
efforts will enable us, of course, to meet the concerns

4

of the Afghan people and their legitimate demands for
greater economic and social justice, and it will enhance
the people’s confidence in their own Government and
in the international community. Then we must also
strengthen our efforts to ensure that the military
engagement of the international community remains
supported by the Afghan people. In his report, the
Secretary-General appeals for a review of the
operations of special forces, which account by far for
the majority of civilian casualties caused by
pro-Government forces. He appeals for a review of the
use of air power in populated areas, which has led to
tragic loss of lives as the result of mistakes, and he
appeals for better training of international military
forces to prepare them better for the Afghan cultural
and political context in which they operate. It is my
view that the political costs of recent mistakes are
simply disproportionate to the military gains and that
such reviews are urgently required.
I
therefore
strongly
welcome
General
McChrystal’s commitment to a fundamental shift in
attitude. That is an important statement. We all know
that it is impossible to fight the insurgency effectively
without maintaining the support of the population.
With additional international forces on the ground, that
challenge will become even more critical. The United
Nations will continue to monitor and address incidents
of civilian casualties in an independent manner, based
on our human rights mandate. But, more
importantly — or at least as importantly — we are
ready to work with the new commander in his reviews
to help avoid the loss of civilian lives in whatever way
we possibly can.
But let me repeat: the clear majority of civilian
casualties are caused by the insurgency, for whom the
casualties are not a result of tragic mistakes, but of
deliberate policy.
What I have just said is not aimed at presenting a
rosy picture of the overall situation in Afghanistan. The
prospects for progress are seriously undermined by the
ongoing conflict. The number of security incidents rose
beyond the 1,000 mark for the first time in May, and
the number of such incidents increased by 43 per cent
over the first four months of this year compared to the
same period last year. However, I should add that these
figures are not necessarily a good measurement of the
success or failure of the insurgency. There are more
incidents in parts of the country that, up to now, have

09-38690

S/PV.6154

been stable. This is, no doubt, the most intense fighting
season we have experienced.
It is also clear that the fight against widespread
corruption is still in its early stages. Institutions are
still weak, not only in human capacity, but in physical
infrastructure, particularly at the subnational level.
Allow me to mention that six provinces still do not
have offices for their governors. Only half of the
district governors have an office building, and 288 do
not have a vehicle. This has a tremendous impact on
their ability to administer the country and deliver
services to the people.
I mentioned in the opening of my speech that we
must also have a perspective that goes beyond the
elections. In Paris and at The Hague Conference, clear
priorities were set for our common efforts. We need a
common strategic vision for the post-election period, a
vision that can provide a clearer direction and guide us
over the next few years in support of a new
Government; a development strategy that can enable us
to move forward in a more disciplined and coordinated
way and that allows for greater Afghan ownership; a
security strategy that accelerates the build-up of
Afghan security forces and their role in ensuring the
stability of the country; and, finally, a political strategy
that includes a credible and inclusive peace process,
respects the rights of all Afghans — men, women and
children — and brings the various parts of the country
together in an inclusive manner. All these elements
must be integral parts of our vision for the postelection period.
Two weeks ago, I addressed almost 1,000 Afghan
religious and intellectual leaders, including opposition
leaders, at an event dedicated to the need for an
inclusive peace process. My message to them was that
such a process must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led.
But the United Nations must be prepared to be a
partner in such a process, and I am dedicated to helping
bring about that partnership.
However, a credible and successful peace process
can only take place if we have a Government that
enjoys the support of the people and has confidence in
itself, and that can only take place if we have an
international presence that enjoys the support of the
people and has confidence in itself.
This past week I was invited to attend the G8
meeting in Trieste. It was the last of a series of
meetings devoted to the regional aspects of and the

09-38690

regional potential for the development of Afghanistan.
The need for closer regional cooperation on security
matters is absolutely obvious. However, the potential
goes much further. In the short term, experts from the
region who know the language, the culture and the
climate can often be more effective and less costly than
experts from further away and could make a valuable
contribution to the development of Afghan capacities.
In the longer term, key infrastructure programmes
could turn Afghanistan from being a barrier to trade to
becoming a corridor for regional economic activities.
Such infrastructure would also help Afghanistan to
exploit its own natural and human resources. Allow me
to say that Afghanistan is a very poor country, but it is
not destined to poverty. It has vast mineral resources,
such as the largest iron ore reserves in Asia.
Infrastructure, as agriculture, is seriously
underfunded. If we could concentrate on a very limited
number of strategic infrastructure projects, then the
impact on sustained economic growth, employment
and revenue collection would be tremendous.
A railway network from the Iranian border
through Herat and north-east to Central Asia and
China, as well as from the Pakistani border through
Jalalabad linking up in the north with the lines to
Central Asia and to the Iranian border, would stimulate
regional trade and would enable Afghanistan to exploit
and export its mineral resources. Agreements already
exist for building significant parts of this network.
There is a need to fill in the gaps. It would over time
have a great impact on Afghanistan’s dependence on
foreign assistance. The expansion of the electricity
lines from Central Asia through Afghanistan would
have a similar impact and generate activities in a wide
range of economic areas. That dimension should also
be an important part of our vision for Afghanistan and
its region over the next few years.
Finally, a few words about the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA): its
mandate is multifaceted and ambitious — very
ambitious, I feel sometimes. The expectations of the
international community are high, and I am certainly
grateful for the additional resources given in December
last year that enabled us to expand the mission
significantly. However, the situation has evolved
significantly even in the six months that have passed
since the 2009 budget was adopted.

5

S/PV.6154

With rising expectations and rising opportunities
emerging on the ground, there is also a need for greater
resources: to fulfil our mandate in donor coordination;
to meet the new opportunities in capacity- and
institution-building; and to expand across the country,
as requested in Security Council resolutions. UNAMA
does not itself bring financial resources. However, a
country-wide presence of our mission could serve as a
magnet to other civilian organizations and gradually
draw development and governance efforts out of the
military context and into the civilian context where
they belong. And it could help to facilitate an
all-inclusive political process through a better civilian
outreach programme. I therefore appeal to the Council
to support us in our urgent need for additional
resources, and I will come back to address that subject
in more precise terms.
In the discussions in March, in the mandate given
to us, the Security Council asked the mission to
develop benchmarks for our activities. This work is
under way and will be finalized in time for the
Secretary-General’s next report in September. It is not
an easy task, and not a task that we take lightly, since
UNAMA’s efforts form an integral part of the efforts of
many others, both Afghan authorities and international
institutions. It is also hard to establish timelines and
means of measuring progress in political processes,
especially in a context as unpredictable and complex as
that of Afghanistan. Consultations are under way with
our partners, and I am confident that by September we
will be able to present the Council with a set of
meaningful benchmarks.
The President: I thank Mr. Kai Eide for his
briefing. I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of
the Council this month and thank you for convening
this debate on Afghanistan. These debates offer an
important opportunity to take stock of the situation and
ensure that we move forward in a unified fashion. Let
me also thank my friend Kai Eide for his typically
insightful briefing. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Afghanistan (S/2009/323), and are
grateful for the incisive, detailed assessment of where
we are now and where we are going.
We are nearing a new beginning in Afghanistan.
Five years ago we held our first elections after decades

6

of a bloody power struggle. Despite the continuing
terrorist activities by the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
Afghanistan has made enormous progress since 2001
and our people are ready to go to the polls for a second
time. This, in itself, is a huge success and reflects the
enduring Afghan support for the stabilization process
and the value of the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community.
The elections have been planned for less than
three months from now. Between now and August, we
must act to ensure the transparency and fairness of the
electoral process. There is a lot at stake. Afghans know
that the elections are the only feasible way to build on
the positive progress of the past years, but in order for
them to do so the elections must be credible and
legitimate. The results of the elections should serve to
unite the Afghan people, strengthen Afghan institutions
and provide momentum for ongoing stabilization
efforts.
In terms of the campaign, the rules of the game
have been defined by law and the Government of
Afghanistan and other relevant bodies are working to
ensure that the candidates receive security,
transportation and access to the media. For the
elections themselves, the essential priority is to ensure
security so that people from all over the country will be
able to vote. In that regard, the Afghan National Army
and Police will provide the main security for more than
7000 polling stations nationwide, supported by a
strengthened international force.
In addition, independent bodies like the
Independent Election Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission and the Media Commission
will be responsible for providing information, logistics
and oversight, guaranteeing access to media for
candidates and responding to concerns and questions
from the public. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General continue to
play an essential role here as the international focal
point, along with the Government of Afghanistan, in
ensuring a transparent, legitimate and credible
elections process.
The upcoming elections have deservedly been the
centre of attention among both Afghans and the
international community. However, we must remember
that they are part of larger ongoing efforts for change
and stability that go beyond the election process. The

09-38690

S/PV.6154

coming months should reinvigorate the partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community. We should use the elections
to add additional momentum to the strategic shifts that
began this year. And we should unify our approach and
focus on, first, the need to strengthen Afghan
institutions and make them sustainable and, secondly,
the need to be increasingly responsive to the growing
expectations of the Afghan people, who want to see a
tangible improvement in their lives.
The past months, with some welcome strategic
reviews by the United States and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), have provided us with a
timely opportunity to review our achievements and
rethink our strategies in different multilateral arenas.
Combined with increasing involvement from Afghan
ministries, this has resulted in a shift towards a more
unified strategic approach, focusing on an intensified
civilian effort, an improvement in subnational
governance and service delivery and increased
alignment of international priorities with Afghan
national strategies. We must continue to build on the
substantial progress made thus far.
In the past eight years, Afghanistan has grown
from a country devoid of society, Government and
infrastructure to one with thousands of miles of roads,
millions of children in school and access to basic
health care for 85 per cent of the population. In
addition, the Government of Afghanistan has made
positive developments in anti-corruption and the rule
of law. The international community has helped us to
build, train and equip an army and police force that can
begin to protect our citizens. Kabul and a few other
cities now have uninterrupted electricity, and, in a
promising and historic development, Afghanistan will
be agriculturally self-sufficient this year for the first
time.
But daunting challenges remain to be adequately
addressed in the areas of security, development and
regional cooperation. First, security is worsening,
rather than improving, and civilians continue to
disproportionately bear the costs. The Taliban have
shown an increasing disregard for human life,
intentionally targeting civilians, particularly women,
children and humanitarian staff, and using populated
areas to stage attacks on international forces in order to
impose civilian casualties.

09-38690

As the international military force increases in
strength over the summer and as security worsens in
parts of the country in advance of the elections, we
must be particularly careful to avoid an increase in the
loss of civilian lives. We applaud the recent steps taken
by NATO and by the United States to address those
concerns and the recently announced improved
guidelines for rules of engagement and use of air
bombardment. It is our hope that those steps will serve
to strengthen the partnership between the international
community and the Afghan people and to reassure
Afghans that the Government and the international
community see their protection as a priority.
Secondly, despite more focused and unified goals,
our development efforts remain fragmented, inefficient
and incomplete. Poverty in Afghanistan has increased
since 2001, and unemployment is one of the biggest
challenges. Governance, corruption and the rule of law
still need sustained attention both from the
Government and from the international community.
Humanitarian and development aid should be better
coordinated and more accountable. Resources need to
be funnelled towards capacity-building for the Afghan
Government because, as the Secretary-General’s report
so eloquently states, we need a lasting expansion of
Government presence and not a temporary expansion
of foreign presence.
To address that issue, the civilian surge will be
the backbone of the successful implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, because it
will further support national development priorities and
programmes in key sectors. In addition, improvements
in subnational governance and service delivery can
help disrupt the negative impacts of insecurity and
provide Afghans with the incentives to engage with the
stabilization process. In both those efforts, donors’
political, technical and financial assistance must be
aligned behind national priorities.
In that regard, my Government continues to fully
support the essential coordination role of UNAMA. We
welcome UNAMA’s strengthened mandate and applaud
the courageous work of its men and women, who have
accomplished so much. We also welcome the recently
signed United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, as it provides priorities that are in line
with our Development Strategy and other national
development priorities.

7

S/PV.6154

And, finally, while the international community
and the United Nations have essential roles to play in
the coming months and years, Afghanistan also needs
to have stronger cooperation with its neighbours. As
has been widely recognized, this conflict is not limited
to the borders of Afghanistan, but involves the entire
region, and endangers people all over the world. Our
enemies are not local, but regional, and they find
sanctuary and support outside of Afghanistan. A full
regional approach will be needed to combat them.
We have recently begun to move towards more
positive regional interaction with Pakistan, particularly
through trilateral arrangements with the United States,
as well as with Turkey and Iran. There have been
promising bilateral and multilateral advances towards
better regional understanding as well. It is our hope
that all regional stakeholders can recognize the mutual
advantages of a stable, prosperous Afghanistan and
will be involved in helping to confront our shared
challenges in a sustainable, cooperative way.
In conclusion, we share the Secretary-General’s
assessment that we have an opportunity to make
significant progress, if we maintain our new
momentum and focus in the coming months. That
effort will require broad and consistent international
engagement going forward. If we can ensure
transparent and open elections, increase security for the
Afghan population, improve coordination and
effectiveness of aid, strengthen Afghan institutions and
constructively address the regional dimensions of the
situation, we can clear a space on which to build a
strong, sustainable Afghanistan.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): Since we know that today,
Mr. President, marks the end of your tenure as
Permanent Representative of Turkey and your long
diplomatic career, allow me to take this opportunity to
express, on behalf of my delegation, my heartfelt
appreciation to you, Ambassador İlkin, for your tireless
efforts to make the work of the Council as productive
and effective as possible. I am sure that we will all
remember your achievements long in the future, and
we will certainly miss you.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I also pay
tribute to the his leadership and to the dedication of the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan

8

(UNAMA) staff, who are working under very difficult
conditions.
By adopting resolution 1868 (2009) in March, the
Security Council reaffirmed the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan and renewed its support for the
endeavours of the Afghan people to achieve towards a
stable and prosperous future. I strongly hope that
today’s meeting will be an occasion for the Council to
demonstrate solidarity in expressing its continued
commitment to the country, as well as its support for
the role of UNAMA.
Since we met in this Chamber last March, the
international commitment to Afghanistan has been
reaffirmed on various occasions. Most notable of those
was the Hague Conference, in which more than
80 countries
and
international
organizations
participated. Most recently, the Foreign Ministers of
the G-8 gathered and had discussions with Afghanistan,
Pakistan and other partners in Trieste, Italy, and
pledged anew their steadfast support.
Individual pledges to strengthen assistance have
also been made, including through the expansion of the
deployment of both troops and civilians. Japan, for its
part, provided about $300 million in additional
assistance in March and began the dispatch of its
civilians to a Provincial Reconstruction Team in May.
All those initiatives represent positive support for
the efforts on the ground, and we welcome them. It is
important that those commitments be implemented
steadily and effectively and that they bring about actual
progress.
In that regard, I would like first of all to
emphasize the importance of ownership on the part of
the Government and people of Afghanistan. I believe
that the efforts of the Afghan Government since last
year in areas such as police and agricultural reform are
to be applauded. We hope to see further progress made
in governance and other key areas. I also wish to stress
that, in those efforts, attention should continue to be
focused on both the central and the local governments.
Secondly, the importance of UNAMA’s central
coordinating role cannot be overstated. We are pleased
to note that its cooperation with the International
Security Assistance Force has increased. We also fully
support the efforts of UNAMA to help identify
priorities in reconstruction and development and to
coordinate international assistance, such as the ongoing

09-38690

S/PV.6154

mapping process as part of agricultural assistance. We
urge donor countries and organizations to cooperate
with such initiatives of UNAMA, so that our assistance
can be implemented more effectively.
We are all aware of the significance of the
upcoming presidential and provincial council elections.
A huge responsibility lies on the shoulders of the
Afghan people, who are responsible for the
preparations for and conduct of the elections. We
welcome the fact that the preparations have been
brought forward thanks to the efforts of the Afghan
authorities with the assistance of the international
community. Let me reiterate that it is crucial that the
elections be free, fair, inclusive and credible.
The
international
community
shares
responsibility, and we welcome the statements on the
elections issued in Istanbul and Trieste by the
Afghanistan-Pakistan International Support Group. The
newly formed Government must achieve legitimacy by
being elected through credible elections, so that it can
garner support domestically as well as in the
international community. Japan intends to dispatch
election observer teams to help ensure that these goals
are met.
For the elections to be credible, it must be
assured that all candidates are able to campaign on a
level playing field and that all those eligible to vote are
permitted to exercise that right. Obviously, in this
regard, security is the biggest challenge. We support
the steps to be taken by the Afghan Government and
the international partners to ensure a secure electoral
process. Japan has pledged its support for the recently
proposed plan for an interim increase in police
personnel. Our $300 million disbursement also
includes assistance equivalent to the salary of the
entire police force for half a year.
Needless to say, the United Nations plays a
significant role in the electoral process through
technical and other assistance. We particularly support
the efforts of the Special Representative to help ensure
a fair campaign. It is encouraging that the guidelines
issued by the Special Representative have been
endorsed by a number of major candidates.
In this electoral process, the candidates were
screened for eligibility through the programme to
disband illegal armed groups. Besides its significance
in the political process, the programme has contributed
to improved security by producing tangible results in

09-38690

the dismantling of illegal armed groups and the
collection of weapons, which Japan, as lead country in
this area, acknowledges with satisfaction. It should
also be noted that the development of acceptance of
disbandment in the districts has made progress as well.
It is Japan’s intention to continue to assist Afghan
efforts in this area, in ever-closer cooperation with
UNAMA, in order to make certain that the progress in
the disbandment process keeps pace with the capacitybuilding of the Afghan police force.
We have witnessed a growing recognition of the
need to embrace a regional perspective, which we
believe is of particular importance in order for the
various initiatives in security, border control and
development in Afghanistan to be effective.
International assistance must be further coordinated
with this approach in mind. The notion was reaffirmed
at last week’s G-8 meeting, which was also attended by
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries. In this
context, the initiatives of Afghanistan and its
neighbours, including the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference, are encouraging. We also
welcome recent international support initiatives such as
the efforts of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Ankara Declaration process and the Dubai Process.
Japan also has advanced its efforts based on this
regional perspective, with undertakings including the
hosting of the Pakistan donors conference in April and
the launch of Japan-Iran Cooperation in Afghanistan
announced in May.
Before concluding, I would like to stress once
again the important role of the United Nations in
meeting all of these challenges. Expectations are high.
We are anxious to see the concrete developments that
the work of UNAMA is expected to bring about, while
understanding, at the same time, that they cannot be
achieved overnight. It was on the basis of such
expectations that the Council asked in its resolution for
benchmarks to be developed, and Japan appreciates the
Secretary-General’s efforts in this regard. We also
understand the necessity of strengthening UNAMA to
meet such expectations among the people in
Afghanistan as well as the international community. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan’s unwavering
support for the work of UNAMA.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by echoing the Ambassador of Japan in paying
tribute to the President on his last day as President of
the Council, which he has led with great precision and

9

S/PV.6154

authority, the last day of his time as Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, and
the last day of a very distinguished and long
international career. We shall all miss him, and
international diplomacy will be the poorer for his
departure. We wish him a long and very rich
retirement.
On the issue of the day, Afghanistan, let me begin
by thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/323) and Special Representative Kai Eide for
his briefing today. These reports are a very important
part of our engagement with the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In the last six months, we have seen UNAMA’s role
grow. We applaud its plans to move into more
provinces, which will be key for delivering increased
Afghan capacity at the subnational level and for
delivery of international contributions well beyond
Kabul and country-wide.
I said in March that this year will be decisive for
Afghanistan. Both the report and today’s briefing only
serve to underline that view. The challenges facing
Afghanistan remain serious, but we are moving
forward and we applaud the progress made by the
Afghan Government in areas such as agriculture and
police reform.
The preparations for elections are on track,
thanks in large part to the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission of Afghanistan in concert with
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and UNAMA.
We welcome the progress on donor coordination,
but we recognize that there is further progress to be
made. We have long argued for consolidated support
for the Government of Afghanistan closely aligned to
the national development strategy. Ambassador Tanin
has repeated this call again today, and we should heed
it.
On counter-narcotics efforts, by continuing to
support the Afghan Government’s national drug control
strategy, we are also making a difference. Over half of
Afghanistan’s provinces are now poppy-free, nationwide poppy cultivation decreased 19 per cent last year,
and significant investment is being made to deliver
alternative livelihoods. All these are areas of progress,
and we have seen coordination among regional
countries also intensifying, which is welcome.

10

In April, the United Kingdom released an updated
policy on Afghanistan and Pakistan, and Prime
Minister Gordon Brown set out the United Kingdom’s
three objectives. The first objective is to prevent the
return of Al-Qaida in Afghanistan and reduce violent
extremism. The second objective is to help Afghanistan
to become an effective and accountable State that is
increasingly able to handle its own security and deliver
basic services to its people. The third objective is to
provide long-term, sustainable support for the Afghan
national development strategy, particularly on
governance, rule of law, human rights and poverty
alleviation.
In all of these areas, UNAMA has a central role
to play. We will not defeat extremism and defeat the
insurgency if we cannot improve the daily lives of
ordinary Afghans. UNAMA’s work is vital to
improving governance and helping build an effective
Afghan State.
The presidential elections in Afghanistan are less
than two months away. The security situation indicates
that organizing the elections will be difficult, but, for
the first time in over 30 years, the will of the Afghan
people will be expressed through an elections process
organized and delivered by the Afghan people
themselves. We are working to help the Afghan
Government ensure that those elections are credible,
inclusive and secure. We encourage all the presidential
candidates to set out their proposals clearly so that
Afghans can make an informed choice.
I would also remind partners of the need for
timely preparations for next year’s parliamentary,
council and district elections as well. UNAMA has
shown commendable political leadership in the run up
to the August elections, and we must all support
Special Representative Eide and his team’s work to
deliver these preparations, not just this year but also in
2010.
We welcome the arrival of new troops in
Afghanistan, especially in the south, as it will improve
security, and, with a significant number of troops
dedicated to training, it will help strengthen the Afghan
national security forces. The key to lasting success in
Afghanistan is to build up Afghan security forces so
that they can take lead responsibility for delivering
security to the Afghan people.
We must all continue to protect non-combatants
from the effects of military action. We all deeply regret

09-38690

S/PV.6154

any civilian casualties; each and every innocent life
lost is a tragedy. Reducing civilian casualties remains a
high priority for the NATO force. We welcome General
McChrystal’s early attention to these issues. Protecting
the Afghan population is at the core of our
international mission, which is in stark contrast to the
Taliban-led insurgency, which, as the Special
Representative has made clear, continues deliberately
to target and kill Afghan civilians.
UNAMA’s work is at the heart of the
international effort in Afghanistan. We fully support
the Mission as it uses the increased resources agreed
last year to deliver its objectives more effectively and
more widely. As UNAMA takes on an increasingly
important role, the Council needs to pay attention to
how we match the demands we make of the Mission
with the resources it needs to deliver them. That will
require clear decisions on the right priorities.
We look forward to seeing the work that UNAMA
is doing to introduce benchmarks into its reporting. I
was glad to hear from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that that task is being taken
seriously. It should not be seen as a bureaucratic chore.
Benchmarks are a vital tool to target their work,
measure the progress made and explain to the Afghan
people and the international community what UNAMA
is achieving. We are content to allow more time for
that, on the understanding that we will see the results
in the next report, in September.
The clear focus that benchmarks will provide will
also help us to consider the merits of further requests
for more resources, which the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has told us are in the pipeline.
May I close by saying how much the United
Kingdom appreciates the work of Kai Eide and all of
UNAMA’s dedicated staff. The United Kingdom will
continue to support them and the Afghan people and
authorities as we collectively tackle the major
challenges ahead.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/323). We
would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kai Eide for his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan.
We commend the central role that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play in coordinating international action

09-38690

and assistance in support of the Afghan Government.
We welcome UNAMA’s efforts to expand its presence
in the country in order to have a greater impact in
carrying out its mandate in Afghanistan.
We have noted, and are concerned about the fact
that, while there has been improvement in the security
situation in some parts of the country, such as Kabul
and neighbouring provinces, the number of security
incidents and the level of violence have increased in
comparison to the same period last year. The security
forecast for the next quarter raises even more concerns,
with an expected increase in the level of violence.
The elections scheduled for 20 August will be an
important milestone in the efforts to restore democracy
and achieve lasting stability and progress in
Afghanistan. However, as the country enters the
election campaign period, poor security conditions may
make it difficult for the people in affected areas of the
south and east of the country to freely exercise their
franchise. Those conditions could also provide cover
for election malpractice. It is therefore imperative that
progress be made in creating suitable conditions for a
successful election in Afghanistan, including in
addressing factors constraining the ability of Afghan
women to fully exercise their political rights. Failure in
providing those conditions could lead to further
disillusionment and apprehension among the Afghan
public as well, a situation that must be prevented.
Building strong institutions remains critical for
sustainable national development. We welcome the
planned increase in Afghan Government leadership and
ownership of the development process through the
civilian surge. Attention should also be given to the
speedy completion of the priority plan, as well as to
mechanisms for the implementation of the civilian
surge, which will facilitate the expansion of the
Government’s presence around the country.
The success of national development efforts
critically depends on the availability of adequate and
predictable resources. While progress is being made to
align donor efforts behind the Afghan National
Development Strategy and priorities, we encourage
UNAMA to continue to work with the Government and
donors to ensure coherence in the allocation of goods
and resources to meet all development priorities,
especially those that are currently underfunded.
Stability in Afghanistan is in the interests of
Afghanistan itself, but also in the interests of the

11

S/PV.6154

countries of the region. Regional cooperation would
provide enhanced opportunities for dealing with
common challenges that cut across national borders
while also generating momentum for economic growth
in the country. In that regard, we welcome the various
efforts that have been undertaken in the past three
months to facilitate dialogue at different levels in —
Moscow, Ankara, Washington and Tehran. We note that
those efforts have underscored and encouraged serious
commitment to joint efforts and action at the regional
level to fight terrorism and counter the production of,
and trafficking in, narcotics. We encourage all
countries in the region to constructively work together
to foster sustainable development and peace in the
region.
The next few months will be complex and very
critical for Afghanistan’s future, its stability and its
progress. The positive momentum that has emerged in
spite of the difficult situation must be maintained.
While there has been emphasis on capacity-building
programmes in the security sector, a more focused
strategy is needed where equal attention is given to
well-funded and effective programmes for building
civilian capacity and institutions in the country. The
Afghan Government must, for its part, do its utmost to
continue ongoing work with the support of UNAMA,
building on the existing momentum generated by the
election process.
The primary responsibility for peace and stability
in the country is, and will remain, with the people of
Afghanistan. However, support from the United
Nations, regional and subregional actors and the wider
international community will remain essential to
reinforcing national efforts. National capacity
development is an important element in that process. It
will require deliberate steps in utilizing and developing
existing national capacities.
We look forward to the finalization of the
benchmarks and indicators, as decided in resolution
1868 (2009), that will facilitate more effective
monitoring of the progress being made in the
implementation of UNAMA’s mandates and priorities.
As this is the last debate of the Council under
your stewardship, Mr. President, I wish, on behalf of
my delegation and on my own behalf, to thank you and
compliment you on the invaluable contribution you
have made since Turkey joined the Security Council.
We have greatly valued your insight and frankness in

12

our deliberations during the past few months. And we
salute you for the excellent way you have steered our
deliberations as President. We wish you every success
in your future endeavours after more than four decades
of a distinguished diplomatic career.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On this very
special day for you and for the Security Council, I
would first like to join other colleagues in thanking and
congratulating you, Mr. President, on the way you have
conducted the work of the Council. In the past six
months, I have greatly appreciated your outstanding
professionalism, shrewdness and what I would call the
Tacitus-like concision of your statements before the
Council. I should also like to say that we greatly
appreciated your continued insistence on the need for
transparency in the work of the Council. We join others
in wishing you all the best in your future endeavours.
Moving on to the item under discussion today, I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kai Eide for the frank assessment that he has
given us today of the current situation and the
challenges ahead, as well as for his continued
dedication and commitment. I also wish to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, who is seated at this table.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
that supporting free, fair and credible elections is
essential. The legitimacy of democratic institutions and
the credibility of the international community in
Afghanistan would be greatly enhanced in the eyes of
the Afghan population by elections that are perceived
as having been free and fair. We welcome the fact that,
to date, the Independent Election Commission has
adhered successfully to its timetable for the first
Afghan-led election process. At the same time, we
encourage the Commission to continue working closely
with international experts.
Austria greatly appreciates the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support and promote a credible election
process. In this context, we welcome the establishment
of the Political Rights monitoring programme, in
partnership with the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, as an important step forward. We
wish to commend, in particular, UNAMA’s successful

09-38690

S/PV.6154

efforts to encourage women to register as candidates
for provincial council seats and its focus on factors that
constrain the ability of women to exercise their
political rights in full. At the same time, we view with
some concern trends of increased violence against
women and the recent introduction of draft legislation
of a discriminatory nature.
Austria welcomes decisions by the European
Union (EU) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to send election
monitoring teams. We will participate in the proposed
EU election observation mission, and will also make a
financial contribution to the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights election
support team. At the same time, we view the
deployment of domestic observers as crucial in
ensuring that a larger percentage of polling stations is
covered.
At this juncture, the preparation for and
organization of the first round of the elections on
20 August deserves priority attention. However — and
this is sometimes forgotten — we believe that it is also
essential to prepare carefully for the possibility of a
second round of presidential elections in the fall of this
year.
The provision of security in the course of the
coming months, and in particular during the elections,
will represent a great challenge. We share the concerns
expressed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General regarding the deterioration of the
security situation, including the high toll of civilian
casualties, which threatens to overshadow many
positive achievements. While recognizing the
complexity of the fight against the insurgency, we
share the view of the Secretary-General that it is
critical to avoid a situation where more troops lead to
more civilian casualties and to behaviour that offends
the population.
We are encouraged by the recent statements made
by General McChrystal noting the absolute priority of
avoiding civilian casualties. The Afghanization of
relevant operations and, in more general terms, the
ongoing reform and strengthening of the Afghan
National Army and the Afghan National Police is of
great relevance in this context.
Austria is currently examining the possibility of a
contribution to EU and United Nations programmes
focused on police and rule-of-law training activities.

09-38690

We are strong supporters of demining activities and
have made a financial contribution towards that,
allowing the deployment of three mine-clearance
teams, which together are projected to clear highpriority mine-contaminated land in the central and
northern regions of Afghanistan.
Afghan ownership is also of critical importance
in the civilian field. We welcome the formulation by
the Afghan Government of a comprehensive plan for
the implementation of the civilian surge in follow-up to
the Hague Conference. Investment in capacitybuilding, in the creation of sustainable jobs and
incomes and in a lasting expansion of Government
presence is essential in achieving sustainable progress
for the benefit of the people of Afghanistan and the
whole region. We are encouraged by the new
mechanisms developed by the Afghan Ministry of
Agriculture, which can help to increase aid
effectiveness. Furthermore, the new Comprehensive
Agriculture and Rural Development facility, which
aims at increasing incentives for the cultivation of
alternatives to poppy production, is a promising
instrument.
Regional cooperation and coordination in the
fight against illicit drug trafficking and supply is of
great importance. As the recently published United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) World
Drug Report 2009 has highlighted, the decline of
global opium poppy cultivation in 2008 was largely a
result of a decrease in Afghanistan’s cultivation area.
Austria is currently supporting three UNODC projects
in Afghanistan aimed at strengthening Afghanistan-Iran
border controls, at capacity-building in the area of
criminal justice and at fighting corruption. Austria is
also a long-time supporter of the UNODC Terrorism
Prevention
Branch,
which
conducts
several
programmes aimed at capacity-building in Afghanistan
and in the region.
In closing, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to develop benchmarks in close
consultation with the Afghan Government. We look
forward to his report in September. In order to support
the positive developments occurring in Afghanistan,
we must not lose focus, and I also say this against the
background of other regional developments. We must
abide by the commitments and priorities set in Paris in
June 2008, and reaffirmed at The Hague this year.

13

S/PV.6154

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): As we
are aware of the fact, Sir, that this meeting marks the
end of your presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June and also represents the equivalent in
your duties as Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations, I would like to join the others in
expressing my gratitude for your distinguished career
in your country’s diplomatic service, which today
comes to an end. I wish you every success in the
future.
I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323) and
his comments on the situation on the ground. We also
welcome the presence of Ambassador Tanin and the
statement he delivered earlier today.
We are concerned to see that the security
situation on the ground has suffered serious setbacks.
The increase in the number of incidents and the level
of widespread violence, both in the capital and in
neighbouring and southern provinces, have produced a
volatile climate for everyone, combatants, civilians and
international personnel alike. Mexico believes that
guaranteeing the security of the population is one of
the main challenges that Afghanistan faces in the short
and medium term. Protecting the integrity of the most
vulnerable populations, such as women and children,
requires priority attention in accordance with the norms
and principles of international law. Likewise, the
security of humanitarian staff must also be promptly
ensured.
In the light of the increase in civilian casualties,
Mexico reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in all
of its forms and manifestations. We vigorously
condemn attacks against the civilian population and the
acts of violence that have been directed against
humanitarian staff and the United Nations on the
ground.
We note the progress that has been made in the
expansion of the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police. However, we urge that efforts
be stepped up to urgently generate the capacities
necessary to guarantee minimal security conditions for
the civilian population. Similarly, we support all efforts
made by national and international security forces to
prevent collateral casualties in terms of civilian victims
in the course of their military operations.

14

We also welcome the announcement concerning
the increase in troops authorized by the Government of
the United States within the framework of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), with
the aim of strengthening its security capabilities and
enhancing the training of the National Army and Police
as well as improving the protection of the civilian
population. Even though the central functions in the
area of security have been assumed by ISAF, the
presence and the comprehensive approach of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is important in order to continue to support
development and reconstruction activities in the
country. One item that we think is crucial is the
adoption, with the support of UNAMA and the
international community, of all of the necessary
measures to prevent the recruitment of children by
armed groups and to bring about conditions conducive
to their reintegration into a safe environment.
Furthermore, we praise the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to make progress in the clearance and
destruction of landmines and other explosive remnants
of war in the country, bearing in mind the fact that
those devices continue to represent a serious threat to
the civilian population. Hence, it is necessary to
provide additional support to mine-clearance
programmes.
Mexico welcomes the results of the International
Conference on Afghanistan, which took place on
31 March in The Hague, as a positive step to promote
the commitment of the international community in
favour of the development, strengthening of security
and institutional capacity-building of Afghanistan and
to provide attention to Afghan priorities.
Similarly, we welcome the adoption of the United
Nations development assistance framework for
Afghanistan, which was signed by the Government and
the United Nations on 28 May, in order to define
international participation and to improve coordination
among all of the bodies and programmes of the United
Nations in that country. Despite the insecurity and the
prevailing violence, we must continue fostering
national priorities through a comprehensive approach
that will strengthen institutional capacities, the
promotion of economic and social development,
respect for human rights and strengthening of the rule
of law, taking into account the regional dimension of
many of the problems that affect that country. In that

09-38690

S/PV.6154

respect, international assistance must adapt to Afghan
structures and priorities.
The fight against organized crime and the illicit
production and trafficking of narcotics is a priority for
the stability of Afghanistan. We welcome the initiatives
that have been promoted in that respect by the Special
Conference on Afghanistan convened by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. We recognize that progress in dialogue and
bilateral cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan
and Iran could assist in tackling common challenges in
the area of regional stability, such as the fight against
terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime, as well
development and trade issues.
Within that framework, we support the efforts of
the Government to reduce the production of opium in
several provinces, as well as regional cooperation to
develop a common front to tackle that phenomenon,
which has global consequences. Similarly, we note the
efforts made by the Government to fight corruption, in
particular the establishment on 1 April of a specialized
anti-corruption unit within the Office of the AttorneyGeneral.
My delegation is also optimistic about the
progress described in the report concerning the
preparation for the elections next August. We think
important progress has been made, not only in the
immediate electoral process, but also in promoting a
democratic culture in the country. In that connection,
special attention should be given to electoral rolls and
the final list of candidates, which have been prepared
on time and without any major security incidents.
We welcome the establishment of the Electoral
Complaints Commission and the establishment of the
Verification of Political Rights campaign set up by
UNAMA, in conjunction with the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission. We urge all
of the political actors in Afghanistan to cooperate with
UNAMA and the security forces as well as the United
Nations Development Programme’s UNDP-ELECT to
make sure that the next elections will take place in a
climate of security, transparency and respect for the
human rights of the voters, in particular the full
exercise of political rights by women.
It is important to take advantage of the impetus
generated by the electoral process to carry out longterm strategic planning with specific measures that

09-38690

would strengthen the rule of law and contribute to
creating trust among the population in their
institutions, as well as in combating impunity.
Undoubtedly, the holding of elections is an opportunity
to write an entirely new chapter that will favour
national reconciliation and strengthen sovereignty and
democracy in Afghanistan.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
expressing my appreciation and that of my delegation
for your contribution, Sir, to the work of the Security
Council during the past six months and particularly, for
the manner in which you led the Council during your
presidency this month. But professionalism, efficiency,
transparency and impartiality have characterized you
throughout your rich career. I wish you all the best in
your future endeavours.
Let me start by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing and for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2009/323). In the same vein, my delegation would
also like to thank Mr. Eide for the leadership he has
provided under extremely harsh circumstances. We
also wish to welcome Mr. Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, to the Council table.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me here to make some brief additional remarks.
The crucial political moment of the year that will
have a significant impact on Afghanistan’s future —
the presidential and legislative elections — is fast
approaching. Croatia is encouraged by the adherence of
the Independent Election Commission to the election
timetable, especially regarding voter registration and
candidate vetting. We particularly welcome the
growing number of women registered as provincial
candidates, as compared to the elections held in 2005.
It is of utmost importance to secure the full
participation of all Afghans in the upcoming elections,
as well as its absolute credibility.
In that context, Croatia strongly supports the role
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the election process,
especially the technical and political incentives it has
provided in close cooperation with the relevant Afghan
institutions, as we believe that those incentives will
help considerably in creating conditions and an

15

S/PV.6154

atmosphere conducive to free, fair and transparent
elections.
In addition, we welcome the appointment of the
Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as the
decisions by the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to send an
observation mission and election support team to
monitor the conduct and outcome of the elections.
Notwithstanding the positive momentum, Croatia
is concerned by the deterioration of the security
situation in the country, especially in the south and the
east, as well as by the expansion of the insurgency in
the previously calm north and the fresh influx of
foreign fighters into the country. On the other hand, we
note with satisfaction that further progress in
coordinating key Afghan security institutions is making
headway, that the security situation in and around
Kabul has improved and that there has been a sharp
decrease in the number of aid workers killed or
maimed during the reporting period. We support the
further Afghanization of security operations and the
continued effort to avoid civilian casualties.

Croatia strongly supports the so-called civilian
surge aimed at massive capacity- and institutionbuilding and the comprehensive plan put forward in
that regard by the Afghan Government following the
Hague Conference. We share the view that that new
surge has to be Afghan-led and primarily focused on
the subnational level. In that context, we eagerly await
the finalization of the Government’s priority plan and
implementing mechanisms as necessary tools for the
full implementation of the aforementioned strategy.
In our view, the fight against corruption remains
one of the main tasks for the Afghan authorities. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a specialized
anti-corruption unit, as well as the development of
anti-corruption plans by the recently created High
Office of Oversight for the Implementation of the
Anti-Corruption Strategy.
The regional dimension of the problems in
Afghanistan cannot be overestimated. It is self-evident
that military action in Afghanistan needs to carefully
take into account and to adequately deal with political
and military situations in neighbouring countries.

It is important to stress that, although we see the
military effort as an important and integral part of the
global solution in Afghanistan, we agree with the
overall assessment that military means alone will not
bring final success in the country. A carefully planned
and attentively implemented national reconciliation
programme based on respect for the constitution and
relevant Security Council resolutions could, in our
opinion, greatly contribute to that aim.

At the same time, Afghanistan’s economic growth
is inconceivable without substantial regional
coordination and cooperation. Croatia welcomes the
outcomes of several recent conferences devoted to
regional cooperation and their efforts to further
mobilize donor support for Afghanistan. We are
similarly pleased to see progress in bilateral relations
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, especially
Pakistan.

Croatia welcomes the progress made in some of
the priority areas identified as essential for
Afghanistan’s long-term economic growth, especially
agriculture, private sector development and higher
education. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of much-needed new mechanisms aimed
at better coordination and coherent allocation of
resources, including the development assistance
database set up in order to increase aid effectiveness
and to coordinate the flow of donor resources.

We fully understand UNAMA’s current focus on
the elections and its determination to include all
relevant stakeholders in the development of the
benchmarks, as requested by resolution 1868 (2009).
We support UNAMA’s endeavours to undertake wide
consultations on that issue, and we look forward to a
finalized set of benchmarks, to be presented in the next
report of the Secretary-General, due in September.

Furthermore, we welcome the newly established
United Nations Development Assistance Framework,
which sets the course for United Nations action in
Afghanistan from 2010 to 2013 and creates a common
fund, with the main aim of addressing the imbalance in
assistance provided to provinces.

16

Bearing in mind the importance and magnitude of
the tasks assigned to UNAMA, Croatia supports the
further strengthening of UNAMA, as well as its
intention to further expand and establish offices in all
provinces of Afghanistan.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I hope that you, Mr. President, will allow me
to begin my statement not by exclusively addressing

09-38690

S/PV.6154

the important Afghan issue. I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing our gratitude to you not only
for convening today’s meeting, but also, above all, for
your eminently effective and productive work as
President of the Security Council and as Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations. Your
activity has been truly extremely fruitful. You indeed
know the very warm feelings that we, the entire
Russian delegation, the Russian Federation, have with
respect to you and your diplomatic activities. We
believe that that standard of diplomatic work has most
clearly raised the bar very high.
Once again, we would like to wish you every
success and all the best in your future activities, and
we hope that you will always remember the many
friends you have left in New York, not least the
Russian ones.
We are grateful to Mr. Eide for his assessments
and for his customary substantive and frank analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan. We commend his personal
contribution to the international effort, under the
auspices of the United Nations, in helping to bring
about a settlement in Afghanistan and the post-conflict
rebuilding of that country.
Unfortunately, despite a number of positive
developments in Afghanistan that were noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323) and were
mentioned by Mr. Eide today, so far the situation in
that country continues to see very clear destabilizing
tendencies. Specifically, as before, we are particularly
concerned by the fact that the efforts by the Afghan
authorities and the international military presence have
yet to bring about any truly serious improvements in
the security sphere. Unfortunately, so far, there has
been no stability in the positive improvements that do
exist, nor have those positive steps been made
irreversible. In that area, clearly much remains to be
done, including in terms of the international military
presence and their mandates. Unfortunately, there
continues to be an increase in the terrorist activities of
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists, which
undermine the basis of the Afghan nationhood and
significantly hinder stabilization and construction.
With regard to the armed fight against the
Taliban, we are seriously concerned by the current
ongoing cases of loss of civilian life owing to the
international military operations. We listened to the
assessments made today by Mr. Eide, and we agree

09-38690

with them. We advocate meticulous investigation of all
related incidents and stepping up efforts to prevent
them in the future.
We acknowledge the work being done by the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
and by the Coalition Forces to prevent the loss of
civilian life during military operations. We recognize
that work, but we note that, unfortunately, those efforts
have so far not been sufficiently effective.
We expect the agreement between NATO and the
Ministry of Defence of Afghanistan to have a practical
effect on the coordination of joint actions. We support
the proposal of the Secretary-General with regard to
the need to Afghanize the special anti-terrorist
operations. We are convinced that, without the active
involvement of the Afghans themselves, it will not be
possible to eradicate extremism in Afghanistan.
We fully share the view of the Secretary-General
to the effect that, if we cannot maintain those positive
trends so far seen that have been mentioned today,
including shifting the focus to the civilian
reconstruction of Afghanistan, strengthening local
governments and enhancing the effectiveness of
international assistance, the positive momentum will be
lost, and the Afghans themselves and the work of the
entire international community in Afghanistan could be
set back for years. The goal is to prevent that through
collective efforts, and the coordinating role of the
United Nations in that regard is extremely important.
We support the goal of national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. At the same time, that process should not
take place to the detriment of achieving long-term
stability in the country, nor should it run counter to the
relevant Security Council decisions, specifically in
terms of carrying out the sanctions regime with respect
to the Taliban and Al-Qaida. That must not happen.
Those Security Council decisions must be fully
implemented by all.
If the Afghan leadership believes it appropriate to
seek contacts with the moderate wing of the Taliban,
such a dialogue should be carried out only with those
who truly lay down their arms, recognize the
Government and the constitution of Afghanistan and
renounce their ties with Al-Qaida. We are categorically
against any arrangements with ringleaders of the
Taliban or other terrorist and extremist organizations.
Any attempt to establish dialogue with them would
undermine the sanctions regime imposed by the

17

S/PV.6154

Security Council. Again, we intend to continue to
demand full compliance with that regime.
While not downplaying the importance of the
holding of presidential and provincial elections in
conformity with the generally accepted requirements of
democracy, we consider that there is a need to pay
particular attention to the post-election period. The
principal aim today is to try to involve the largest
possible number of Afghans in the electoral process
and, in general, in the political settlement and the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We welcome the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that regard and expect the
Mission to continue, as in previous years, to provide
solid and effective assistance in conducting the
electoral process in line with international standards.
We continue to believe that the international
presences’ counter-narcotics efforts are still falling
short. That task is ever more pressing, as drug
trafficking continues to provide the primary financial
underpinning of the terrorists in Afghanistan — and, I
would add, beyond. At several levels, Russia actively
supports the fight against the scourge of illicit drug
production. In combating terrorism, drug trafficking
and organized crime, we are certain that we must make
more active use of the capacities of regional
organizations that have proven their effectiveness in
these spheres. These include in particular the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
An important political stimulus for setting up
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism belts around
Afghanistan was provided by the event held on
27 March in Moscow: the Special Conference on
Afghanistan, convened under the auspices of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are grateful to
the Secretary-General for his effective participation in
that Conference. The Conference’s outcome was aimed
at stepping up practical international cooperation in the
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism effort. The
measures that were adopted included a comprehensive
analysis of the situation and a variety of joint efforts,
including manoeuvres and the training of specialists to
meet the needs of law-enforcement agencies in
Afghanistan.
Russia is interested in the development of
Afghanistan into a prosperous, democratic and stable
State, and our practical efforts are aimed at helping

18

achieve that goal through carrying out joint projects in
the areas of industry, transportation, communications
and infrastructure. We are pleased, for example, that
the volume of trade between Russia and Afghanistan
grew by 12 per cent last year, to a total of some
$400 million. That is a positive trend, and Moscow
intends to continue engaging in serious endeavours
with our Afghan partners in this sphere. Clearly, we
shall continue to provide the friendly Afghan people
with necessary humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): On this final day of Turkey’s current
presidency of the Security Council, I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your successful diplomatic
performance at the United Nations. We wish you every
success in the future.
My delegation is grateful for the convening of
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We take
note of the briefing provided by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan. We also welcome the presence among us
today of Ambassador Tanin.
We wish at the outset to acknowledge the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to help strengthen political
stability and attain the overall economic, social and
development objectives of Afghanistan. We support
UNAMA’s activities, which, as the Special
Representative has noted, can be summed up under
three interconnected categories: security strategy,
development strategy and political strategy. It is crucial
to work in harmony with those strategies in order to
strengthen the rule of law. Carrying out these tasks
should be accompanied by efforts to fight corruption
and to prevent impunity from prevailing. In our view,
the fight against narcotics and other drugs is also
important.
We take note of the various international efforts
that have taken place since our previous debate on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.6094). These duly reflect the
outcomes of the Paris Conference of June 2008 and, in
particular, the Hague Conference of March this year.
We are aware of the vital importance for the stability of
Afghanistan of obtaining firm, united support from the
international community. In that regard, we highlight
the role that UNAMA is playing in coordinating the
various international cooperation efforts. We welcome
in particular mechanisms aimed at ensuring the

09-38690

S/PV.6154

appropriate transfer of international funds and other
resources. We urge that such processes be carried out
with transparency and effectiveness. We also welcome
all endeavours that help maintain a climate of regional
stability. In that regard we support the talks that have
taken place between Afghanistan and neighbouring
States.
My delegation is concerned at the increase in the
number of security incidents in Afghanistan, which
poses a threat to the country’s stability. We cannot fail
to condemn all violence, which runs counter to the
quest for lasting peace in Afghanistan. My country
continues to be concerned about collateral damage that
has taken place, with direct effects on the civilian
population. We warn and are concerned about the
number of civilian victims and the attacks against
United Nations facilities, humanitarian personnel and
educational institutions. The right — in particular of
girls — to education must be respected.
The fact that women and children are victims of
the escalation of violence deserves special mention,
and we urge Council members to endorse the
conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Afghanistan
(S/2008/695). It is crucial to implement the resolutions
that have been adopted on the protection of civilians.
International humanitarian law must prevail and must
be respected by all parties.
Costa Rica is clear about the importance of the
electoral process that has begun in Afghanistan. We
hope that the elections will be free, fair and
competitive. We hope that the opportunity to elect
leaders will strengthen internal democracy and the
diversity of political expression within the system. We
call for suitable international monitoring, which would
make it possible to certify the outcome of the process.
The international community must ensure that electoral
stability is preserved in Afghanistan, for the elections
could become a choice target for those seeking to
destabilize Afghanistan and instigate violence against
its people. In the context of these elections, the safety
and freedom of the civilian population must be
guaranteed.
Last March, when the Security Council extended
the mandate of UNAMA for one year, the Mission was
encouraged to redouble its efforts to meet certain
benchmarks in its mandate, such as ensuring progress
towards peace and development. Despite the practical

09-38690

obstacles on the road to compliance, we urge the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to step
up his work to achieve these tasks.
Finally, my country is closely studying the three
major shifts to which the Chapter X, “Observations”,
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323)
refers: the increased emphasis on civilian efforts
alongside military ones; a new focus on what is viewed
as proper and necessary democratic governance; and
the alignment of international cooperation behind key
sectors for the political and economic development of
Afghanistan. The common emphasis of those three
interlinked areas poses a challenge to the country’s
institutions. The future of Afghanistan as well as its
stability could depend on this achievement, so we urge
UNAMA to continue its efforts in the area of
coordination to help to carry out this agenda in order to
achieve the peacebuilding and development that is
sought by the Afghan people.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Mr. President, since this is the last Council
meeting in which you are participating in your capacity
as the Permanent Representative of your brotherly
country, permit me to add my voice to the colleagues
who have preceded me and commend the laudable
qualities that you have demonstrated and the
constructive cooperation that have prevailed in the
course of your leadership of your delegation. We also
laud your positive contribution to the work of the
Council. By the same token, I would like to thank you
for the excellent manner with which you have steered
the deliberations of the Council. On my behalf and on
behalf of other members of the Council, I wish you
health, happiness and success in your future activities.
I would also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Kai
Eide for his comprehensive briefing and commend the
efforts he and all the members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are
expending to assist the Afghan people despite all the
difficulties and challenges that they are facing. I wish
also to welcome the statement made by His Excellency
Ambassador Tanin, the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.
The reports of the Secretary-General since 2005
have predicted the deterioration of the security
situation in Afghanistan year in and year out. This past
year has been no exception. The report of the
Secretary-General before us (S/2009/323) makes

19

S/PV.6154

numerous references to new record numbers of
incidents since the beginning of this year. In paragraph
18, for example, the report indicates that the number of
security incidents rose by 43 per cent. The number of
such incidents rose above the 1,000 mark in last May
alone. The report also predicts the possibility of
increasing levels of violence in the forthcoming period.
Meanwhile, international pledges and promises to
Afghanistan have, unfortunately, been declining,
particularly with regard to the implementation of the
Afghan National Development Strategy, which is made
clear in paragraph 25 of the report. We are gravely
concerned that the day will come when the
international community will turn its back once again
on Afghanistan. We hope that that will not happen.
Once again, we would like to state that the use of
force alone will not lead to security and stability in
Afghanistan. We believe that the proposal calling for
increasing the number of civilian experts to support the
Afghan Government and build Afghan capacity is a
step in the right direction and must be carried out as
soon as possible.
We also look forward to more inclusive reviews
of peace and broader strategies in Afghanistan based on
the principle of comprehensive dialogue with all those
who accept dialogue as a means of promoting national
reconciliation, achieving understanding among all
sectors of the Afghan people, and realizing
development.
On the other hand, there is a pressing need for to
strengthen the role and mandate of UNAMA and make
the necessary resources available to it. It is also
necessary to support the wider presence and ensure
effective contributions by United Nations agencies, in
particular in development and reconstruction projects
in Afghanistan, with a view to paving the way for the
withdrawal of foreign troops, which is a sine qua non
for achieving national reconciliation.
We would like to express our satisfaction at the
statement made by the representative of Afghanistan
regarding the progress made in the areas of
infrastructure, education, agriculture and health
services. We also hope that the international
community will continue its support in financing those
sectors.
Despite the recurrent tragic incidents perpetrated
by international troops against civilians in Afghanistan

20

and despite repeated appeals to take the measures
required to prevent their repetition, the incidents of
killing civilians continue in a deeply disconcerting
manner. It is enough here to refer to the incident that
took place in the Bala Baluk district on 4 May 2009,
which led to the deaths of 140 civilians according to
Afghan Government sources. Recurrence of such
incidents prompts us to question the establishment of
rules and procedures by the international troop
command to prevent such tragic incidents and their
consequences. It is urgent that fair and impartial
investigations of these incidents be conducted and
those responsible for them be prosecuted.
We wish to express our satisfaction at the manner
in which preparations for elections have been made, as
well as the consensus reached by the Afghan people on
this question. We wish here to commend the role
played by Mr. Kai Eide and the United Nations
Assistance Mission. We believe that the success of
elections depends on the wide participation of the
Afghan people, on the integrity of the process and on
non-interference from outside in the election results.
In conclusion, we look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General evaluating progress in
implementing the mandate and priorities of UNAMA to
be presented next September.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the outset, let me express our deep
gratitude to you for the manner in which you have
guided our work. You have demonstrated talent and
exceptional mastery under very trying circumstances.
As you now prepare to leave New York, Sir, I would
like to express to you our admiration and our gratitude
and personally convey to you the expression of my
friendship. I hope that, as we say in French, the winds
will be favourable to you and that life will be beautiful
for you, Ambassador İlkin.
The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic will soon make a statement on behalf of the
European Union. France endorses that statement. I
would like to provide several additional comments,
after also having thanked Ambassador Tanin for his
presentation.
First, I would like to commend the tireless efforts
of Mr. Kai Eide to ensure better consistency in the
international efforts in Afghanistan under the auspices
of the United Nations. He has greatly contributed
personally to the momentum and the increased

09-38690

S/PV.6154

mobilization of the international community, which has
allowed the United Nations to engage itself,
particularly since the Paris Conference, as a key player
in coordination of international efforts.
The 20 August elections should be an opportunity
for Afghans to freely and democratically express their
choice with regard to the direction they want to give
their country. In order to ensure the full legitimacy and
universal acceptance of the candidates elected to lead
the country, the electoral process must be transparent,
fair and credible. To that end, every candidate should,
in particular, be able to campaign while enjoying the
same access to the media and the country. I know that
is one of the Special Representative’s concerns. As
Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner emphasized in
Kabul in May during his meetings with the main
candidates, they must also feel individually responsible
for the proper conduct of the elections.
The responsibility for the holding of the elections
belongs first and foremost to the Afghans themselves.
But the United Nations has an important role to play in
assisting them. We trust that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General will continue down the path
he has embarked upon and provide his vigilant
assistance to the electoral process.
Continuing the work to rebuild the country will
depend upon the success of the elections. As the
Special Representative has pointed out, significant
progress was made in a number of areas in the course
of the past year. That progress must now be
consolidated. In particular, I should like to refer to the
increased strength of the Afghan National Army. The
progressive
handover
to Afghan
forces
of
responsibility for security in the Kabul region, which
began in August 2008 and in which the French
contingent was especially involved, has led to an
improvement of the security situation in that region.
That is proof that “Afghanization” works and is
continuing.
A new element has been the renewed effort to
reform and strengthen the police. In that connection,
President Sarkozy has taken the decision to involve the
French Gendarmerie in tasks in Afghanistan related to
training and mentoring the Afghan National Police.
That effort is part of the future deployment of the
European Union’s gendarmerie force, which will be
particularly suited to provide operational training to the

09-38690

Afghan police to prepare it to take over military
activities on the ground.
We have taken note of the progress referred to by
the Secretary-General in the area of coordinating
international assistance, even though there is still much
to do. In that regard, we look forward with interest to
the outcome of the work being done by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to develop benchmarks and criteria to measure results.
Those indicators will be a useful tool in encouraging
international partners and the Afghan Government to
fully
commit
themselves
to
the
effective
implementation of the commitments undertaken in
Paris and Bucharest, and later reaffirmed at The Hague.
We have also been interested to learn of the wish
of the Secretary-General that new resources be
allocated to UNAMA. We understand his desire to be
able to count on the necessary capacities as soon as
possible, especially with regard to the coordination of
assistance. We shall therefore keep an open mind in
considering the requests to be made by the Secretariat.
Developments in the area of human rights
continue to be a source of great concern. Afghan
authorities should, with the support of the international
community, increase their efforts in that regard. I know
that is a concern of the Special Representative as well.
The issue of women’s rights in particular should
continue to be a priority of the Afghan Governments.
I should also like to reiterate our ongoing concern
about the issue of civilian casualties, primarily caused
by deliberate attacks by the Taliban and other extremist
groups. However, France continues to be aware that
there is still a need to intensify efforts by both
Government and international forces in that regard.
The momentum in strengthening regional
cooperation was once again in evidence at the recent
Trieste meeting on Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
should collectively ensure the implementation of the
commitments made in recent months in the areas
referred to by the Special Representative at Trieste, in
particular with regard to railway infrastructure and
energy.
Despite the individual characteristics of both
countries, there is also a need to develop a coordinated
approach to Afghanistan and Pakistan that addresses
the many common challenges that exist. Allow me to
take this opportunity to commend the determination of

21

S/PV.6154

Pakistani officials in the fight under way in the Swat
Valley. The Government of Pakistan can count on
France’s solidarity in that fight, which should focus on
all armed extremist groups active on Pakistani territory
and which we know must be part of a long-term
comprehensive strategy.
The stabilization of Afghanistan and the region as
a whole is a priority for us all. It is for that reason that,
for two years now, France has worked to substantially
strengthen its military commitment in Afghanistan. We
are aware of the need to for a comprehensive approach,
and we want to help to put one in place by committing
as fully as possible. We have also significantly
strengthened our political and civilian commitment by
massively increasing our 2009 reconstruction
assistance, which will amount to €45 million.
Afghanistan can rely on France’s tireless commitment
alongside the United Nations.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): It gives me
great pleasure to join my colleagues in thanking you,
Sir, for your extraordinary leadership as President of
the Security Council, for your distinguished career and
for the many contributions you have made — not only
to your Government but to the relationship between our
two countries, given your service in Washington — as
well as for the tremendous wisdom, friendship and
leadership that you have shown throughout your tenure
here. We — and I — will miss you enormously. We
wish you all the best. I hope we all have an open
invitation to come and see you.
I want to begin also by thanking Special
Representative Kai Eide for his comprehensive briefing
today and for all of his exceptional efforts as head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
The United States strongly supports UNAMA and
its pursuit, together with the international community
and especially with the Government of Afghanistan, of
the goals set out in resolution 1868 (2009). Much work
remains for all of us to do as we help the Afghan
Government to better serve and protect its people.
On the heels of the launch of the United States
own comprehensive new strategy in Afghanistan, the
Hague ministerial meeting and the Paris Conference
earlier this month, the United States welcomes the
Secretary-General’s first quarterly report (S/2009/323)
on the situation in Afghanistan. As the SecretaryGeneral indicates, the security situation remains

22

challenging. But our partnership is indeed making
progress as we work to address key security,
humanitarian, human rights and governance concerns
on the ground. At the Hague ministerial, the
international community spoke with a strong and
united voice: UNAMA will continue to play a key role
in Afghanistan’s security and development. The
international community clearly put UNAMA in the
lead for coordinating international action and
assistance in support of the Government of
Afghanistan.
As the Council knows, President Obama has
made Afghanistan a top national security priority. Our
goals are clear: to disrupt, defeat and dismantle
Al-Qaida and to build up the Afghan Government’s
capacity to secure its people and its territory. UNAMA
is doing outstanding work, and it will remain key to
our common efforts.
In that light, permit me to touch on a few critical
areas.
Afghanistan’s
presidential
and
provincial
elections on 20 August will be a critical milestone in
the Government of Afghanistan’s efforts to expand
governance. The elections offer the Afghan
Government an opportunity to give its citizens a voice
and to underscore to the international community its
ongoing drive to strengthen democracy and good
governance in the country. The international
community and the United Nations are working hard
with the Independent Election Commission to help
make sure that those election-related efforts succeed.
We must all make that our top priority in the weeks
ahead. Let me note in that regard that the United States
has given $120 million to the United Nationsadministered donor fund for the elections. We call on
all other donors to rapidly deliver on their pledges as
well.
The United States does not support or oppose any
particular presidential or provincial council candidate.
Instead, we support the right of the Afghan people to
choose their own leaders. That is why we are working
with Afghan electoral authorities and the United
Nations to help Afghans ensure a credible, secure and
inclusive electoral process. The United States applauds
efforts by UNAMA towards that goal. We welcome the
establishment of the Political Rights monitoring
programme, which will watch the protection of the
freedom of expression, association, peaceful assembly
and movement. We will also remain vigilant for cases

09-38690

S/PV.6154

of intimidation, partiality and discrimination, and we
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to fully
enforce its decree on non-intervention in the election
affairs of 2009.
The United States also welcomes the efforts of
UNAMA to encourage Afghan women to participate in
the political process, as both candidates and voters. We
are working in parallel to empower women and end
gender discrimination in Afghanistan. Allow me to note
that President Obama’s Ambassador-at-Large for
Global Women’s Issues, Melanne Verveer, completed a
trip to Afghanistan just yesterday. While in the country,
she promoted the launch of a $27 million grants
programme to support gender equality by strengthening
Afghan-led civil society organizations, particularly
through providing technical assistance and smaller
grants to Afghan non-governmental organizations.
UNAMA will only be as effective as its resources
and presence throughout Afghanistan will allow.
Expanding the presence of UNAMA in Afghanistan’s
regions and provinces, as called for in resolution 1868
(2009), is also essential.
We welcome stronger leadership by UNAMA in
donor coordination, and we have committed ourselves
to new levels of cooperation and transparency as we
work with UNAMA and other donors. It is critical to
coordinate capitals’ preparation of their 2009 to 2013
assistance plans with the Government of Afghanistan
as well as among donors. Donor-implementation
meetings at the international level would help reach
this goal, and such efforts would be a useful
supplement to coordination in the field. We must help
donors align their high-level plans and funding
requests with Afghan priorities.
The proposed civilian increase to implement an
enhanced, targeted, capacity-building programme
comes in direct response to the Afghan Government’s
requests and geographic priorities. UNAMA must lie at
the heart of efforts to coordinate the international
aspects of the civilian increase, but the Afghan
Government must also take ownership of that increase
for it to be effective. Afghanistan needs a dramatic
increase of civilian expertise to help develop key
systems and institutions, extend basic infrastructure
and create lawful economic alternatives to poppy
production. On counter-narcotics, the United States
recently announced that it is phasing out eradication
and channelling significantly more resources into
agriculture, interdiction and public information efforts.

09-38690

Allow me to single out a creative programme that
will also support the work of UNAMA, that is, the
United Nations efforts to support the Afghan economy
through, in the Secretary-General’s words, its
“local procurement campaign with members of
the Government, donors and a number of Afghan
private-sector suppliers. This campaign is
intended to encourage the international
community to buy Afghan products and reduce
reliance
on
more
expensive
imports”
(S/2009/323, para. 35).
The United States is very supportive of efforts to
expand bilateral and regional trade, including more
United States purchases from Afghan producers and
businesses. My Government will also do its part to
increase regional trade through the launch of a regional
infrastructure and trade development initiative and by
encouraging Afghanistan and Pakistan to conclude an
updated transit trade treaty.
We must also do more to develop Afghan
agriculture, which will require better technology,
marketing, building of infrastructure, irrigation, rural
electrification, cold storage and roads from farms to
markets. We should all be working together with the
people and Government of Afghanistan to deliver the
basic needs and infrastructure necessary to improve the
lives of the 76 per cent of Afghans who live in rural
areas.
Finally, my Government would be remiss if it did
not comment on the report’s discussion of civilian
casualties. The United States deeply regrets any injury
or loss of life among innocent Afghans from operations
involving United States forces and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Any loss of innocent
human life is tragic. We try to promptly provide
humanitarian assistance to affected communities after
incidents occur. We take all reports of such incidents
seriously, and we will continue to conduct thorough,
joint investigations with the Afghan Government to
determine exactly what happened in each incident
involving allegations of civilian casualties.
United States and international forces take
extensive precautions to avoid loss of life among
Afghan civilians, as well as international and Afghan
forces, during operations against insurgents and
terrorists. We understand that civilian casualties
undermine Afghan public and government backing for
all that we do together. In fact, shortly after assuming

23

S/PV.6154

command of the United States forces in Afghanistan
and ISAF on 14 June, General Stanley McChrystal
announced that reducing civilian casualties will be a
top priority as he pursues the military efforts necessary
to provide a secure environment in which
Afghanistan’s society and Government can be
strengthened.
But we must not forget that, as we pursue these
goals, we are fighting against an enemy — the Taliban
and other militants — that employs appalling tactics,
including using child soldiers as suicide bombers and
using civilians as human shields. Most civilian
causalities
in
Afghanistan,
as
the
Special
Representative just said, are caused by insurgents, not
by the international forces working to improve the
capacity of the Afghan Government to protect the
Afghan people.
The international community has made UNAMA
a guiding force in achieving our goals in Afghanistan.
The United States stands steadfast in its support for the
Afghan people as they seek to overcome the challenges
of the past 30 years and work with the international
community to defeat a common enemy. We must now
work together to succeed in Afghanistan for the sake of
the Afghan people, for the sake of the region and for
the sake of international peace and security.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to congratulate Turkey on such a
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your
outstanding contribution. The presidency of the
Security Council is something that all diplomats aspire
to. We hope that your work and life during this month
will be a long-lasting legacy for you. We also wish you
every success in all of your future endeavours.
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323). We
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kai Eide for his briefing. We
appreciate the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
difficult conditions for the peace, stability and
development of Afghanistan. We also wish to welcome
the statement made by the representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin.
The upcoming elections will be a major event in
the political life of Afghanistan this year. We are
pleased to see that, despite multiple challenges,

24

preparations for the Afghan elections have been on
track thus far. We trust that the Afghan people will
apply their wisdom to the proper resolution of issues
relating to the elections and, through the elections,
promote social cohesion and stability and enhance the
Government’s capacity for governance in all fields.
Ensuring a smooth election process will be of critical
importance. This will lay an important foundation for
maintaining political stability in Afghanistan and
achieving peaceful reconstruction.
Recently, the Afghan peace process and domestic
reconstruction have registered good progress and are
moving towards the goal of steady development. But
the security situation remains worrisome. We hope that
the Afghan Government, the Afghan National Army
and the Afghan National Police will, with the
assistance of the international community, continuously
enhance their capacity-building so as to independently
assume the responsibility of safeguarding national
security and social stability.
The key to securing lasting peace in Afghanistan
is economic development. The international community
should increase its input in Afghan economic
reconstruction; provide assistance to Afghanistan in
agriculture, education, health and other fields; support
improvements in its infrastructure; advance positive
social development; and effectively help the Afghan
people improve and raise their living standards so as to
address the factors causing social instability at their roots.
We support the continued leading and
coordinating role of the United Nations in assisting the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We support UNAMA in
further enhancing its relationship with the Government
of Afghanistan, the International Security Assistance
Force and all donors, and in further advancing its
monitoring and coordinating role.
Having gone through so many trials and
tribulations, the Afghan people eagerly look forward to
embarking on the road to peace, stability and
development aspirations that are shared by all countries
of the world. That calls for continued painstaking
efforts on the part of the Afghan Government and
people, as well as vigorous support from the
international community.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
stands ready to continue to assist Afghanistan to the
best of its ability, actively engage in the Afghan

09-38690

S/PV.6154

reconstruction process, and work tirelessly for lasting
peace in Afghanistan.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you very
much, Sir, for convening this meeting. While there are
only several hours remaining before the official
conclusion of your presidency for the month, I wish to
join other colleagues in congratulating you and your
team on the excellence with which you have lead and
conducted the work of the Council throughout this
month. I also wish you all the best of health and
happiness as you are about to leave us, and we will
certainly miss you a lot.
I also thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his updated and
straightforward briefing, and particularly for his
tireless and productive endeavours on the ground. I
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for his
statement to the Council.
It is truly heartening to learn of the major positive
developments in many fields in Afghanistan in the past
three months. As the centre of both national and
international political attention, the upcoming
presidential and provincial council elections have gone
through the very difficult phase of voter registration
without serious security incidents. The date of
elections has been determined and the list of candidates
finalized, and the powers of the President after 22 May
have been endorsed by the Supreme Court.
Efforts to expand the Afghan National Army and
to reform and strengthen the Afghan National Police,
coupled with preparations for the establishment of a
social monitoring mechanism with a view to ensuring
the role of elected organs and civil society in
overseeing police performance at the local level, are
also commendable. In the field of governance, progress
is visible in the fight against corruption and in the
enhancement of administrative accountability and
capacity-building, thus giving rise to the civilian surge
which is aimed at extending the Government’s
presence to the whole country, avoiding duplication
and creating greater efficiency among existing
governance structures.
We acknowledge the closer and more effective
regional cooperation Afghanistan has enjoyed during
the past three months, which is pivotal in helping to
solve the conflict, combat cross-border crime and drug
trafficking, and generate economic growth in the
country. We appreciate the continued assistance of the

09-38690

international community to the Afghan Government
and people. We especially commend the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its
central role in better coordinating international action
and assistance.
Against that backdrop, we remain concerned by
the continued deteriorating insecurity and increased
levels of violence in Afghanistan. The expanded
fighting and insurgency activities in previously stable
areas, the intensified intimidation, abductions and
assassinations, and the continued deliberate targeting
of public officials, civilian contractors, religious
scholars and aid workers, and particularly attacks
against United Nations personnel, remain key sources
of concern. We recognize the commitment to reducing
civilian casualties, but regret the 24 per cent increase
in civilian casualties as compared with the same period
in 2008, and look forward to early concrete measures
to concretely and sharply bring down this figure.
With less than two months left before the
elections are scheduled to be held, we believe in the
critical importance of international assistance in
maintaining the positive momentum. We therefore
welcome the renewed commitment to Afghanistan’s
peacebuilding process expressed by international
donors at The Hague Conference in March this year, as
well as the consensus on a more focused strategy to
meet the challenges in Afghanistan, which include
adequately funded and effective civilian capacity- and
institution-building programmes. More efficient
mechanisms should be developed to enhance donor
coordination, aid effectiveness and coherence in the
allocation and use of available resources. In this
connection, we look forward to the Secretary-General’s
presentation of the benchmarks at the September
meeting of the Council.
At the same time, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on Afghan ownership, for no one
but the Afghan people could do better the work of
rebuilding and sustaining peace and ensuring the
stability, growth and development of their own country.
To this end, international assistance should fit into
Afghan structures and priorities and the process of
Afghanization should gradually be the ultimate answer
to all the challenges facing the country.
With that in mind, we call upon all Afghan
stakeholders to put the political stability of their
country above their partisan or group interests,

25

S/PV.6154

renounce violence, overcome divisions and advance
dialogue and cooperation in order to succeed in the
major political events ahead, and most immediately to
make sure that the upcoming elections are fair, free and
non-violent, with the broad voluntary participation of
the Afghan people.
To conclude, given the many similarities between
Viet Nam and Afghanistan in both conditions and
levels of development, and given Viet Nam’s
comparative advantages in areas that agro-based
countries like Afghanistan may often need for
development, allow me to reiterate Viet Nam’s
commitment at the Paris Conference last year to
staying prepared to contribute our experience and
expertise in post-war recovery and development to the
reconstruction process in the brother country of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
As you conclude your duties as Permanent
Representative of your country to the United Nations,
on behalf of my delegation I, too, should like to pay
tribute to you, Sir, above all for the excellence with
which you presided over the Security Council for the
month of June, as well as for the quality of the human
relationships you have been able to form with each and
every one of us. I wish you every success for the
future.
Having said that, I would also like to thank
Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing. I
also wish to thank our friend and colleague,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.
The sharp increase in incidents in Afghanistan
remains a source of major concern, in particular in the
light of the upcoming presidential and provincial
elections scheduled for 20 August 2009. However, we
are somewhat reassured to see a net improvement in
the coordination of activities between the Afghan
National Security Forces and UNAMA, on the one
hand, and the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance and the International Security Assistance
Force on the other. They must take the necessary
measures to spare the civilian population from the
collateral effects of military operations.
The success of the mission in Afghanistan will
largely depend on the support of the civilian population

26

for the objectives sought by the international
community. In that context, we believe it appropriate to
establish a communication strategy to make Afghans
aware of the benefits of international assistance.
We also urge the international community to step
up its efforts towards Afghanistan, namely in the
priority fields, and we urge UNAMA to further
strengthen its presence in the country, as resolution
1868 (2009) requires.
In that regard, it is very reassuring to note the
strong currents of support shown by the international
community for Afghanistan through the organization of
recent meetings in Moscow, The Hague, Islamabad and
Tehran. We hope that that commitment and that
solidarity will greatly benefit the Afghan people.
Clearly, Afghanistan is at a crossroads, and we
must together act quickly and with resolve to address
the challenges on the horizon. We are pleased that there
are no longer controversies surrounding the elections,
namely concerning the date and the powers of the
President. UNAMA played a big part in reaching that
consensus, and we are grateful to it.
We urge the Afghan political class to renounce
violence, to accept the rules of democracy and to
favour political dialogue, which are indispensable
conditions for the success of the elections. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission, which has respected the timeline
by launching the election campaign on 16 June.
We welcome the implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy in other
sectors deemed priority, where, moreover, progress has
been made, in particular the decisions concerning the
new national agriculture strategy, police reform and
private-sector development.
However,
donor
coordination
and
aid
effectiveness remain crucial to tangible and lasting
improvements in the living conditions of the Afghan
population. That is why we welcome the mechanisms
set up to strengthen coordination, in particular the peer
review mechanism, which will help ensure a coherent
allocation of resources and oblige the donors to fulfil
their actions.
Similarly, the signing of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework by the Minister of
Economy and the United Nations Resident Coordinator

09-38690

S/PV.6154

on 28 May constitutes a good policy framework for the
activities of the United Nations bodies in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the detailed plan produced by
the Afghan Government for the rapid and effective
deployment of civilian experts, the effective
implementation of which should expand the capacities
of the Government in the long term.
Furthermore, encouraging measures in the fight
against corruption bodes well for the true resolve of the
Government to tackle the threat to extinguish the
development efforts. In fact, UNAMA’s cooperation
remains essential at all levels to fill the gaps.
During the period under consideration, the
humanitarian situation still suffers from the effects of
natural disasters, which could, if we are not careful,
cause public health problems or exacerbate the food
crisis. Even if those disasters are managed swiftly
thanks to good coordination among the different
partners, support measures are needed to reduce the
suffering of the people.
Lastly, the indispensable asset of regional
cooperation in Afghanistan in both the political and
economic spheres must also be underscored. From that
point of view, several conferences have reaffirmed the
commitment of the countries of the region to support
economic projects and to combat terrorism, drugtrafficking and organized crime.
Finally, we hope that all actions undertaken by
the United Nations and the international community
will receive the consent and support of the Afghans so
as to foster their ownership for a better future in
Afghanistan.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I wish to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Kai Eide, for his insightful briefing. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his statement.
In view of the upcoming elections, which we
hope will constitute a milestone in the transformation
of Afghanistan into a stable and democratic State, our
meeting today takes on additional significance. Indeed,
the holding of those elections in a free and fair manner
represents a high priority not only for Afghanistan, but
also for the entire international community.

09-38690

Council members have already emphasized the
importance of the election process and expressed their
determination to help make it a success. Turkey joins
that commitment and reiterates its full support for
UNAMA’s activities in that regard. In fact, UNAMA is
playing an essential role in almost all walks of social,
political and economic life in Afghanistan, and we
want that to continue unabated in the critical period
ahead.
In the light of the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (S/2009/323), I will not go into
details of what further could and should be done. Let
me just underline that we fully agree with the
Secretary-General’s observations and recommendations.
In that context, we particularly look forward to
agreed benchmarks being formulated and reflected in
the next report of the Secretary-General. We believe
that that exercise will result in further improving the
United Nations work in Afghanistan and will also
guide the Member States in their contributions.
As an active contributor to peace and stability
efforts in Afghanistan, Turkey pledges its full support
to the Secretariat in formulating those benchmarks. We
believe that the benchmarks should be concise and
achievable, reflecting the challenges and opportunities
on the ground. But, even more importantly, given the
need for a comprehensive strategy, including security,
governance, the rule of law, human rights and social
and economic development, the benchmarks must
address all those dimensions in a holistic, balanced and
realistic manner. Only through such a broad-based and
forward-looking strategy can we achieve our common
objectives.
Likewise, continued and enhanced regional
cooperation is another requirement to accomplish our
goals in Afghanistan. Recently, there are have been a
number of promising developments in that context,
particularly with respect to Afghanistan-Pakistan
relations. The international community should continue
to encourage and help those efforts to further advance
regional cooperation.
For its part, Turkey leads a trilateral cooperation
process that includes Pakistan, Afghanistan and Turkey.
Building upon our excellent relations with both
countries and our deep-rooted engagement in the
peace, prosperity and stability of the region, we hope
that that initiative will constitute another contribution
to the international community’s joint endeavours. In

27

S/PV.6154

that context, I am pleased to report that the third
trilateral summit within that framework was recently
held in April in Ankara.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once again
what we have been saying from the first day — that
failure is not an option in Afghanistan. Indeed, given
the stakes involved, we must succeed, and we are
confident that we will.
We have every reason to believe that the proud
people of Afghanistan, with the help of the
international community, will turn the challenges into
opportunities and will pave the way for a bright and
prosperous future. Our Afghan brothers and sisters,
who have suffered immensely from decades of war and
destruction, deserve no less.
Turkey will continue to contribute to the
collective efforts in that direction, and we will do
everything possible to make sure that we achieve our
common goals sooner rather than later.
Now, on a personal note, I extend my warmest
thanks and gratitude for all the comments of my
colleagues, who have bid me farewell. I must say that
they have all been extremely kind and generous in their
remarks about me.
On the last day of the Presidency of Turkey, I
wish to place on record my deep appreciation, and that
of my delegation to our colleagues on the Council, for
their cooperation and support. It was a great experience
for me and my Mission, and I must add that I and my
colleagues in our Mission enjoyed every moment of
our Presidency, since there was never a dull moment.
I also wish to thank our Secretariat colleagues for
their invaluable support. Their professionalism and
dedication are most commendable.
Indeed, this is my last appearance before the
Council in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, since I will be retiring as of
tomorrow. Therefore, taking this opportunity, I would
like to say that my four and a half years at the United
Nations, and especially the last six months in the
Security Council, have been the most interesting and
rewarding experiences of my 44 year-long diplomatic
career.
I thank all my colleagues at the United Nations
and in the Secretariat for their kindness and support.

28

Without their cooperation and understanding, I would
certainly have not enjoyed it as much as I did.
Last but not least, I want to thank our interpreters
for their tireless efforts. They are the invisible enablers
of our work at the United Nations. Without them, we
could not function.
I resume my function as the President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Honourable Lawrence
Cannon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
Mr. Cannon (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada, like a number of other members of the
international community, is making considerable
sacrifices and mobilizing significant resources in the
pursuit of a more stable and secure Afghanistan. The
ongoing attention of the Security Council is critical to
achieving this objective.
Canada welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2009/323). It is a thoughtful report that reflects the
complex realities we — the Afghans and the
international community — confront in promoting
security, good governance and development for all
Afghans. As the report makes clear, the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and the international
community are investing considerable energy and
resources in assist in the holding of truly democratic
elections.
Elections in Afghanistan represent an important
milestone in the country’s ongoing democratic
transition. Across the country, the Afghan people are
mobilizing in the millions to organize these elections,
to secure these elections, to campaign in these
elections, and to vote in these elections. These
elections help to meet the aspirations of the Afghan
people to exercise increasing influence over the
decisions that affect their lives.
Canada is proud to be playing a supporting role,
alongside our international partners, in this historic
process. We have committed $35 million over three
years to support Afghanistan’s 2009-2010 elections,
including a $25 million contribution to the multidonor
programme on enhancing legal and electoral capacity
for tomorrow (UNDP/ELECT). We are also paying
particular attention to maximizing the participation of
women in the electoral process as voters, candidates
and observers.

09-38690

S/PV.6154

Canadian officials in Kabul and Kandahar are
working around the clock to support these efforts. We
have also deployed a technical expert to support the
work of the Independent Election Commission.
Moreover, we hope to deploy election observers as part
of multilateral election observation efforts.
We continue to call on the Afghan Government to
take all necessary measures to ensure the credibility of
the electoral process. In this regard, we welcome
efforts to ensure a level playing field for all candidates.
Canada is also working with the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to ensure
that these elections take place in the safest environment
possible. In Kandahar, for example, Canadian armed
forces personnel and civilian police are mentoring the
Afghan National Security Forces to provide security
throughout the elections process, and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has also indicated
that it stands ready to provide third-line security.
Canada is committed to strengthening the
capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces to
ensure security throughout the elections process and to
promote the rule of law in the future. As the last report
of the Secretary General notes, the security situation
remains extremely challenging, especially in the south
and in Kandahar, which is why one of Canada’s key
priorities in Afghanistan is to train, develop and mentor
Afghan security forces. And we are making progress,
as our latest quarterly report to the Canadian
Parliament shows. More and more police officers and
soldiers are being trained, and some units are now
capable of planning, executing and sustaining
operations in Kandahar.
All of us agree that the Afghan National Police
constitutes the first line of defence in protecting
Afghan voters and safeguarding the Afghan electoral
process. It constitutes the most visible face of the
Afghan Government in the country’s districts.
In this context, Canada welcomes the Afghan
Government’s recent decision to increase the capacity
of Afghan National Police by recruiting up to 15,000
new officers in the most insecure areas of the country.
(spoke in English)
During my last visit to Afghanistan, I had the
privilege of announcing a new Canadian contribution
of $21 million to support the rule of law in
Afghanistan. Of this contribution $20 million supports

09-38690

the Law and Order Trust Fund to help pay the salaries
of police and correctional officers.
Moreover, Canada has recently announced an
additional contribution of $12 million to the Law and
Order Trust Fund to help pay the salaries of new police
recruits. Canadian civilian and military police officers
will continue to assist in training and mentoring the
Afghan National Police in Kandahar.
Strengthening the rule of law in Afghanistan will
be a long and hard road, and the choices and decisions
that have been made this year are important steps in
this journey. Canada continues to work closely with
our Afghan and international partners to coordinate our
efforts and build the capacity of the Afghan National
Police to provide security to the Afghan population.
The security Afghans seek is akin to the safety we
all have come to expect — the simple ability to move
freely, for children, including girls, to go to school, for
farmers to take their products to market, for families to
visit their relatives in neighbouring villages. This
security also includes being able to campaign in
support of a candidate’s platform or to cast a ballot in a
remote district. Canada will continue to support
legitimate Afghan aspirations in this regard.
The Afghan elections are an Afghan undertaking —
elections by the Afghan people for the Afghan people.
We encourage our Afghan friends to elect the leaders
who best represent their values and their vision. And
we encourage Afghanistan’s leaders to engage in a fair
and transparent debate. In return, we, Canada, pledge
our continued support and our neutrality.
We continue to look to the United Nations to
reinforce the international community’s impartiality in
these elections. I would like to salute the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide,
tireless worker in this regard. Under his leadership, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has begun to address critical human
resource, budgetary and other challenges. UNAMA is
clearly stronger this year than last. We commend those
efforts. However, there is more we all can do.
Like Kai Eide, I recently returned from very
constructive meetings in Trieste, which were organized
by Italy under the auspices of the G-8. Nearly 50 States
and international organizations actively participated,
including Afghanistan’s neighbours and the United
Nations, again demonstrating the depth of international

29

S/PV.6154

resolve on this issue. We spoke specifically in Trieste
on how to support efforts towards better border
management.
Canada has considerable experience on that issue.
We share one of the longest borders in the world with
the United States, nearly 9,000 kilometres long. While
border management will always depend on the regional
context, similar interests of security and prosperity for
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the broader region underpin
our collective interests. We need to continue to be
responsive to Afghan and Pakistani needs. Moreover,
we need to prepare to deliver meaningfully, in a way
that resonates locally. Indeed, Canada’s engagement
seeks to do just that.
We continue to learn, adjust and improve the
delivery of our assistance to Afghanistan. That includes
the elaboration of clear time-bound priorities,
benchmarks, targets and indicators to guide our work
nationally and in Kandahar. It also includes a
strengthened civilian presence in Kandahar and a focus
on the humanitarian situation confronting the Afghan
people.
As we deploy those new resources, we view the
role of the United Nations in Kandahar and throughout
the country as fundamental. The United Nations needs
to play the same coordinating and leadership role in the
provinces as it plays in Kabul. Moreover, its regional
presence, which extends our reach and attracts growing
numbers of partners, is critical to our shared success.
We similarly look forward to the results of
UNAMA’s efforts to articulate benchmarks. We
encourage ongoing efforts to continue to reduce
UNAMA’s vacancy rate, and we warmly welcome
plans to establish a presence for the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in southern
Afghanistan. Taken together, those steps will no doubt
strengthen the United Nations ability to help Afghans
meet their own aspirations for their country.
As I stated earlier, Afghanistan’s future is
ultimately in the hands of Afghans, where it should be.
Canada remains committed to supporting the Afghan
people as they continue to move forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic, who will be the
last speaker for this morning’s session of our meeting.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The

30

candidate countries of Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
Let me begin by expressing our appreciation for
the opportunity to participate in today’s debate on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to
thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing and
for his excellent ongoing work in leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/323), there have recently been positive
developments of great significance in Afghanistan. The
work of UNAMA has contributed to that progress. At
the same time, daunting challenges remain. The EU
strongly encourages the Afghan Government to sustain
the positive efforts, so as to ensure a major
improvement of the situation, with assistance provided
by the multinational presence on the ground. In that
respect, the European Union would like to reiterate its
unwavering dedication to assisting Afghan authorities
in maintaining the current positive momentum during
the complex period ahead. That is of crucial
importance with regard to the upcoming presidential
and provincial elections, which will have significant
effects on the development of the situation in
Afghanistan.
The upcoming elections, to be held on 20 August,
will be a major stepping stone for the further political
development of Afghanistan. It is important that the
elections serve to ensure the political legitimacy of the
next Government and provide it with a strong mandate.
The European Union attaches the greatest importance
to the holding of legitimate, inclusive and secure
presidential elections, in line with international
standards, which would strengthen the support of the
Afghan people for their institutions. To that end, it is
particularly important that the Afghan Government
exercises its authority with impartiality and integrity,
ensuring a level playing field for all candidates.
The election process should be managed in close
cooperation with the Afghanistan Independent Election
Commission. The updating of the voter registration list,
the completion of the candidate nomination process

09-38690

S/PV.6154

and the publication of the final list of candidates, while
not without their problems, represent important
preliminary developments in relation to the upcoming
elections. However, it is vital that sound mechanisms
be in place to avoid large-scale irregularities occurring
at the time of the vote. The European Union has
decided to deploy an electoral observation mission to
observe the elections. Clearly, UNAMA will also have
a crucial role to play in that regard.
The enhanced international presence in
Afghanistan in connection with the elections should
focus on safeguarding a stable security situation, and
thereby make development possible. Maintaining
security during the election period is a shared
responsibility between the Afghan national security
forces and the international community. The European
Union concurs with the Secretary-General’s report that
increased levels of security-related operations should,
however, do everything possible to avoid the risk of
more civilian casualties, and that we should continue
looking at ways of promoting wider “Afghanization” of
relevant operations.
The European Union actively supports the
improvement of good governance and the rule of law in
Afghanistan, as well as the fight against corruption and
promoting respect for human rights. Building Afghan
capacity and ownership in the police and civil sectors
remains at the core of the EU’s engagement in
Afghanistan. In that regard, the EU urges the
Government of Afghanistan to give the utmost priority
to the achievement of significant progress in those
areas, especially at the subnational level.
The European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan is clear proof of such an active and
continued engagement. The EU Mission aims at
contributing to the establishment of sustainable and
effective civilian policing arrangements under Afghan
ownership. Its mandate encompasses the monitoring,
mentoring, advising and training of national police
forces.
As a complementary initiative to building up
police capacity, the EU underlines the importance of
the prospect of a deployment of the European
Gendarmerie Force to Afghanistan. Recognizing the
Afghan Compact and the Afghan National
Development Strategy and the principles agreed to in
The Hague at the conference on Afghanistan as the
framework for the country’s political, social and

09-38690

economic development, the EU intends to further
enhance and consolidate its commitment to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development through
a common approach and bilaterally by individual
member States.
Without a doubt, stability, security and
development in Afghanistan are closely linked to the
overall situation in the region. The European Union
strongly supports the development of a coordinated
approach at the regional level and an enhanced
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
especially Pakistan. The EU particularly acknowledges
the key role of Pakistan for stability in the region and
therefore welcomes the fact that further progress that
has been achieved in the bilateral dialogue between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report. As highlighted in the joint
statement of the first EU-Pakistan summit held in
Brussels on 17 June 2009, where Pakistan was
represented by President Asif Ali Zardari, the EU, in
close cooperation with Pakistan, is committed to
strengthening security and stability in Afghanistan and
the wider region, including through enhanced
cooperation on combating terrorism.
The EU appreciates the increased attention of the
Group of Eight (G8) countries to Afghanistan and
regional cooperation, as also demonstrated by the
meeting of the G8 Foreign Ministers on Afghanistan
and the region, which took place in Trieste, Italy, on
26 and 27 June 2009.
The EU strongly supports the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in its important role
as the coordinator of international efforts, while
recognizing Member States’ responsibility to assist
UNAMA in performing this task. The new provincial
offices are a welcome contribution, and the EU hopes
that this expansion can continue. The EU welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to propose in his
report due in September 2009 a finalized set of
benchmarks designed to contribute to measuring
progress in the implementation of the mandates and
priorities of UNAMA.
In conclusion, allow me to recall that the
European Union reiterates its full recognition that the
primary responsibility for the development of the
country lies with the Afghan Government and people
themselves. I would like to assure you that the
European Union will continue to play an active role in

31

S/PV.6154

assisting Afghanistan on its road to security, stability
and prosperity, in close cooperation and coordination
with UNAMA and other international actors.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I

32

intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. The first
statement will then be by the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

09-38690
