SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFI·CIAL RECO'RDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 61
;62nd and 163rd meetings

162eme et 163eme seances

2 July 1947

(50 p.)

22 juillet 1947

Lake Success
New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and sixty-second meeting

Cent-soixante-deuxieme seance
Page

Pages

232. Provisional agenda
1407
1407
233. Adoption of the agenda
234. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1407

232. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . .. 1407
233. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1407
234. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1407

Hundred and sixty-third meeting

Cent-soixante-troisieme seance

235. Provi~onal agenda
1428
236. Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . .. 1428
237. Continuation of the discussion on the'
Greek question. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1428

235. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . .. 1428
236. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . .. 1428
237. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1428

Documents

Documents

The following documents, relevant to the hundred
and sixty-second and hundred and sixty-third
meetings, appear as follows:

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux centsoixan te-deuxieme et cent-soixante-troisieme
seances, figurent dans les publications suivantes:

Official records of the Security Council:
Second Yea" Supplement No. 15, Annex 38
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom at the
hundred and sixty-second meeting of the Security Council (document S/429).

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiti:
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 38
Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant du Royaume-Uni a la centsoixante-deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (docucment S/429).

Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of France at the hundred and
sixty-second meeting of the Security Council
(document S/430).

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 39
Amer ,dements au projet de resolution des EtatsU is sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant de la France a la cent-soixantedeuxie,me seance du Conseil de securite (document S/430).

Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).

DeuxiJme Annee, Supplement special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a ia frontiere grecque (document
S/360) .

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFfiCIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 61

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 61

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SECOND MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTE-DEUXGEME SEANCE

Heid at Lake Success, New York,
:.m Tuesday, 22 July 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, N6w-York,
le mardi 22 juiliet 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, :France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

232. Provisional agenda (document
S/424)
2. The Greek question: report of the Commis-

232. Or.dre du Dour provisoire (document
S/424)
1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. La question grecque: rapport presente au

sion of Investigation C'"lncerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).1

Conseil de securite par la Commission
d'enquete sur les inCidents survenus le long
de la frontiere grecque (document S/360)1.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

233. Adoption of agenda
The agenda was adopted.

233. Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

234. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

234. Suite de la discussion sur la
question grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania, Mr. Mevorah, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis, representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan,
representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at
the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel
Kerenxhi, representant de l'Albanie, M. Mevorah, representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece et M. Vilfan, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: I understand that some of
the representatives have amendments to the
United States resolution2 which the Council
started to discuss at its hundred and sixty-first
meeting.s I should like to invite these representatives to present their amendments and to say
whatever they wish in support of them.

Le PRESn)ENT (traduit de l'ang~[l.is):
Je crois que certains representants ont l'intention
de proposer des amendements a la resolution
presentee par les Etats-Unis2 , resolution que le
Conseil a commence a discuter a la cent-soixante
et unieme seances. J e voudrais inviter ces representants a presenter leurs amendements et a
prendre la parole pour les defendre.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.
2 Ibid., Second Year, No. 51, 147th meeting, pages
1124 to 1126.
~b 3~id., Second Year, No. 60.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.
2 Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance, pages
1124 a 1126.
• Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 60.

1408

.. 44

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): The French delegation intends to present a number of amendments to the dr"ft resolution introduced by the United States delegation. These amendments will be circulated
forthwith. All of them are drawn up with the
same purpose, namely, to represent the recommendation which will eventually be adopted by
the Security Council as essentiRlly aimed at the
restoration of neighbourly relations among the
countries concerned, and to insist primarily on
the conciliatory functions, the "good offices",
which should be entrusted to the proposed commission.
Furthermore, this commission should retain
the power to investigate any new incidents which
. may occur; this provision seems necessary in
view of the present sit.lation. But the intention
of the amendments ;':" a whole is to produce a
resolution of the type indicated the other day by
the representative of Syria, that is, one designed
to emphasize as strongly as possible the fact that
our aim is essentially one of conciliation and
rapprochement.

M. PAROD! (France): La delegation fran~aise
se propose, en efIet, de presenter un certain
nombre d'amendements au projet de resolution
introduit par la delegation des Etats-Unis. Ces
amendements vont etre incessamment distribues.
Ils sont tous rediges dans le meme esprit, qui est
de faire apparaitre la recommandation a laquelle
arriverait le Conseil de securite comme une
recommandation essentiellement destinee a reta- .
blir des rapports de bon voisinage entre les pays
i'1teresses, et d'insister princ~palement sur les
fonctions de conciliation, de "bons offices", a
attribuer a la commission dont l'institution est
envisagee.
Cette commission conserverait, d'autre part, le
pouvoir d'enqueter sur les nouveaux incidents
qui pourraient survenir; cela nous paralt necessaire en raison de la situatiun actuelle. Mais
l'intention de l'ensemble des amendements est
d'aboutir a une resolution con~ue dans l'esprit
qu'indiquait l'autre jour le representant de la
Syrie: faire ressortir le plus possible le fait que
notre but est essentiellement la conciliation et le
rapprochement.

Mr. ~6PEZ (Colombia): Before we begin a
discussion of these amendments, I should like to
know whether the Security Council has received
any information concerning recent developments
in connexion with the Greek question. If the
Council has not received any word on that matter, perhaps the Greek representative can give ns
any information which he has to substantiate the
reports which have been appearing in the Press
dun .g the last eight or ten days. I believe that
would have some bearing on the discussion.
That is why I should like to know whether the
Council has received any information from the
Subsidiary Group.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Avant de commencer la discussion de ces
amendements, je voudrais savoir si le Conseil
de securite a re~u des informations au sujet de
recents developpements qui concernent la question grecque. Si le Conseil n'a re~u aucune
communication en l'espece, peut-etre le representant de la Grece pourrait-il nous donner les
renseignements qu'il possede; cela nous permettrait de mieux comprendre les communiques
publies dans les journaux ces derniers huit ou
dix jours. Je crois que cela aura une certaine
influence sur la suite ce la discussion. C'est
pourquoi je voudrais savoir si le Conseil a re~u
des informations du Groupe subsidiaire.

The PRESIDENT: The Commission held a
meeting yesterday, and the Chairman of the
Commission then requested the Secretariat to
ask the Subsidiary GrouJ? to send in its report.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
La Commission d'enquete a tenu hier une
seance a la suite de laquelle le President de la
Commission a demande au Secretariat d'inviter
le Graupe subsidiaire a envQyer son rapport.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): I have
submitted certain amendmentsl to the United
States resolution, but I do not wish to make a
long statement with regard to them.
As Sir Alexander Cadogan has indicated, the
United Kingdom Government is in full sympathy
with the United States draft resolution, and, in
principle, we agree with its terms.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): ]'ai presente certains amendementsl
a la resolution des Etats-Unis, mais je ne desire
pas faire une longue declaration a leur sujet.
Comme Sir Alexander Cadogan l'a deja
declare, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
approuve pleinement le projet de resolution des
Etats-Unis et est d'accord, en principe, avec tous
ses termes.
A'la derniere seance du Conseil, il a ete dit,
pat le representant de la Syrie je crais, qu'il
serait preferable p,our la clarte du texte de
rappeler en substance les paragraphes A, B, D
et E de la recommandation de la Commission
plutot que de s'y referer comme a des propositions contenues aux paragraphes A, B, D et E~.

At the last meeting of the Security Council it
was suggested, I think by the representative of
Syria, that, for reasons of clarity, it might be
preferable for the substance of paragraphs A,
B, D and E of the Commission's proposals to be
spelled out in the terms of the resolution, rather
than to be referred to as proposals contained,in
paragraphs, A, B, D and E. 2
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 38.
I Ibid., Second Year, No. 60, 161st meetinf'.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, .(\nnexe 38.
• Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 60, 161eme seance.

1409
There is some force to this suggestion, and
we feel it woud make the resolution-with
which, I repeat, we are in full agreement-''clear and comprehensible without reference to
any other document. That is generally an advantage.
If it is intended to discuss the United States
resolution paragraph by paragraph, I would prefer to reserve any other remarks on my amendments until we :reach the paragraph to which
they refer.

Cette suggestion a sa valeur et rendra la
resolution - avec laquelle, je le repete, nous'
sommes entierem~nt d'accord - claire e'!: comprehensible, sans qu'il soit necessaire de se referer
a un autre document, ce qui, d'une fa~on
generale, est un avantage.
Si la discussion de la resolution des Etats-Unis
se fait paragraphe par paragraphe, je pre£ererais
reserver toutes autres observations au sujet des
amendements que j'ai prestntes, et les faire au
moment de la discussion des paragraphes auxquels- elles se rapportent.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): I do not wish to
waste the time of the Security Council by unnecessary discussion ~hich will retard our decisions on this matter, but I believe it is important
to make it clear that apparently we have no in-.
formation to substantiate the alarming reports
that we have been getting day by day since we
began to discuss the report of the Commission of
Investigation. I believe it would be an advantage, and certainly it would be adv1sable, for the
Security Council to make it clearly understood
that we are not acting on the strength of unsubstantiated reports, but, clearly and definitely,
on the report of the Commission of Investigation,
which, to my mind, furnishes all the grounds
necessary for our decisions.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je ne desire pas, par des Cliscussions inutiles,
faire perdre son temps au Conse~, ce qui retarderait nos decisions sur cette question, mais je
crois tres important de preciser qu'apparemment
nous n'avons aucun renseignement etablissant le
bien-fonde des rapports alarmants qui nous
parviennent tous les· jours depuis que nous avons
commence la discussion du rapport de la
Commission d'enquete. Je crois que ce sera
un avantage et qu'il est certainement desirable
que le Conseil de securite fasse clairement
comprendre que nous n'agissons pas S!IT la foi
de rapports non controIes, mais que, d'une fa~on
claire et formelle, nous nous fondons sur le
rapport de la Commission d'enquete, rapport
qui, d'apres moi, donne tous les elements qui
nous sont necessaires pour prendre une decision.

The PRESIDENT: It may be useful if I ask the
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l~anglais):
Assistant Secretary-General to read to the Coun- Je crois utile de demander au Secretaire general
cil the letter I have received from the Chairman adjoint de donner lecture au Conseil de la lettre
of the Commission of Investigation.
,.que j'ai re~ue du President de la Commission
d'enquete.
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : The Subsidiary Group,
which is now in Yannina, has sent the Commis~1C>71 of Investigation a teltgram which has been
repruduced as one of the Commission's documents (document SiAC.4/286). Mter its meeting yesterday, the Commission addressed the following letter to Mr. Oscar Lange, President of
the Security Council:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l~anglais) :
Le Groupe subsidiaire, qui se trouve pour le
moment a J anina, a envoye a la Commission
d'enquete un telegramme qui a ete publie en
tant que document de la Commission (document
SIAC.4/286).' La Commission, apl'Cs sa seance
d'hier, a adresse a M. Oscar Lange, President
du Conseil de'securite, la lettre suivante:

[Original text: English]
"Sir,
"In accordance with the decision of the majority of the Commission taken at its 91st meeting, held on 21 July 1947, I have the honour to
transmit, for the information of the members of
the Security Council, a telegram received from
the Subsidiary Group on 20 July 1947, concerning the investigation of the alleged frontier incidents on the Greca-Albanian border, and. to
communicate that the text of that telegram has
been handed to the liaison representative of
Albania for transmission to his Government in
Tirana.
"I wish to add that the penultimate sentence
in the "text of the telegram has been amended
to read as follows: 'Subsidiary Group invites
comments of Albanian Government and requests
that proposals regarding itinerary time table and

[Texte original en anglais]
"Monsieur,
"Conformement a la decision prise par la
majorite de la Commission a la 91eme seance,
tenue le 21 juillet 1947, j'ai l'honneur de
transmettre, pour l'information des membres du
Conseil de securite, un teIegramme du Groupe
subsidiaire, re~u le 20 juillet 1947, au sujet de
l'enquete sur les pretendus incidents de frontiere
a la frontiere greco-albanaise, et de faire savoir
que le texte de ce telegramme a ete transmis a
l'agent de liaison albanais, pour etre transnlis
a son Gouvernement a Tirana.

-

-

"Je desire ajouter que l'avant-derniere phrase
du texte de ce teIegramme a ete modifiee
et se lit comme suit: "Le Groupe subsidiaire
invite le Gouvernement albanais a pre-senter
ses observations et lui demande de lui faire

1410
hearings be communicated to it as soon as pos.sible after receipt of documentation by Albanian
Government'."

connaitre, aussitot que possib~e apres reception
de .la documentation par le Gouvernement
albanais, ses propositions en ce qui concerne
l'itineraire, l'emploi du temps et les auditions de
temoins."

The PRESIDENT: The telegram which w~
sent by the Subsidiary Group, and which the
Assistant Secretary-General has mentioned, will
be distributed. to the members of the Security
Council. I should think that would be sufficient,
unless the representative of Colombia wishes it
to be read now.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l~anglais):
Le texte du teIegl'amme envoye par le Groupe
subsidiaire et mentionne par le Se.cretaire general
adjoint sera distribue aux membres du Conseil
de securite. Je crois que cela sera suffisant, a
moins que le representant de la Colombie ne
desire que ce texte soit lu maintenant.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
It might be just as well to note, as an example
of the extreme practical difficulties under which
the Subsidiary Group has been compelled to
work, that on 5 July the Subsidiary Group sent
a telegram to the Government of Albania, to
which it has never received a reply. Because of
that lack of ordinary courtesy, not to speak of
co-operation, I understand that the Subsidiary
Group was compelled to address itself to the
Commission here, with the request that a further
conimunication sh:mld be sent to the Government of Albania.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l~ anglais): n peut etre bo~ de faire
rcmarquer, comme exemple des difficultes
pratiques extremes que le Groupe subsidiaire
rencontre dans son travail, que le 5 jtiillet le
Groupe subsidiaire a envoye au Gouvernement
de l'Albanie un telegramme auquel il n'a jamais
re~u de reponse. Si je comprends bien, c'est par
suite de ce manque de courtoisie, pour ne pas
dire d'esprit de cooperation, que le Groupe
subsidiaire a ete oblige de s'adresser a la Commission, ici, dc:mandant qu'une seconde note soit
envoyee au Gouvernement de l'Albanie.

Mr. EL-KROURI (Syria): I understood from
the letter just read from the Chairman of the
Commission of Investigation that the Subsidiary
Group sent a telegram, which will be distributed
here, concerning these incidents. In view of the
fact that the matter is being discussed now, I
think it would be proper to have that telegram
read, as it was communicated to the President
of the Security Council, along with the letter.
If it is read in the Security Council, we shall
understand what it contains, and we shall be
able to formulate some idea about the situation.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
De la lettre du President de la Commission
d'enquete, qui vient de nous etre lue, il semble
ressortir que le Groupe subsidiaire a envoye, a
propos des incidents survenus, un teIegramme
dont copie nous sera distribuee. Etant donne que
cette question va etre discutee maintenant, je
pense qu'il serait utile que ce tt~legrarr.me soit lu
en meme temps que la lettre, sous la forme ou
il a ete communique au President du Conseil de
securite. S'il est lu au Conseil, nous verrous ce
qu'il dit et pourrons nous faire une idee de la
situation.

The PRESIDENT: I shall certainly submit to
the wish of the representative of Syria and ask
the Assistant Secretary-General in charge of
Legal Affairs to read the telegram.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je m'incline volontiers devant le desir du representant de la Syrie et je demanderai au Secretaire
general adjoint charge des questions juridiques
de lire le telegramme.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs):. The text, including
the amendment, of the telegram which was
handed to the liaison representative of Albania
for transmission to his Government in Tirana is
as follows:
[Original text: English]

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le texte amende du telegramme remis a I'agent
de liaison albanais pour etre transmis a son
Gouvernement a Tirana, se lit comme suit:

"Subsidiary Group of Commission of Investigation of Greek incidents has begun investigation
of an incident brought to its attention by Greek
Government and alleged to have occurred on
Greco-Albanian frontier. Greek Government has
charged that firstly Albanian Government has
allowed and encouraged the concentration in its
territory of armed bands of every kind, these
consisting of about 3,000 men on 12 and 13 July
violated the Greek border along a front of 10
kilometres between Mertzani Bridge and village
of Prossilion; secondly, Albanian. Government

"Le Groupe subsidiaire de la Commission
d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque a commence son enquete sur un incident
qui lui a ete signale par le Gouvernement grec
comme s'etantproduit a la frontiere grecoalbanaise. Le Gouvernement grec declare que:
premierement, le Gouvernement albanais a
permis a des bandes armees de toutes sortes
de se rassembler sur son territoire et les a
encouragees a le faire. Les 12 et 13 juillet, ces
bandes, qui comprennent environ 3.000 hommes,
ont viole la frontiere grecque sur une longueur

[Texte original en anglais]

~~~r:~::Z~~;:f=;:~~~~~~~~~~>~~c:~,':~.=~:~:!~~: . ~,:AO~r~.;;.u...

pi

1411

by furnishing guerrillas with arms, ammunition
and clothing; thirdly support of Albanian Government to guerrillas is not limited to preparation of attack, but consists also in reception of
wounded and dispa.tch of ammunition. Subsidiary Group c0nsiders that in connexion with investigation of alleged incident it will be desirable
for it to extend its investigation to both sides of
Greco-Albanian frontier.

et le village de Prossillion; deuxiemement, le
Gouvernement albanais a minutieusement
prepare cette agression sur son propre territoire,
en fournissant aux partisans des armes, des
munitions et des vetements; troisiemement, pour
aider les partisans, le Gouvernement albanais
ne se borne pas ~ preparer l'attaquemais, en
outre, il donne asile aux blesses et expedie des
munitions. Le Groupe subsidiaire estime que,
pour tirer au clair l'incident qui se serait produit,
il conviendrait qu'il mene son enquete de part
et d'autre de la front~ere greco-albanaise.

"En consequence, pour que l'enquete soit
"Therefore, in order to assure both completeness and impartiality of investigation, Subsidiary vraiment complete et impartiale, le Groupe
Group requests fullest co-operation of Albanian subsidiaire demande au Gouvernement albanais
Government and believes that co-operation be- sa collaboration la plus entiere et estime qu'en
tween itself and Albanian Government in con- l'occurrence, la collaboration du Groupe
nexion this incident would be greatly facilitated subsidiaire et du Gouvernement albanais serait
and administrative arrangements would be sim- 'grandeme:at facilitee et que les mesures
plified if Albanian Government could sf'~d quali- administratives seraient simplifiees si le
fied representative for consultation at earliest Gouvernement albanais pouvait envoyer, aussit6t
possible date. Subsidiary Group invites Albanian que possible, un representant qualifie pour
Government to present such evidence and pro- s'entretenir avec le Groupe. Le Groupe
uuce such witnesseg as it may consider desirable subsidiaire invite le Gouvernement albanais a
in connexion with alleged incident. Copies of- presenter tous temoignages, pieces et temoins
all documentation submitted as well as list of qu'il jugera uCe de produire en c\:'tte affaire.
delegations memb,ers of Secretariat, Press, Greek ; Des copies de toute la documentation pre.sentee,
witnesses and other persons who will accompany I ~e meme que la liste des delegations, membres
Subsidiary Group will be ready for delivery to du Secretariat, representants de la presse, temoins
Albanian authorities at the frontier post of grecs et autres personnes qui accompagneront le
Kakavia on 23 July. As soon as your reply Groupe subsidiaire, seront pretes a etre remises
reaches Subsidiary Group the latter will be posi- aux autorites albanaises, au poste frontiere de
tion to precise date on which it could be at Kakavia, 'le 23 juillet. Des que le Groupe
Greco-Albanian frontier. Pending definite deci- subsidiaire aura re~u votre reponse il sera a
sion as to exact date and place of Subsidiary meme de preciser la date a laquelle ilpourra
Group's arrival at Albanian frontier and as to se presenter a la frontiere greco-albanaise.
full itinerary to be followed (which could best En attendant qu'une decision definitive soit
be agreed on consultation with r~presentative of intervenue en ce qui concerne la date et le lieu
Albanian Government), Subsidiary Group re- d'arrivee du Groupe a la frontiere albanaise
quests Albanian Government take necessary steps et l'itineraire complet qu'il devra suivre (la
to ensure that on arrival at Albanian frontier it meille,ure solution serait que cct itineraire soit
will find that pr~parations have been made to arrete de concert avec le representant du
facilitate firstly its crossing of frontier, secondly Gouvernf:ment albanais), le Groupe subsidiaire
its interrogation in Albania of such witnesses as demande au Gouvernement albanais de faire le
Subsidiary Group may request Albanian Govern- nel;essaire pour qu'a son arrlvee a la frontiere
ment to produce and who are to be found in albanaise le Groupe constate qu'~n a pris des
Albania, thirdly hearing in Albania of such dispositions pour lui faciliter, prerpierement, le
Greek witnesses as Subsidiary Group may desire passage de la frontiere; deuxiemement,l'audition
to bring with it into Albania and whose names en Albanie des temoins se trouvant en .Albanie
will have been communicated in advance to que le Groupe subsidiaire pourrait demander
Albanian GlJvernment pl~ces of hearing to be au Gouvernement albanais de produire;
designated by Subsidiary Group. Fourthly an troisiemement, l'audition en Albanie des temoins
examination of terrain in Albanian territory in grecs que le Groupe' subsidiaire pourrait
frontier areas between and including Mert- desirer amener' avec lui, en Albanie et dont
zani and Radat and in such other places or les noms seront communiques a l'avance au
localities as Subsidiary Group may in course of GouvernemeIit albanais, le Groupe subsidiaire
hearing evidence decide necessary for complete choisissant les lieux ou les temoins seront
investigation.
'
entendus; quatriemement, l'examen de Heux
sitnes en territoire albanais dans les regions
frontieres s'etendant ~ntre Mertzani et Radat
(ces deux localites comprises) et de tous autres
.lieux ou, au cours de l'audition des temoins, le
Groupe subsidiaire jugera necessaire de se rendre
pour enquete complete.
"Albanian Government's preparations should
of COurse include arrangements for transporta-

ht

"Les dispositions prises par le Gouvernement
albanais devraient naturellement prevair le

. tion, lodging and feeding Subsidiary Group tran~port, le logement et le ravitaillement du
against payment during its stay in. Albanian ter- Groupe "subsidiaire, a titre onereux, pour la
ritory as well as such other arrangements as are duree de son sejour en Albanie et tous autres
neeessaI'Y fully to facilitate its work. Subsidiary arrangementll necessaires pour lui faciliter
Group invites comments of Albanian Govern- pleinement sa tache.. Le Groupe subsidiaire
ment and requests "that proposals regarding invite le Gouvernement albanais a presenter
itinerary time table and hearings be communi- ses observations et lui demande de lui faire
cated to it as soon as possible after receipt of . connaitre, aussitot que possible apres reception
documentation by Albanian Government. de la documentation par le GouverneIIlent
Favour cif immediate acknowledgment .of re- albanais, ses propositions en' ce qui concerne
. ceipt of this telegr~ is req~ested through l'itineraire, l'emploi du temps et les auditions de
channel Commission Investigation, Lake Success. temoins. Vous demandede bien vouloir accuser'
immediatement reception de ce telegramme
HOUSSA, Chairman, Subsidiary Group:'
par voie Commission d'enquete, Lake Success.
HmrssA, President du Groupe subsidiaire."
M. -L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je crains de ne pas m'etre exprime assez
clairement; pourtant mon point de vue est tres
simple. Le' Conseil de securite a cree une
Commission d'enquete. Nous avons un rapport
de cette Commission d'enquete. La majorite au
moins des membJ.;es du Conseil trouve dans ce
rapport toutes les donnees necessaires pour
entreprendre une action. La majorite a decide
d'entreprend~e cette action, et je crois qu'il ya
des raisons suffisantes pour cela.
.
Ce que je voulais dire, c'est que les informaMy'point is that these alarming relJorts with.
regard to the Greek invasion have not been sub- tions alarmantes qui nous parviennent au-sujet
stantiated to the satisfaction of the Council. On de l'invasion en Grece n'ont pas paru au Conseil
the contrary, according to the Press reports, far suffisarnment etablies. Au contraire, d'apres les
from being substantiated, they remain unproved. journaux, ces informations, loin d'etre etablies,
restent douteuses.
It 1<S not easy to understand how 20,000 men,
11 est difficile de comprendre comment 20.000
3,000 men, or 2,500 men have got into Greece. hommes, 3.000 hommes ou 2.500 hommes ont
Mter several days the nearest approach that we penetre en Grece. Apres plusieurs jours, la 'seule
have to any substantiating evidence is a state- information ayant quelque caractere d'authentiment from General Zervas, Minister of Public cite que nous ayons est une declaration du
Order, saying, accor~g to one.of the Press re- general Zervas, Ministre de la surete publique
ports from Athens, that his facts were based on qui, d'apres un communique de presse d'Athenes,
". the testimony of a soldier who w~s captured by a dit que sa connaissance des faits etait basee
the guerrillas and escaped.
sur le temoignage d'un soldat qui avait ete pris
par les partis~'I1S et qui s'etait echappe.
I just wanted to make it clear that we are not
Je desirerais qu'il soit clair que les mesures
taking any action based on these Press reports que nous prendrons ne sont pas fondees sur les
w4ich have been systematically sent out from communiques de presse envoyes d'une ~a~on
Greece during the last eight or ten days, but systeniatique de Grece depuis hilit ou dix jours,
that we are going to take action for a very good mais que notre action serafondee sur le rapport
reason, bas4tg our action on the report of the de la.Commission d'enquete et sera parfaitement
Commission of Investigation. That is my point. justifiee. Voila ce que j~ voulais dire.
Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): I am afraid that I
have not mafie my point clear enough, although
it is very simple. The Security Council appointed
a CotIlIlliesion of Investigation. We have a report from" the Commission of Investigation. A
majority of the :tp.embers of the Security Council,
at least, finds in that report all the evidence
necessary to take action. The majority has decided to take that action, and I believe it has
sufficient justification.

\

."

The PRESIDENT: Thus far ~endments have
been submitted by the representative of France1
and by" the representative of the United Kingdom. 2 The French amendments are now being
reproduced by the Secretariat. I understand they
are rather lengthy and it will take a little more
time before they are reproduced.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Jusqu'a present, des amendements ont ete presentes par le representant de la Fxance1 et par
le representant du Royaume-Unr. Le Secretariat
est en train de reproduire le texte des amende~
ments fran~ais. Je crois que ce texte est assez
long et qu'il ne pourra etre distribue avant
quelques instants.

Colonel KERENXHI (Albania) (translated
from French): Since the Council has now resumed the discussion begun a few days ago on

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie).: Puisque le
Conseil a maintenant repris la discussion, cornmencee il y a quelques jours, sur la question de

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39.
2Jbid., Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 38.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux of/iciels du Conseil de securiee,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 39.
2 Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe
38.
.

1413
the question of the alleged invasion of Greece, I
should like, in the name of my Government, to
add a few' explar'ltory remarks.
Those of you who recall the very strong c~m..tign directed at the outset against Albania., and
observe that now the American Press-the
source of the information you have received-.
is not so loud on the subject as it was during the
first few days~ will understand that this alleged
invasion has not been proved, that the proofs
offered during the first few days were ridiculous,
that, in short, the invasion does not exist.
It would appear that the acts of provocation
by means of which the Greek rulers are attempting, as I have previously stated, to influeuce the
si.tuation, are still continuing: a .:.ertain investigation is now requested. The Government of
Albania has not yet received any formal request
to this effect, however. The Conimission of Investigation's telegram states that the request will
be communicated to it on ,23 July at the frontier at Kakavia.
I do not understand how the United States
representative can speak of a lack of courtesy on
the part of the Government of Albania for not
replying to a communication which it has not
. yet received.
Furthermore, this request is to be delivered to
the Albanian authorities on 23 July, but, I repeat, at the frontier., I must say that if the
Government of Albania does not receive this
, communication, it cannot, as you can lHlderstand, be held responsible, for I warn you that
it is impossible to have contacts with the
Albanian Government at the frontier.

la pretendue invasion de la Grece, jedesire, au '
nom de mon. Gouvernement, ajollter quelqUe8
explications.
.
Tous ceux qui se souviennent de la tres forte
campagne dirigee au debut contre l',Albani~ et
constatent a present que, dans la presse americaine - source des informations qui vnus ont
ete donnees - on ne fait plus le meme bruit que
durant ces premiers jours,. comprennent que
cette pretendue invasion n'est pas prouvee, que
les preuves donn&,s les premiers jours etaient
ridicules, qu'en un mot l'invasion n'existe pas.
Il semble que les povocations au moyen desqueUes les gouvernants grecs tentent, comme je
l'ai deja dit, d'influencer la situation, continuent
toujours. On ciemande maintenant une certaine
enquete. Or, le Gouvernement de l'Albanie n'a
pas encore re~u de demande formelIe a cet e.ffet~
Dans le teIegramme de la Commissi<m d'enquete,
il est dit que cette demande lui sera communiquee le 23 juillet a la frontiere; a Kakavia.

Je ne comprends pas pourquoi le representant
des Etats-Unis parle d'un manque de courtoisie
de la part du Gouvernement de l'Albanie,sous
pretexte que ce Gouvernement ne repond· pas a
une dernande qu'il n'a pas encore re~ue.
D'autre part, c'est le 23 juillet que. cette
demande sera communiquee aux autorites albanaises, mais, je le repete, a la frontiere. J e dois
mre que, si le Gouvernement de l'Albanie ne
re~oit pas communication de cette demande, il
ne pourra pas, yous devez le comprendre, en etre
tenu pour responsable; car, je vpus le dis, il est
impossible, a la fruntiere, d'avoir des contacts
avec le Gouvernement de l'Albanie.
Several times the Greek authorities have orLes autorites grecques ont organise plusieurs
ganized armed acts of provocation against our fois des provocations armees contre notre fionfrontier; they even waylay our soldiers, take them tiere; eUes tendent meme des pieges pour
prisoner, and carry them off to Greece, in order s'emparer de nos soldats, les fan'e prisonniers,
to be able to say afterwards that our soldiers in- les emmener en Grece, afin de pouvoir dire
vaded Greece and were captured on Greek terri- ensuite que nos soldats sont. entres en Grece et
tory. That is why our soldiers do not reply, and ont ete faits prisonniers en territoire grec. C'est
according to my information, it is possible that' la raison pour laquelle nos soldats ne repondent
they will refuse to accept the communication in pas, et, d'apres ce que je puis savoir, il est
question, fearing it may be yet another provoca- possible qu'ils n'acceptent pas de recevoir la
tion, or a trap set by the Greek military frontier communication en question, craignant qu'il ne
authorities.
'
s'agisse d'une provocation, ou d'un piege tendu
par les autorites militaires de frontiere grecques.
Conseq!!ently, the method adopted by the
Par consequent, la voie adoptee par le Groupe
Subsidiar}' Group to inform the Government of ~ubsidiaire pour informer le Gouvernement
Albania is not the correct one. As it did in the albanais n'est pas la bonne. Comme ill'a deja
case of the other Governments concerned. ~he fait pOur les autres Gouvernements, le Groupe
Subsidiary Group should have addressed 'itself subsidiaire aurait dfr s'adresser au Gouvernement
b the Albanian Government by telegram or by albanais par teIegramme, ou de quelque autre
some other means; but the method it chose, that maniere, mais la methode qu'il a choisb pour
of establishing contact with the Albanian au- prendre contact avec les autorites albanaises athorities at the frontier, is a poor one; In these la Jrontiere est mauvaise. Dans ces conditions,
circumstances, it is a mistake to speak of a lack parler d'un manque de conrtoisie de la part du
of courtesy on tile part of the Albanian Govern- Gouvernement albanais, alors qu'il n'a pas
JP.ent. when the communication in question has encore re~u la demande dont il s'agit, est u.ne
not yet been received.
err.eur.
I

Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): lam in complete accord with the representative of Colombia when he says that the

b

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Je suis absolument
d'accord avec le representant de la Colombie
lorsqu'il dit que le Conseil, apres avoir examine

Council, after exaInining the Commission's report, will base its decision thereon.
As regards the recent incidents, the Council
will allow me to read the letter which I addressed
to it on 14 July:

le rapport de la Commission, prendra sa decision
sur la foi de ce rapport.
En ce qui concerne les incidents recents, le
Conseil me permettra de rappeler la lettre que
je lui ai adressee en date du 14 juillet:

[Original text: English]

[Texte original en anglais]
"Monsieur le President,

"Upon urgent instructions from my Government, I have the honour to communicate the
following and to request you to bring the same
to the attention of the members of the Council
as soon as possible:

"COIiformement aux instructions urgentes que
j'ai re~ues de man Gouvernement, j'ai l'honneur
de porter a votre connaissance les faits ci-dessous
et de vous prier de bien vouloir les soumettre le
plus tot possible a l'attention des membres du
Conseil de securite.
"Des detachements ennemis, nombreux et bien
armes, venant d'Albanie, ant envahi le territoire
grec, l'J.er 13 juillet, ont occupe le pont de
Mertzani (Bourisani) sur la riviere Aoos
(Voioussa), et assiege la ville de· Konitza situee
a environ six mllies de la frontiere greco-albanaise. On sait, en outre, qu'au nord-ouest de
Konitza, a proximite de la frontiere, en territoire
albanais, on a concentre des approvision..llements
et des services medicaux ainsi que des forces
iinportantes comprenant des unites d'une brigade
internationale d'irreguliers et de communistes.
Des personnalites dirigeantes du parti communiste grec se trouvent egalement en Albanie
ainsi qu'en Yougoslavie en vue de former un
"gouvernement" rebelle et d'en transferer finalement le siege dans le district contre lequel
l'offensive vient d'etre declenchee.
"Il est clair que pendant l'examen par le
Conseil de securite des recommandations que
lui a adressees sa Commission d'enquete, la
situation signalee par cette Commission s'est tres
fortement aggravee. N ous prions respectueusement les membres du Conseil de securite de faire
tout ce qui est en leur pouvoir pour prendre au
plus vite une decision au sujet de la resolution
actuellement soumise au Conseil, afin de donner
efIet aux recommandations de la Commission.
"Une fois sa decision prise sur ce point, le
Conseil pourra exaIniner l'eventualite, s'il y a
lieu, etant donne les graves evenements actuels,
de prendre de nouvelles decisions."
Le Groupe subsidiaire est maintenant sur
place et je suis absolument certain qu'il verifiera
toutes les accusations qui ant ete portees devant
le Conseil.

"Sir:

"Strong and well-armed hostile forces invaded
Greek territory from Albania yesterday morning,
13 July, occupied the Mertzani (Bourisani)
Bridge on the River Aoos (Voioussa) and besieged the town of Konitsa, which is situated at
a distance of about six miles from the GreekAlbanian border. Furthermore, it is known that,
to the north-west of Konitsa in the vicinity of the
border on Albanian soil, supplies and medical
services are concentrated as well as substantial
forces inciuding units of an international brigade
of irregulars and communists. Leading persons
of the Communist Party of Greece are also in
Albania as well as in Yugoslavia for the purpose
of forIning a rebel "government", and eventually
transferring its seat to the district against which
the offensive is being launched.
"It is apparent that, while the Council has
been discussing the recommendations of its Commission of Investigation, the conditions reported
by that Commission have become drastically
more serious. It is respectfully requested of the
members of the Security Council that they do
everything possible to hasten action on the resolution now before the Security Council to give
effect to the recommendations of this Commission.
"After action has been taken on that, the
Council can consider whether further decisions
may be necessary in the light of the present serious development."
The Subsidiary Group is now on the spot, and
I am absolutely certain that it will verify all the
accusations which have been brought before thf'
Security Council.
The PRESIDENT: I think the discussion has
clarified the subject, and I consider it desirable
that we should return to the amendments which
are before us. I understand that it will take
about five minutes to have the French amendments distributed. The United K;ngdom amendments are before the Council, and I wonder
whether the represent~J;ve of the United Kingdom would wish to say a few words about them.
Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): I have
already made a very brief covering statement.
I do not know whether the :::otlncil wishes to
proceed in the numerical order of the paragraphs
of the resolution. I am perfectly happy to begin

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ranglais):
J e pense que la discussion a rendu cette question
claire et je crois que nous devrions· revenir a la
discussion des amendements qui nous sont soumis. Je crois qu'il faudra environ cinq Ininutes
pour que le texte des amendements fran~ais soit
distribue. Les amendements du Royaume-Uni
sont devant naus et je demanderai au representant du Royaume-Uni s'il. ne desire pas dire
quelques mats a ce sujet.
M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
['anglais): l'ai deja f,ait une breve declaration
generale. J e ne sais si le Conseil desire proceder
a la discussion dans l'ordre dans lequel les
paragraphes de la resolution sont numerates. Je
~

14:15
talking about my amendment, which deals with
paragraph 2, but I understand that the French
representative has other amendments. I do not
know whether the Council would like to wait
until the other amendments are ready for distribution and then discuss them. I am quite happy,
if the Council agrees, to start off on paragraph 2,
but I think it may be slightly confusing.

suis tout dispose a parler au sujet de mon
amendement, mais il se rapporte au paragraphe
2, et je crois que It. representant de la France
presente d'autres amendements. Peut-etre le
Conseil desirerait-il attendre que le texte des
autres amendements soit distribue pour les discuter. Je suis d'ailleurs pret, si le Conseil est
d'accord, a commencer par le paragraphe 2,
mais je pense que cela pourrait entrailler une
certaine confusion.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): The first numbered
paragraph of the United States draft resolution,
which reads: "The Security Council adopts the
proposals made by the majority of the members
of the Commission", should be considered after
the other amendments. To adopt that paragraph
first would be to prejudge the issue. How can
we adopt a paragraph sta~ing that the Security
Council adopp3 the proposals of the Commission,
before we actually adopt them? No proposals
have been adopted as yet. Perhaps they will be
adopted later; in that event, we ,shall be able to
state at the end of the resolution that we have
adopted them. I believe that paragraph 1 should
be placed at the end, and that we should now
proceed to discuss paragraph 2.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglois):
Le premier paragraphe du projet de resolution
presente par les Etats-Unis, et disant: "Le
Conseil de securite adopte les propositions faites
par la majorite des membres de la Commission",
devrait etre examine apres les autres amendements. Adopter ce parazraphe en premier lieu
serait prejuger le res:Iltat de notre discussion.
Comment pouvons-nous adopter un paragraphe
disant que le Conseil de securite adopte les
propositions de la Commission, avant d'avoir
reellement adopte ces propositions? Aucuneproposition n'a encore ete adoptee. Peut-etre le
seront-elles plus tard et, dans ce cas, nous pourrons declarer a la fin de la resolution que
nous les avons adoptees. Mais j'estime que le
paragraphe 1 devrait etre place a la fin de la
resolution et que nous devrions commencer a
discuter maintenant le paragraphe 2.

The PRESIDENT: I suggest that each of the
representatives submitting amendments should
speak on all of his amendments at one time;
otherwise, we shall not obtain a clear picture of
the over-all meaning of the various points. I
think that the observations made by the representative of Syria lead to the same conclusion.
I shall therefore ask the representaive of the
United Kingdom to proceed.

Le PRE'SIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Je propose que chaque representant qui presente
des amendements pade au sujet de tous ses
amendements a la fois, sinon nous n'aurons pas
une idee claire du sens general des differents
points de vue. Je pense que les observations
presentees par le representant de la Syrie
menent a la meme conclusion. C'est pourquoi
je demanderai au representant du Royaume-Uni
de commencer.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): As I have
already indicated, I should be very happy to
begin a discussion of the United Kingdom
amendments. I must say first, however, that I
do not agree with the representative of Syria.
Paragraph 2 gives effect to paragraph 1; therefore, if we do not adopt paragraph 1, paragraph
2 does not necessarily follow.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): Comme je l' ai deja dit, je suis dispose
a ouvrir la discussion des amendements presentes
par le Royaume-Uni. Toutefois, je dois dire
d'abord que je ne suis pas d'accord avec le
representant de la Syrie. Le paragraphe 2 .est
une application du paragraphe 1; c'est pourquoi,
si nous n'adoptons pas le paragraphe 1, le paragraphe 2 perd sa justification.
Puisque le President semble le desirer, je suis '
pret ,a commencer l' expose des motifs des
amendements du Royaume-Uni. Cependant, je
crois que le texte des amendements presentes par
le representant de la France est maintenant
distribue aux membres du Conseil et je pense
que nous pourrions discuter d'abord ces amendements.

Since the President seems to desire it, I am
quite ready to begin an account of the reasons
for the United Kingdom amendments. However, I understand that the amendments submitted by the French representative have now
been distributed to the members of the Council,
and I think we might begin with them.
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): The amendments which I have the
honour to present to the Security Council have
now been circulated. The first of these deals
with the preamble to the draft resolution presented by the United States delegation, and the
second refers to paragraph 1.

........

M. PARODI (France): Les amendements que
j'ai l'honneur de presenter au Conseil de securite
sont maintenant distribues. Le premier de ces
amendements se rapporte au preambule du
projet de resolution presente par la delegation
des Etats-Unis, et le deuxieme au paragraphe 1.

1'*1t>

Mr. President, I agree with you that it may
be. desirable to have all the amendments presented to the Council first of all. It seems to me
that, in that case, the best procedure would be
to submit them in the eame order as the United
States representative's resolution, which is the
logical order. If you agree, I shall now read the
first two amendments which I propose, adding
a word of explanation. The amendment of the
United Kingdom delegatlon would logically follow, and we could then come back to the
amendments proposed by the French delegation
to the latter part of the United States delegation's draft resolution.

Monsieur le President, je pense, comme vous,
qu'il peut y avoir interet a ce que l'ensemble dl:s
amendements soit tout d'abord presente au
Conseil. 11 me semble que, dans ce cas, la meilleure maniere de proceder serait de les soumettre
dans l'ordre meme de la resolution du representant des Etats-Unis, qui est l'ordre logique. Si
vaus etes d'accord, je donnerai donc lecture des
deux premiers amendements que je propose, en
ajoutant un mot d'explication. Ensuite viendrait
logiquement l'amendement de la delegation du
Royaume-Uni, et nous pourrions aiors revenir
aux amendements que propose la delegation
fran~aise et qui s'appliquent a la suite du projet
de resolution de la delegation des Etats-Unis.

The PRESIDENT: That procedure will be
adopted. I now ask th.e representative of France
to proceed.

Le Pd:SID::,NT (traduit de l'anglais):
Nous adnpterons cette fa~on de proceder. Je
demande maintenant au representant de la
France de prendre la parole.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): The first amendment presented by the
French delegation concerns the preamble, which
would read as follows:
"The Security Council, having primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security pursuant to Article 24 of the
Charter, and having considered the report of
the Commission of Investigation established by
resolution dated 19 December 1946/ f.nds that
a dispute exists, the continuation of which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security."

M. PARODI (France) : Le premier amendement
presente par la delegation fran~aise concerne le
preambule, q1.!i se lirait ainsi:

"Le Conseil de securite, detenant, en vertu de
l'Article 24 de la Charte, la responsabilite principale du maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales, apres avoir etudie le rapport
presente par la Commission d'enquete creee par
la resolution du Conseil en date du 19 decembre
19461, constate qu'il se trouve en presence d'un
differend dont la prolongation est susceptible de
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales."
Le deuxieme amendement s'applique au
The second amendment applies to paragraph
1. It is worded as follows:
paragraphe 1. Il est ainsi con~u:
"The Security Council adopts the substance of I "Le Conseil de securite adopte dans leur
the proposals made by the majority of the mem- substance les propositions presentees par la majorite des membres de la Commission d'enquete."
bers of the Commission."
Ainsi que vous pouvez le constater, la modiAs you see, the proposed change in the preamble is quite small; its purpose is to make the fication propasee au preamlule est assez limitee;
resolution as a whole a little broader and to in- elle a pour objet une presentation un peu plus
large de l'ensemble de la resolution et une
clude a reference to the Charter.
reference a la Charte.
L'amendement propose en ce qui concerne le
The proposed amendment to paragraph 1 perhaps answers to some extent the observation paragraphe 1 repond peut-etre, dans une certaine
made by the representative of Syria. It consti- mesure, a l'observation presentee par le repretutes an approval. The Council would begin by sentant de la Syrie. C'est \me approbation. Le
indicating its adoption, not in detail but in sub- Conseil commencerait par indiquer qu'il adopte,
stance, of the proposals of the report, which can non pas strictement, mais en substance, les
. be gone into more closely later. That is not quite propositions du rapport, qui seraient reprises
the same thing.
ensuite. Ce n'est pas absolument la meme chose.
Tels sont les deux premiers amendements
Such are the first two amendments presented
by the French delegation.
presentes par la delegation fran~aise.
The PRESIDENT: I shall now ask the representative of the United Kingdom to speak on
his amendments.

.Te demanderai maintenant au representant du

Mr. LAwFoRD(United Kingdom): It will be
seen that our first amendment, which proposes
a new paragraph 2, relates to proposal A of the
Commission's report. It does not quote the pro-

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
f anglais) : On s'apercevra que notre premier
amendement, qui propose un nouveau texte pour
le paragraphe 2, vise la proposition A du rappor..

1 See Official Records of the Security Council,
Year, Second Serie~, No. 28, 87th meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie, No 28, 87eme seance.

First

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
Royaume-Uni de prendre la parole pour defendre ses amendements.

..

~

...

--

1417

posal in full, but I hope it gives the gist of it
accurately enough.
It will be noted that our amendment omits
specific reference to propaganda campaigns. The
reason for that omission is that we felt that the
subject might be held to be already covered by
the earlier recommendations to the four Governments that they should abstain from all action
likely to maintain or increase tension and unrest.
However, if the majority of the members of the
Council would prefer to have that sentence reinstated in the text, my delegation would have
no objection.
As regards any other changes in phraseology
which may have been made, they have been
made principally for reasons of style and drafting
and have no sinister significance.
The phrase which is inserted at the beginning
of the second sentence, "In view of the gravity
of the present situation", corresponds to the
phrase used in the Commission report: "In the
light of the &ituation investigated.by it", in other
words, investigated by the Commission.
Our second amendment, which proposes a
new paragraph 3, refers to proposal B of the
Commission's report. The additional reference
to the pacific settlement of frontier incidents and
disputes perhaps gives a somewhat more positive
turn to the Commission's recommendation for
regulation and control of common frontiers, as
. it points to the purpose underlying such control
and regulation. It is also in line with the recommendation in proposal B that the frontier convention should take into account the needs of
the present situation. It seems to us to be completely in conformity with the spirit of the Charter, and therefore I hope it will not be objectionable to the members of the Council.
Our third and fourth amendments follow
closely the text of proposals D and E respectively
of the Commission's report.
The PRESIDENT: I shall ask the representative
of France to present to us his amendments to
paragraphs 3, 4, and 5.
Colonel HOnGSON (Australia): I suggest that
we should deal with this point by point, begitining with the preamble; we shall become confused if the amendments to paragraphs 3, 4,
and 5 are explained, and then we go back to
the preamble.
Some members may wish to speak on the first
paragraphs. My delegation wishes to speak on
the French amendment to the preamble while we
have the observations of the representative of
France and other members still in our minds.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I support the observation made by the represen-

't

N

,=

_

de la Commission. Il ne cite pas la proposition
entierement, mais e~ reproduit l'essentiel cl'une
fa~on que j'espere suffisamment precise.
On remarquera que notre amendement ne fait
pas explicitement mention des campagnes de
propagande. La raison en est que nous avons
pense que cette question pouvait etre consideree
comme deja couvene par les recommandations
aux quatre Gouvernements interesses de s'abstenir de toute action propre a maintenir ou a
augmenter la tension et les troubles. Toutefois,
si la majorite des membres du Conseil prefere
que cette phrase soit reintroduite dan'3 le texte,
ma delegation n'y a pas cl'objections.
En ce qui concerne les atitres modifications de
forme, elles ont ete faites surtout pour des raisons
de style et de reclaction et ne cachent pas de
noirs desseins.
Les mots places au commencement de la
deuxieme phrase, "En raison de la gravite de la
situation actuelle", correspondent aux mots du
rapport de la Commission: "a la lumiere
de la situation examinee parelle", c'est-a-dire
examinee par la Commission.
Notre deuxieme amendement, proposant un
nouveau texte pour le paragraphe 3, vise la
proposition B du rapport de la Commission. La
reference au reglement pacifique des incidents
de frontiere et des differends, qui y est ajoutee,
donne peut-etre un tour que1que peu plus
affirmatif a la recommandation de la Commission en ce qui cOllcerne les reglementations et
le contrOle aux frontieres communes, puisqu'il
precise le but de ces reglementations et de ce
contrOle. Il est egalement conforme a la recommandation de la proposition B de dire que la
convention frontaliere doit tenir compte des
exigences de la situation actuelle. Cela nous
semble entierement conforme a l'esprit de la
Charte; c'est pourquoi j'espere que les membres
du Conseill'admettront sans objections.
Nos troisieme et quatrieme amendements
suivent respectivement de tres pres le texte des
propositions D et E du rapport de la Commission.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):

Je demanderai au representant de la France de
nous presenter ses amendements aux paragraphes
3, 4 et 5.
Le Colonel HOnGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais):: Je propose que nous examinions cela
paragraphe par paragraphe, en commen~ant par
le preambule; il y aurait confusion dans notre
esprit si les amendements aux paragraphes 3, 4
et 5 etaient presentes maintenant et si nous
revenions au preambule ensuite.
Certains membres peuvent desirer prendre la
parole au sujet des premiers paragraphes. Ma
delegation desire discuter l'amendement fran~ais
au preambule tandis que les remarques faites a
ce sujet par le representant de la France et par
d'autres membres sont encore presentes dans
notre esprit.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (Iraduit de l'anglais): J'appuie la declaration du

1418
tative of Australia. I think it would facilitate the
.work of the Council if we finished the discussion
on each paragraph as we go along, because the
kind of discussion we are having now can, of
course, be of a preliminary nature only.
There may be observations that members
would like to make on each one of these amendments, but it may not be practicable to do that
until we get the English translation of the French
amendments. That is what is holding up the
progress of this debate.
I should like to know whether this discussion
we are now having is a preliminary one, and
whether, when the English text of the French
amendments is received,' we shall then go back
to the beginning of the resolution and deal with
it paragraph by paragraph, voting or deciding
to defer the vote as we finish the discussion on
each paragraph. We shall then know precisely
where we stand.
The PRESIDENT: It is indeed better that we
should discuss the amendments one after the
other, but I had a different procedure in mind,
because we have not yet received the English
translation of the French amendments. The
Secretariat informs me they received the French
amendments only at 10.30 this morning. As
they are lengthy, it will be some time before we
have the translation.
However, if the representatives of Australia
and the United States do not object, and are
ready to discuss the French amendments on the
basis of the text we have before us, we can start
the discussion straight away.
Colonel HODGSON (Australia),: I do not propose to make another prepared speech or a general speech, but I desire to speak on the United
States resolution as a whole, and then make
specific reference to the French amendments. I
do this for the reason that certain action proposed in the United States resolution has been
challenged on the ground that it is invalid. In
the opinion of my delegation, no effective reply
has been made to the argument that was advanced. We think that argument has to be met;
otherwise there is going to be doubt as regards
the whole of the authority and power and duties
of the Security Council under Chapter VI.

The argument-which was submitted first by
the representative of Bulgaria and supported by
the representatives of Albania and Yugoslavia,
and by a speech of the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics-indicated
that we can adopt only recommendations under
Chapter VI; we cannot take action such as is
contemplated in the setting up of a commission.
It is argued that such action can be taken only
under Chapter VII, when the Security Council
finds that there is a breach of the peace. "In
this case", they say, "as we have not found that

representant de 1'Australie. Je pense que le
travail du Conseil serait facilite si nous terminions
la discussion de chaque paragraphe au fur et a
mesure que nous avan90ns, car le genre de
discussion que nous avohs maintenant ne peut
evidemment etre qu'une discussion prtmminaire.
Les membres pourraient vouloir faire des
observations sur chacun de ces amendements,
mais cela ne peut etre fait raisonnablement
avant que nous ayons la traduction anglaise des
amendements fran9ais. C'est cela qui empeche
notre debat d'avancer.
Je voudrais savoir si la discussion actuellement
en cours est une discussion preliminaire, et si,
quand nous recevrons le texte anglais des
amendements fran9ais, nous reprendrons la
resolution a son commencement et 1'examinerons
paragraphe par paragraphe, mettant aux voix
ou decidant de differer le vote a l'issue de la
discussion sur chaque paragraphe. Nous saurons
alors d'une maniere precise Oll nous en sommes.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ranglais):
Il est en effet preferable de discuter les amendements 1'un apres l'autre, mais j'envisageais une
methode differente, p'uisque nous n'avons pas
encore re~u la traduction en anglais des amendements fran9ais. Le Secretariat m'informe qu'il
n'a re9u les amendements fran9ais qu'a 10 h. 30
ce matin; etant donne qu'ils sont longs, il faudra
un certain delai avant que nous les ayons.
Neanmoins, si les representants de l'Australie
et des Etats-Unis n'yfont pas d'objections, et sont
prets a discuter les amendements fran9ais, sur la
base du texte que nous avons actuellement sous
les yeux, nous pouvons entamer la discussion
irnmediatement.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de

ranglais): J e ne me propose pas de vous lire un
second discours prepare ou un discours d'ordre
general, mais je veux parler de la resolution des
Etats-Unis dans son ensemble, et ensuite me
reporter plus specialement aux amendements
fran9ais. Ceci, parce que l'une des mesures
proposees dans la resolution des Etats-Unis a ete
attaquee sous pretexte qu'elle n'est pas conforme
aux stipulations de la Charte. Selon l'avis de ma
delegation, aucune replique pertinente n'a ete
faite a 1'argument qui a ete avan,ce. Nous pensons qu'il y a lieu de repondre a cet argument;
autrement, il 'y aura des doutes en ce qui concerne l'ensemble de l'autorite, du pouvoir et des
fonctions conferes au Conseil de securite par le
Chapitre VI.
La these soutenue en premier lieu par le
representant de la Bulgarie et appuyee par les
representants de l'Albanie et de la Yougoslavie,
puis par un discours du representant de l'URSS,
tendait a demontrer qu'aux termes du Chapitre
VI, nous ne pouvons que formuler des recommandations; nous ne pouvons pas prendre
de mesures comme celle que constituerait la'
creation d'une commission. On pretend' qu'une
telle mesure ne peut etre prise qu'en vertu' du
Chapitre VII, lorsque le Cons~il de securite juge
qu'il y a rupture de la paix. "Dans le cas present,

1419

Further, the right to' investigate also connotes
a right to continue investigation, and that was

dit-on, comme nous n'avons pas juge qu'il y
eut rupture de la paix, noilS devons nous en
tenir aux dispositions du Chapitre VI; nous ne
pouvons que formuler des recommandations, et
une recommandation n'est pas une decision.
Cependant, une decision est necessaire pour que
les parties soient liees par les dispositions de
l'Articlf' 25." En consequence, ajoute-t-on, elles
ne sont pas obligees, dans le cas actuel, de
se soumettre a l'action du Conseil. Telle est
l'argumentation presentee.
Un seul representant a essaye d'y repondre.
Le representant des Etats-Unis a declare, en se
fondant sur une lettre du Secretaire general
donnant I'opinion du Departement juridique a
l' occasion de l'examen par le Conseil des trois
documents concernant le Territoire libre de
Trieste, que le Conseil possede aux termes de
l'Article 24 des pouvoirs tres etendus pour
assurer le maintien de la paix et de la' securite
internationales1.
Ma d.~legation a des doutes serieux sur la
validite de cet argument parce que, je le rappelle, nous avons toujours dit que nous doutions
beaucoup que le Conseil de securite put garantir
l'independance de Trieste. Nous avons fait
egalement de serieuses reserves a propos de
ses pouvoirs censement etendus. Mais, dans le
Chapitre VI meme, et dans d'autres parties de
la Charte, nous trouvons une ample justification
a l'ensemble des inesures proposees dans la
resolution des Etats-Unis. Ceci n'a jamais ete
mis en doute, et qui plus est, la premiere fois
que la question a ete soulevee, le Conseil a decide
de faire une enquete. En dfet, avant de decider
que la prolongation d'une situation menace la
paix et la securite internationales, nous devons
le constater d'apres les faits; autrement, nous ne
pouvons rien faire.
C'est pourquoi nous appuyons le texte fran~ais. La decision de faire une' enquete - et· ceci
n'a jamais ete conteste - est certainement plus
qu'une recommandation. Nous pouvons prendre
beaucoup de decisions aux termes du Chapitre
VI. La presente resolution visant a l'etablissement d'une commission a deux buts et tend
a confere~ a la commission deux pouvoirs
principaux: le pouvoir de mener l'enquete, et
le pouvoir de conciliation et de mediation.
Donner a un organisine un certain pouvoir, c'est
lui donner implicitement qualite pourexercer ce
pouvoir. L'exercice d'un tel pouvoir suppose
r cutorite. Autrement, a quo; servirait le droit
Lt, - possede ce' Conseil de menerune enquete
si les organismes charges d'enqueter n'etaient pas
dotes du pouvoir d'agir - par exemple, du
pouvoir d'aller et de venir de part et d'autre
des frontieres, du pouvoir d'entendre des temoins,
du pouvoir d'entendre des fonctionnaires des
pays' en question: en un mot, du pouvoir dont
il s'agit dans cette resolution.
Bien plus, le droit de mener une enquete
comporte egalement le droit de poursuivre cette

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
",Year,:..No. 57.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM.
Deuxieme Annee, No 57.

there is a breach of the peace, we are confined
to Chapter VI; we can only recommend, and a
recommendation is not a decision. Yet a decision is required if the parties are to be bound
under Article 25." Therefore, they say they are
not bound to accept that action. Now, that is
their case.

One representative has endeavoured to answer
that case. The representative of the United
States says that, on the basis of a letter from
the Secretary-General giving the opinion of the
Legal Department in connexion with the consideration by the Council of the three instruments
relating to the Free Territory of Trieste, this
Council has, under Article 24, wide reserve
powers for its duty for the maintenance of international peace and security.1
My delegation has very grave doubts about
the validity of that argument because, it will be
recalled, we have always expressed the view that
we are very doubtful that the Security Council
could guarantee the independence of Trieste. We
also have grave reservations about these socalled wide reserve powers. But in Chapter VI
itself and in other places in the Charter, we find
ample justification for all the action proposed
in the United States resolution. That has never
been denied; even the first time the question
arose, this Council decided to investigate. Indeed, we are bound to investigate because, before we decide that the continuation of a situation does endanger international peace and security, we must make a finding to that effect;
otherwise we cannot do anything.
That is why we support the French text. A
\ decision to investigate-and that has never been
challenged-is surely more than a recommenda,.
tion. Under Chapter VI we can take many decisions. This resolution on the setting up of a
commission has two purposes, confers two main
powers: the power of investigation and the
power of conciliation and mediation. If you give
a body a certain power, that connotes that you
give it authority to carry out that power. Authority is inherent in that power. Otherwise,
what point would there be in this Council having
the right to investigate, if the investigating body
Were not clothed with authority to act, authority,
for example, to move about the frontiers; authority to examine witnesses; authority to examine officials of the country concerned; the
very authority given in this resolution?

--

1420
11
r challenged when we set up the original
. Commission of Investigation~ It is a strange
thing that, for the first time, it should be challenged now. That is a decision, and not a recommendation; therefore, Article 25 does apply.

This Council could even take a decision to set
up a conciliation commission. It could even take
a decision to set up an arbitration commission in
this case, if it wished. Those are all d~cisions,
they are not recommendations; the Council has
such pow~r.
Under Article 28, we know that even the Security Council could go to Greece and hold
meetings. Under Article 29 of the Charter, the
Security Council has the right to establish subsidiary organs to carry out its function of maintaining international peace and security.
For all those reasons, there is ample justification for setting up the proposed body. Moreover,
it is our right and duty to set up this body and
to clothe it with the necessary powers; otherwise,
the will of this Council would be completely
stultified in any action it contemplated under
Chapter VI.
But we say that, whether it is a decision or a
recommendation that is involved-and we have
indicated that we can make both under Chapter
VI-we cannot make either until we have determined that the continuation of the situation does
endanger international peace and security. That
is the opinion of my delegation. That determination must be made under Article 34, in
order to take any of the steps which the resolution contemplates under Article 33. The United
States resolution indicates that we adopt the
proposals of the Commission, but if one looks
carefully through the Commission's proposals,
one can find no statement to the effect that the
continuation of the situation does endanger international peace and security. Thus, the adoption of the proposals would not carry us any
further, whereas the French amendment to the
preamble does. That is why we support it fully.

Mr. L6PEz (Colombia): I am in full agreement with the position taken by the Australian
delegation with regard to the preamble to this
resolution. It also seems to the Colombian delegation that the first thing to do is to include
provisions on the basis of having established that
a dispute exists, the continuance of which is in
fact likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, as is very clearly
provided, to our mind, in Article 37 of the Charter. Article 37, paragraph 2, reads as follows:
"If the Security Council deems that the continuance of the dispute is in fact likely to endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security, it ~hall decide whether to take action

enquete, et ceci n'a jamais ete conteste quand
nous avons etabli la premiere Commission
d'enquete. Il est etrange que, pour la premiere
fois, ce droit doive etre conteste maintenant. Il
s'agit d'une decision et non d'une recommandation, et en consequence l'Article 25 est
applicable.
Ce Conseil pourrait meme prendre la decision
d'etablir une commission de conciliation. Et dans
ie cas present, s'i! le desirait, il pourrait meme
prendre la decision d'etablir une commission
d'arbitrage. Ce sont la des decisions et non des
recommandations; un tel pouvoir appartient au
Conseil.
Aux termes de l'Article 28, nous savons que
le Conseil de securite 'pourrait meme aller en
Grece et y tenir ses seances. Aux termes de
l'Article 29 de la Charte, le Conseil de securite
a le droit de creer des organes subsidiaires pour
s'acquitter de sa fonction, qui est de maintenir
la paix et la securite internationales.
Pour tous ces motifs, l'etablissement de
1'0rganisme propose est amplement justifie. Bien
plus, nous avons le droit et le pouvoir d'etablir
cet organisme et de le doter des pouvoirs
necessaires; autrement, les volontes de ce Conseil
seraient rendues nulles dans toute action qU'il
entreprendrait aux termes du Chapitre VI.
Mais, qu'i! s'agisse d'une decision ou d'une
recommandation - et nous avons indique que
nous pouvons formuler les deux aux termes du
Chapitre VI - , nous affirmons que nous ne
pouvjns formuler ni l'une ni l'autre avant
d'avoir determine si la prolongation de la
situation constitue une menace pour la paix et
la securite internationales. Voila l'avis de ma
delegation. Cette determination doit etre faite
aux termes de l'Article 34, afin de prendre rune
que1conque des mesures que la resolution
envisage aux termes de l'Article 33. La resolution
des Etats-Unis indique que nous adoptons les
propositions de la Commission, mais, si l'on veut
considerer avec soin ces propositions, on ne peut
y trouver aucune declaration sur le fait que la
prolongation de la situation constitue une menace
pour la paix et la securite internationales. Ainsi
done, l'adoption des propositions ne nous ferait
nullement progresser, tandis que l'amendement
franc;ais au preambule constitue un pas en avant.
C'est pourquoi nous y donnons tout notre appui.
M. L6PEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'ang1ais) :
Je me rallie entierement a la position prise par
la delegation de l'Australie en ce qui conceme
le preambule a cette resolution. Il semble
egalement a la delegation de la Colombie que
la premiere. chose a faire est d'inserer dans le
texte de la resolution des dispositions specifiant
que le Conseil reconnalt l'existence d'un differend dont la prolongation est susceptible de
menacer la paix et la securite internationales;
ce que, a notre avis, represente tres nettement
le cas prevu par l'Article 37 de la Charte.
L' Article 37, p~ragraphe 2, est redige comme
suit: "Si le Conseil de secIJrite estime que
la prolongation du differend semble, en fait,

"~

..

1421
under Article 36 or to recommend such terms of
settlement as it may consider appropriate."
There seems to be no room for doubt concerning
the authority of the Council to take action as
contemplated in the preamble suggested by the
French delegation.

menacer le maintien de la paix et de la sckurite
internationales, il decide s'il doit agir en application de l'Article 36 ou recommander teIs termes
de reglement qu'iI juge appropries." n semble
donc qu'iI ne peut subsister aucun doute con-'
cernant le pouvoir du Conseil de prendre des
mesures de la nature de celles qui sont envisagees
dans le preambuIe propose par la delegation
franc;aise.

But if we want to elaborate the point a little
further, Article 39 further provides that: "The
Security Council shall determine the existence
of any threat to the peace, breach of the peace,
or act of aggression. . ." We are acting on a
declaration that we believe that the continuance
of the threat to the peace may endanger international security. We have three situations: a
threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or an
act of aggression; and Article 39 reads that in
that eventuality the Council "shall . . . decide
what measures shall be taken in accordance with
Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and security". .

Maissi nous voulons approfondir la question,
l'Article 39 prevoit en outre: "Le ConseiI de
securite constate 1'existence d'une menace contre
la paix, d'une rupture de la paix ou d'un acte
d'agression ... " Nous agissons actuellement en
vertu d'une declaration suivant laquelle nous
pensons que la prolongation de la menace contre
la paix peut mettre en danger la securite internationale. Trois cas peuvent etre envisages: une
menace contre la paix, une rupture de la paix,
et un acte d'agression; et 1'ArticIe 39 dit que
dans cette eventualite le Conseil " ... decide
quelles mesures seront prises conformement aux
Articles 41 et 42 pour maintenir ou retabIir la
paix et la securite internationales".
L'Article 41 stipule d'une maniere tres precise:
"Le Conseil de securite peut decider quelles
mesures n'impliquant pas 1'emploi de la force
armee dojvent etre prises pour donner effet a ses
decisions ... " La presente resolution, a notre
avis, est une decision du Conseil de securite
n'impliquant pas l'emploi de la force armee.
La delegation de la Colombie a eu l'occasion
de discuter ce preambule avec la delegation
franc;aise, et elle est effectivement d'accord sur
l'amendement presente par la delegation franc;;aise, bien que, a notre sens, iI eut ete preferable
de completer ce preambule par une legere adjonction.
Comme nous l'avons dit dans notre suggestion,
"le Conseil de securite, apres avoir etudie le
rapport presente par la Commission d'enquete
creee par la resolution en date du 19 decembre
1946, constate qu'il se trouve en presence d'un
differend dont la prolongation est susceptible de
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales". Ceci est conforme aux termes
de I'Article 37. Nous proposons de poursuivre en
disant: "Le Conseil de securite juge egalement
que d'autres mesures sont necessaires pour
retablir des conditions normales le long de la
frontiere entre la Grece d'une part, et l'Albanie,
la Bulgarie et la Youg-osIavie d'autre part. En
consequence, le Conseil de securite, suivant les
propositions formuJ.ees par la majorite des membres de la Commission d'enquete, decide ..• ",
et 1'0n passerait ensuite au paragraphe suivant.
De cette maniere nous pourrions prendre des
decisions sur les recommandations sans avoir l'air
de les avoir adoptees avant de l'avoir effectivement fait.
Comme .le l'ai dit iI y a deux ou trois .lours,
nous nous abstenons de presenter aucune propositi.on officielle; nous formulons simplement nos
suggestions. NOils serions tres heureux si l'une
des delegations qui a propose des amendements

Article 41 very specifically provides: "The
Security Council may decide what measures not
involving the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to its decisions ..." This
resolution, to our mind, is a decision of the Security Council not involving the use of armed
force.
The Colombian delegation has had the opportunity to discuss this preamble with the French
delegation, and it is substantially in agreement
with the amendment presented by the French
delegation, although, to our mind, it might be
preferable to add something to that preamble.

As we have worded it in our suggestion: "The
Security Council, having considered the report
of the Commission of Investigation established
by resolution dated 19 December 1946, finds
that a dispute exists, the continuance of which
is in fact likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security." That is in
accordance with Article 37. We suggest going
on to say: "The Security Council also finds that
further action is required for the purpose of restoring normal conditions along the frontiers between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other. Therefore,
the Security Council, following the proposals
made by the majority of the members of the
Commission of Investigation, resolves . . .", and
then go on to the next paragraph. By this means
we could act upon the recommendations without appearing to say that we have adopted them
before we have done so.

As I said two or three days ago, we are refraining from submitting any formal proposals;
we are just making our suggestions. In the event
that any delegations' which are presenting
amendments find that our suggestions are useful,

~~

c

(

c,;,

C

we shall be very happy· if .they decide to act
upon them.

aq

j

jugeait ces suggestions utiles et decidait de s'en
inspirer.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais): Je
Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): I feel that the representativeof Australia gave a very clear explana- \ pense que le representant de l'Australie a fourni
tion with regard to the United States resolution, sur la resolution des Etats-Unis des explications
an explanation which was definitely necessary. tres claires, qui etaient vraiment necessaires. La
The United States resolution combines two dif- resolution des Etats-Unis combine deux elements
ferent elements, namely, conciliation and the in- differents, a savoir: la conciliation et 1'enquete
vestigation of lacts.
.
quant aux faits.
.
En matiere d'enquete, le pouvoir du Conseil
In the matter of investigation, the power of
the Council is contained in Article 34. The de securite est contenu dans l'Article 34. Le
Council has already ordered an investigation and Conseil a deja ordonne une enquete, et il peut
it can very well order a ·further investigation. tres bieh ordonner. qu'elle soit poursuivie. Ce
That power cannot be challenged without elimi- pouvoir ne peut pas etre conteste sans eliminer
nating Article' 34 of the Charter and ignoring l'Article 34 de la Charte et ignorer la fonction
the role ~signed to the Security Council by the attribuee au Conseil de securite par la Charte en
charter as the mainstay of security.
tant que gardien principal de la securite.
En consequence, 1'argument d'apres lequelle
Therefore, the argument to the effect that the
Security Council, in acting under Chapter VI, Conseil de securite, en application du Chapitre
must limit itself to adopting recommendations is VI, doit se borner a faire des recommandations
entirely unfounded. Measures proposed as a est entierement denue de fondement. Les mesures
means of conciliation have the character of proposees comme moyens de conciliation ont le
recommendations, but even those measures carry caractere de recommandations, mais meme ces
great weight if the Council finds that we are mesures sont d'une tres grande importance si le
faced with a situation which is likely to endanger Conseil-juge que nous faisons face a une situation
peace and security. The determination of such qui est susceptible de menacer le maintien de la
a situation establishes the jurisdiction of the paix et de la securite. Le fait de reconnaitre une
Council in the matter and creates an obligation telle situation determine egalement.la juridiction
on the parties concerned to settle a dispute, un- du Conseil en la matiere et cree pour les parties
der penalty of having the situation become a en cause une obligation de regler leurs differends,
threat to the peace, in which case Chapter VII sous peine de voir la situation' devenir une
would apply.
menace a la paix, auque1-cas le Chapitre VII
deviendrait applicable.
It is therefore my feeling that the preamble
En consequence, j'estime que le preambule a
to the resolution should contain these main la resolution doit indiquer les points principaux
P9ints: the supreme role of the Council with suivants: le role supreme du Conseil en matiere
regard to security; the investigation of a situation de securite; 1'enquete menee sur une situation
which might lead to internationfll friction and susceptible de conduire a une tension intemagive rise to a dispute; the finding, in the light tionale et d'etre la cause d'un differend; la
of this investigation, that the continuance of the constatation, a la lumiere de cette enquete, que
, situation is likely to endanger the maintenance la prolongation de cette sit11ation est susceptible
of international peace and security, and the de menacer le maintien de la paix et de la
necessity for further action with regard to in- securite internationales, et enfin la necessite de
vestigation in this matter.
procedera une enquete plus approfondie sur ce
sujet.
That is why I agree with'the preamble proJe suis donc d'accord avec le representant de
posed by the French representative, inasmuch la France sur le preambuletel qu'il est propose,
as it sets forth very clearly those three or four parce qu'il souligne tres clairement les trois ou
elements of the situation.
quatre elements de la situation.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The U:nited States delegation is glad to indicate
its acceptance of the amendment to the preamble
proposed by the representative of France. I
should like to state very briefly my appreciation
for the clarifying remarks made by the representative of Brazil and for certain of the remarks
made by the representative' of Australia.
The United States delegation feels strongly
that the establishment of a commission with the
purposes outlined in our resolution is entirely
within the powers of the Security Council, under
the Charter. Not only is it within the powers
of the Security Council, but it is within its duties.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais) : La delegation des EtatsUnis est heureuse d'annoncer qu'elle accepte'
1'amendement au preambule propose par le
representant de la France. .le voudrais exprimer
tres brievement mes remerciements au representant du Bresil pour ses eclaircissements, et au
representant de l'Australie pour certaines de ses
observations.
La delegation des Etats-Unis 'est persuadee
que la creation d'une commission dont les buts
ont ete soulignes dans notre resolution rentre
entierement, aux termes de la Charte, dans le
cadre des pouvoirs du Conseil de securite. Non
seulement cet acte n'excede pas les pou~oirs du
Conseil de securite, mais encore il entre dans le
cadre de ses devoirs.

1423
Le rOle primordial du Conseil de securite,. je
I think it is generally admitted that the
P!imary role of the Security Council is to be the pense que personne ne le contestera, c'est d'etre
guardian organ of the United Nations for inter- 1'organe des Nations Unies, charge du maintien
national peace and security. Under Article 34 de la paix et de la securite internationales. Aux
of the Charter, the Security Council itself could termes de l'Article 34 de la Charte, le Conseil
go to the region which we have betn discussing de securite lui-meme pourrait se transporter sur
and conduct investigations. It follows, therefore, les lieux qui ont fait 1'objet de nos cL.scussions
that it can set up a subsidiary organ to perform . et y mener une enquete. Il s'ensuit donc que le
those functions. To argue that, in setting up Conseil peut etablir un organe suhsidiaire pour
such an organ, it would have the power only to exercer les dites fonctions. L'argument qui
recommend to countries that the commission consistea dire que le Conseil de securite, en
should be allowed to function, and that those etablissant un tel organe, n'aurait d'autre
countries could refuse to accept it and to co- pouvoir que celui de recommander aux pays
operate with it, or refuse to give it facilities, interesses d'autoriser la commission a exercer
would seem to me to undermine the very founda- ses fonctions, en laissant a ces pays le droit
tions of the Charter and would stultify whatever de refuser leur cooperation ou leur appui,me
influence and power the Security Council might semble saper les fondations memes de la Charte;
have for the preservation of international peace. il rendrait sans valeur toute influence et tout
It is a totally unacceptable doctrine, in the view pouvoir que le Conseil de securite pourrait avoir
of the United States delegation.
pour preserver la paix internationale. De 1'avis
de la delegation des Etats-Unis, cette these est
absolument insoutenable.
Such a refusal of any Member of the United
Comme le representant du Bresil1'a fort bien
Nations or of any country which, for the pur- souligne, un tel refus de la part de tout Membre
poses of a. particular question, had accepted the des Nations Unies ou de tout pays qui, pour
stipulations of the Charter, would lay it open, les besoins d'une situation particuliere, aurait
as the representative of Brazil has very forcefully accepte les obligations de la Charte, 1'exposerait
pointed out, to much graver charges and action a des accusations et des mesures beaucoup plus
under another Chapter of the Charter.
graves, aux termes d'un autre Chapitre de la
Charte.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): As the representative of Australia said, in the report of the Commission there is no mention of whether the continuance of that. situation would be likely to
endanger international peace and security. The
representative of Australia considers that the
French draft would guarantee that point in the
preamble, but I find that it is stated in the text
of the French proposal: ". . . constate qu'il se
trouve en presence d'un differend dont la prolongation est susceptible de menacer le maintien
de la paix et de la securite internationales": The
French text would therefore seem to imply that
it has already been determined that the continuance of the situation is likely to endanger peace
and security, whereas Article 34 of the Charter,
which entitles the Security Council to make investigations, says: "The Secu'ity Council may
investigate any dispute, or any situation which
might lead to international friction or give rise
to a dispute, in order to determine whether the
continuance of the dispute or situation is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security."

Itn

As long as the United States proposal and the
proposals of the Commission of Investigation
state that a commission should be established
now, or that the existing Commission should
continue, the purpose, the object and the justification for these proposals lie in the necessity
for determining whether or not the situation is
likely to endanger international peace and secUri:~,~~~~e~ore, I think we would be pre-

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Comme le representant de l'Australie 1'a signale,
le rapport de la Commission ne fait aucune
mention permettant de dire si la prolongation de
cette situation est susceptible ou non de menacer
la paix et la securite internationales. Le representant de l'Australie considere que 1'amendement frans;ais repond a cette preoccupation dans
le preambule, et je constate qU'il est dit d~ns le
texte de la proposition frans;aise: " ... constate
qu'il se trouve en presence d'un differend dont
la prolongation est susceptible de menacer le
maintien de la paix et de la securite intemationales". En consequence, le texte frans;ais
semblerait impliquer qu'il a deja ete etabli que
la prolongation de la situation est susceptible de
menacer la paix et la securite, alors que si nous
nous reportons a l'Article 34 de la Charte,
attribuant au Conseil de securite le droit d'enqueter, nous lisons: "Le Conseil de securite peut
enqueter sur tout differend ou toute situation
qui pourrait entramer un desaccord entre nations
ou engendrer un differend, afin de determiner
si la prolongation de ce differend ou de cette
situation semble devoir menacer le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales."
Du moment que la proposition des Etats-Unis
et les propositions de la Commission d'enquetc::
declarent qu'une commission doit etre creee
maintenant, ou que la Commission existante doit
poursuivre ses travaux, le but, l'objet et la
justification de ces propositions ressortent de la
necessite de determiner si la situation est
susceptible ou non de menacer la paix et la
securite internationales. En consequence, si nous

1424

I do not know the view of the French representative on this point-that is, "that further
action must 'be taken by the Security Council
under ArtiCle 34 of the Charter in order to determine ..."
This wording makes it clear that we have not
yet made a determination; the further action of
setting up a commission would therefore be justified on the grounds that we are attempting to
determine whether the continuance of the situation ~ question is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. The
continuance of the action which was begun by
the Commission of Investigation would also be
in conformity with Article 34 of the Charter,
as well as with the other Articles of the Charter.

adoptons le texte du preambule fran~ais, nous
prejugerions, a mon avis, la situation. L'enquete
serait terminee. Il n'y aurait aucune raison
valable de continuer I'enquete du moment que
nous aurions' accepte, admis ou con~tate que
la prolongation de la situation presente peut
menacer la paix ~t la securite internationales.
Pour cette raison, j'estime que le texte fran~ais
devrait etre amende de la fa~on suivante:
apres les mots "19 decembre 1946", on lirait
" ... estime que de nouvelles mesures doivent
etre prises par le Conseil de securite en
application de l'Article 34 de la Charte afin de
determiner si la prolongation de cette situation
est susceptible ou non de menacer le maintien
de la paix et de la securite intemationales". Je
propose que cette phrase soit introduite dans la
proposition fran~aise; peut-etre devrait-elle etre
exprimee plus clairement dans la traduction
anglaise.
Je ne connais pas I'avis du representant de la
France sur cette modification, a savoir "que de,
nouvelles mesures doivent etre prises par le
Conseil de securite en application de l'Article 34
de la Charte, afin de determiner ... "
Cette redaction exprimerait mieux que nous
n'avons encore rien determine; des mesures
nouvelles, c'est-a-dire la creation d'une commission, seraient ainsi justifiees par le fait que nous
essayons de determiner si la prolongation de la
situation en cause est susceptible ou non de
menacer le maintier de la paL", et de la securite
internationales. La continuation de I'action
entreprise par la Commission d'enquet~ serait
egalement conforme a l'Article 34 aussi bien
qu'a tout autre Article de la Charte:

The PRESIDENT: I should like t'o explain the
present status of the preamble. The representative of the United States has accepted the version of the preamble suggested by the representative of France. I therefore now consider that
version an integral part of the United Statefl
resolution.

-Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
J e desire preciser l'etat actue1 du preambule. Le
representant des Etats-Unis a accepte le texte du
preambule soumis par le representant de la
France. En consequence, je considere ce texte
comme partie integrante de la resolution des
Etats-Unis.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The United States delegation is not able to
accept in its entirety the interpretation just given
by the representa,tive of Syria. We thfuk that the
power of the Security Council to conduct an investigation, or to order an investigation conducted under Article 34, is not necessarily
stopped because, at one stage in the development of a dangerous situation, an investigating
group'has found that a situation exists the prolongation of which might threaten the maintenance of international peace and security. If the
Council can order and carry out an investigation
leading to such a conclusion, it seems to my
delegation that it is inherent in the powers conferred by Article 34, and conferred by other provisions of the Charter relating to the duties and
functions of the Security C:::ouncil, that it may
continue to make such investigations as long as
it thinks that that situation exists. In the opinion

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
ne saurait accepter dans son integralite l'interpretation qui vient d'etre donnee par le representant de la Syrie. Nous pensons que le pouvoir
du Conseil de securite de mener une enquete,
ou de la faire mener en application de l'Article
34, ne prend pas necessairement fin du fait qu'a
une etape du developpement d'une situation
dangereuse, un groupe d'enquete a juge qu'il
existe effectivement une situation dont la prolongation peut menacer le maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales. Nous estimons
que si le Conseil a le pouvoir d'ordonner et de
mener une enquete qui le conduise a une telle
conclusion, il lui appaxtient, au titre des fonctions conferees par l'Article 34 et par d'autres
dispositions de la Charte relatives aux devoirs'
et fonctions du Conseil de securite, de pouvoir
poursuivre de telles enquetes aussi longtemps

judging the case if we put it as it is in the French
preamble. The act of .investigation would be
over. There would be no necessity for continuing the investigation as long as we accepted or
admitted or determined that the prolongation of
the present situation might endanger international peace and security.
Eor thiS reason, I think the French text should
be amended to read after "19 December'1946":
". . . finds that further action must be taken
by the Security Council under Article 34 of the
Charter in order to determine whether the continuance of that situation is likely to endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security." I suggest that this phraee should be inserted il, the French proposal. Perhaps it should
. be put in a clearer form in the English translation.
j

1425
of my delegation, the distinction drawn by the
representative of Syria is neither necessary nor
valid.
The United States delegation reiterates its
acceptance of the French a~endment. Having
indicated our acceptance of that amendment, I
should nevertheless like to make a reference to
the very clear exposition by the representative of
Colombia and to the suggestions he made to the
Council. He stated that he was not proposing
amendments on the part of his delegation, but he
invited the Council's consideration of certain
substantive suggestions. If a proposal had been
made to combine the first paragraph of the
United States resolution and the preamble along
the lines suggested by the representative of Colombia, the United States delegation would have
been glad to accept that proposal. However, we
are entirely satisfied with the amendme.nt offered
by the representative of France. I merely wished
to make this statement as' an indication of our
reaction to the proposal mad~ by the representative of Colombia.

qu'il pense que cette situation existe. De I'avis
de ma delegation, la distinction etablie par le
representant de la Syrie n'est ni valable ni necessairef
La delegation des Etats-Unis reaffirme son
acceptation de l'amendement fran~ais. Ayant
indique notre acceptation de cet amendement,
je voudrais neanmoins faire mention de l'expose
tres clair fait par le representant de la Colombie
et des propositions qu'il a faites au Conseil. n a
declare que sa delegation ne proposait aucun
amendement, mais qu'il attirait I'attention du
Conseil sur certaines suggestions de principe. Si
une proposition formelle avait ete formulee,
ayant pour effet. de combiner le premier paragraphe de la resolution des Etats-Unis et le
. preambule sous la forme .indiquee par le
representant de la Colombie, la delegation des
Etats-Unis aurait ete heureuse d'accepter une
telle proposition. Puisque tel n'est pas le cas,
l'amendement propose par le representant de la
France. nous parait tout a fait satisfaisant. Je
tenais simplement a indiquer notre attitude a
l'egard de la proposition formulee par le representant de -la Colombie.

In my opinion-and I believe I have already
made it clear-the right to establish a commission such as the one proposed stems from two
sources. In the first place, I consider it quite
natural that the Security Council should establish a commission to help in the work of conciliation which it is the Security Council's duty
to recommend. Under the various provisions of

M. PARODI (France): Les observations que je
voudrais presenter se rapportent a ce qu'ont dit
principalement les representants de l'Australie et
de la Syrie.
Au cours de nos precedentes deliberations, une
objection de droit avait ete somevee contre la
partie de la proposition de la delegation des
Etats-Unis qui consistait a etablir une commission. On nous a dit qu'il n'etait pas possible
d'e~ablir une ct,mmission ayant les pouvoirs
indiques dans le projet, parce que ce serait
deborder les termes du Chapitre VI de la Charte
sur le terrl:!:in duquel nous sommes places.
J'incline, pour ma part - et je crois que je .
I'avais indique lorsque j'ai pris la parole precedemment pour donner, cl'une mailiere generale,
le point de vue de la delegation fran~aisel a me dire d'accord, a cet egard, avec le
representant de I'Australie. J'ai des doutes, moi
aussi, sur l'argument dont s'etait servi le representant des Etats-Unis et qu'il tirait du precedent
de Trieste2 •
En effet, dans le cas de Trieste, now) n'etions
pas sur le terrain precis d'un des Chapitres de
la Charte. Mais lorsque nous nous trouvons sur
le terrain d'un des Chapitres de la Charte - du
Chapitre VI ,dans le cas qui nous occupe -- le
Conseil de securite est limite par les dispositions
de ce Chapitre.
A mon avis - et je crois I'avoir deja fait
valoir - l'institution d'une commission telle que
ceIle qui a ete proposee a un double fondement.
D'une part, je trouve tout a fait normal que le
Conseil de securite etablisse une comrtlission qui
aide au travail de conciliation qu'il appartient
au Conseil de securite de recommander. En
vertu des differentes dispositions du Chapitre VI,

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 58, 158th meeting.
:IIbid., Second Year, Nc. 57.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secuTitl,
Deuxieme Annee, No 58, 158eme seance.
21bid., Deuxieme Annee, No 57.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): The observations I should like to make
deal principally with what has been said by the
representatives of Australia and Syria.
In the cqurse of our previous deliberations, an
objection of a legal nature was raised to that part
of the United States delegation's proposal which
concerned the establishment of a commission.
We were told that it was not possible to set up
a commission having the powers indicated in the
proposal, because this would be exceeding the
tenns of Chapter VI of the Charter on which
our action was based.
Personally, I am inclined-and I believe I indicated this in the speech in which I gave a
general outline of the point of view of the French
delegation1-to agree in this respect with the
representative of Australia. I, toe, have some
doubts concerning the argument presented by the
United States 'representative, based on the precedent of Trieste.2
In the case of Trieste, we were not specifically
on the ground of any Chapter of the Charter.
But when we actually are on the grQund of one
of the Chapters of the Charter-Chapter VI in
the present instance-the Security Council is
bound by the provisions of that Chapter.

.......

1426
Chapter VI, the Security Council may, in faCL,
recomme 1 measures of conciliation, of rapprochement, among the parties concerned. Naturally, in these conditions, it may set up a commission to lend its good offices to facilitate such
conciliation. As the representative of Australia
said just now, there is no difficulty here. The
second source of the commission's powers is
Article 34, which confers a power of direct investigation for the purpose of keeping the Security Council informed' at all times.

le Conseil de securite peut, en efIet, recommander des mesures de conciliation, de
rapprochement entre les parties interessees. nest
tout a fait naturel que, dans ces conditions, il
puisse etablir une commission pour preter ses
bons offices en vue de cette conciliation. Comme
l'a dit tout a I'heure le representant de
l'Australie, il n'y a pas de difficultes a cet
egard. L'autre fondement des pouvoirs de la
Commission est l'Article 34. n s'agit d'un pouvoir d'enquete direct en vue de tenir le Conseil
de securite informe, de le renseigner a tout
moment.

It deT'~nds, therefore, on how far we are undertaIallg a task of conciliation and rapprochement, or a mission of investigation as provided
. under Article 34 of the Charter, whether we are
entitled to entrust to a commission the powers
embodied in the text of the draft resolution.

. C'est donc dans la mesure ou nous pouvons
nous rattacher, soit a une tache de con-ciliation
ou de rapprochement, soit a une mission d'enquete, telle qu'elle est prevue dans I'Article 34
de la Charte, que nous pouvons en droit donner
a une commission les pouvoirs dont il s'agit dans
le. texte dll projet de resolution.

C'est ici qu'on rencontre l'objection du
It is here that we encounter the Syrian representative's objection. It is & somewhat subtle representant de la Syrie. Elle est un peu subtile;
one, but I must admit that, legally, it is rather mais, juridiquement, je dois reconnaltre qu'elle
embarrassing. The representative of Syria, who est a~sez genante. Le representant dl'..: ' Syrie,
is an excellent jurist, draws his argument from qui est un excellent juriste, tire un arguIr.'ent de
Article 34 of the Charter, and tells us that, since l'Article 34 de la Charte et nous dit que, comme
Article 34 of the Charter provides powers of in- l'Article 34 de la Charte prevoit des pouvoirs
vestigation in order to determine whether a d'enquete en vue de determiner s'il y ~, une
situation endangering the maintenance of peace situation mena~ante pour le maintien de la paix,
exists, if we begin by stating that such a situa- si nous commen~ons par dire que cette situation
tion exists, there can no longer be any reason for existe, il n'y a plus aucune raison de proceder a
undertaking an investigation, and consequently une enquete et, par consequent, on ne peut plus
we can no longer invoke Article 34. I believe se fonder sur I'Article 34. Je crois que j'ai bien
that I have correctly analysed the objection of analyse l'objection du representant de la Syrie.
the representative of Syria.
L'objection ainsi formulee trouve, certaineThe objection thu::; stated certainly finds rather
strong support in the terms of Article 34. I must ment, un assez fort argument dans les termes
say, however, that I do not believe it to be de l'Article 34. Je dois dire cependant que, en
strictly valid. In my opinion that is too literal, definitive, je ne la crois pas exacte. C'est la,
too narrow an interpretation of Article 34.. It is, selon moi, une interpretation trap litterale, trop
of course, a continually recurring problem in . etroite, de l'Article 34. C'est evidemment une
legal matters to decide how far texts should be question qui se pose toujours en droit de savoir
applied literally and how far they should be dans quelle mesure on doit appliquer les textes
applied in accordance with their spirit, by inter- d'une maniere litterale, et dans quelle mesure on
pretation. I feel that if the Security Council has doit les appliquer dans leur esprit, en les prohad the power to initiate an investigation for the IO!lgeant. Je pense que si le Conseil de securite
purpose of obtaining information, and of ascer- a pu faire proceder a une enquete en vue de se
taining whether a situation endangering peace renseigner. en vue de savoir si une situation
exists, it is reasonable to suppose that it can con- mena~ante pour la paix ey.iste, il est raisonnable
tinue this investigation when the situation itself de penser qu'il peut prolonger cette enquete
seems likely to continue. For such a situation can lorsque· la situation elle-meme est susceptible
become aggravated, can become more threaten- de se prolonger. Car une telle situation peut
ing to peace; it can disappear, or on the contrary s'aggraver, devenir plus mena~ante pour la paix;
it can become more serious. It would be rather elle peut disparaitre; elle peut, au contraire,
paradoxical, I think, that an investigation could . devenir plus urgente. Il y aurait quelque chose
be continued if it did net find there was a threat d'assez paradoxal, me semble-t-il, a ce qu'une
to the peace, if it left the matter in don't, but enquete puisse etre continuee si elle n'aboutit pas
could not be continued in the most serioU& situa- a la constatation de l'existence d'une menace
tion, that is, one in which a threat to the peace contre la paix, si dIe laisse subsister le doute,
was found to exist. .
mais qu'elle ne puisse pas l'etre dans le cas le
plus grave, celui ou l'on constate qu'une menace
pour la paix existe.
Autrement dit, je crois que l'interpretation la
In other words, I feel that the most reasonable
interpretation of the text of Article 34 is to go plus raisonnable du texte de l'Article 34 est
beyond its simple and literal interpretation. Since d'aller au dela de la simple interpretation

W4

1427
we have est<j.blished a Commission and find· that
the same situation exists, that it may continue
and become more or less dangerous, we have, I
feel, the power to continue to apply Article 34,
that is, to request further information.

.

As to the extremely helpful remarks of the
representative of Colombia, I find that the wording I proposed is on the whole very similar to
that which he suggested. If I had not already
proposed a text, I should support the one he
presents. But, having been the first to propose a
text which has already been supported, I hesitate
to amend it. However, I should like to make a
few observations on this point. I should not in
the least object if, in place of drafting a first
article in these words: "The Security Council
adopts the substance of the proposals made by
the majority of the members of the Commission
of Investigation," the following sentence were
introduced in the preamble: "Therefore, the
Security Council, adopting in substance" (I feel
that the word "substance" must be retained)
"the proposals made by the majority of the members of the Commission of Investigation ..."

The articles would follow the preamble thus
supplemented. If the other members of the Security C~)Uncil agree on a modification of this
kind, I shall not insist on the original wording of
my amendment.

litterale. Puisque nous avons constitue une
Commission et que nous constatons que la meme
sit'lation existe? qu'elle peut se prolonger et'
durenir plus ou moins dangereuse, nous avons,
me semble-t-il, le pouvoir de continueI' a appliqu~. PArticle 34, c~est-a-dire de demander que
de nouveaux renseignements nous soient fournis.
En ce qui conceme les observations extremement utiles presentees par le representant de la
Colombie, je constate que la redaction que j'ai
proposee est, en somme, tre3 voisine de celle
qu'il envisageait lui-meme. Si je n'avais pas
propose un texte, je me rallierais a celui qu'il
suggere. Mais, ayant propose le premier un texte
qui a deja ete app).lye, j'hesite a y apporter une
modification. Je desire cependant presenter
quelques observations a ce sujet. Je ne verrais
aucun inconvenient a ce qu'au lieu de rediger
un premier article ainsi con~u: "Le Conseil de
securite adopte dans leur substance les propositions presentees par la majorite des membres de
la Commission d'enquete", on introduise cette
phrase dans le preambule sous la forme suivante:
"En consequence, le Conseil de securite, adoptant dans leur substance" (je crois qu'il faut
maintenir "dans leur substance") "les propositions presentees par la majorite des membres de
la Commission d'enquete ... "
On ne commencerait les articles qu'apres le
preambule ainsi complete. Si les autres membres
du Conseil de securite sont d'accord sur une
modification de cet ordre, je n'insisterai pas pour
le maintien de ma redaction primitive.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traMr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I should like to draw the attention of the Council duit de l' anglais): Je voudrais attirer l'attention
to the English translation of the French amend- du Conseil sur la traduction en anglais de
ment to the preamble, which has just been given l'amendement fran~ais au preambule, qui vient
to us. This translation is not an accurate trans- de nous etre donnee. Cette traduction n'est pas
lation of the French text, and the difference is . une traduction precise. du texte fran~ais, et
so important that I feel that it is necessary to l'erreur est si importante que je pense qu'il est
point it out. The word constate does not mean. necessaire de la faire remarquer. Le mot
"notes" in English, but means "find<s". The dif- "constate" ne peut pas dire notes en anglais, mais
ference there is material.
signifie finds. La difference est ici d'importance.
The PRESIDENT: The remark of the representative of the United States is correct. Since
he has accepted this French amendment as part
of the resolution, I take it for granted that it will
be in the text as he now states it.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais):
L'observation formulee par le representant des
Etats-Unis est juste. Puisqu'il a accepte'l'amendement fran~ais comme partie integrante de la
resolution, j'admets que la traduction du texte
sera telle qu'il vient de ladonner.

The three remaining speakers on my list, who
wish to make comments concerning the preamble, will be heard this afternoon at the three
o'clock meeting.

Les trois orateurs restant sur ma liste, qui
desirent faire des observations concernant le
preambule, seront entendus cet apres-midi a la
seance de 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 05.

A

SAtES· AGENTS OF TJNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS·
,

,

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Argentina-Argentine
Editorial Sudamericana
S. A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES

Australia-AustraUe
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

Belgium-Belgique
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A
14-22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

Bolivia-BoUvie
Libreria Cientifica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

Canada'
The R yerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

Chile-ChiU
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

China-Chine
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

Costa Rica-Costa-Rica
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Cuba

Ecuador--Equateur
Munoz Hermanos y Cia
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

Egypt-Egypte
Librairie ':La Renaissance
d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIRO

Finland-Finlande
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

France
Editions A Pedone
13, rue Souffiot
PARIS, Ve

Greece-Grece
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

Guatemala
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

Haiti-Haiti
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Bolte postale III-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

India-Inde
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia .House
NEW DELHI

La Casa Belga
'Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

Iran

Czechoslovakia
T checoslovaquie

Iraq-lrak

F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

Denmark-Danemark
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
KJOBENHAVN

Dominican Republic
Republique Dominicaine

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

Lebanon-Liban
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

L'uXembourg
Librairie J. Schumn:,c'
Place Guillauine
LUXEMBOURG

Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO

Netherlands--Pays-Bas

Printed in the U.S.A.

Price in the United States: 50 cents

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
s'GRAVENHAGE

New Zealand
N ouvelle-Zelande
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Norway-Norvege
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
OSLO

Philippines
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN

Sweden-Suede
A-B. C. B. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

Switzerland-Suisse
Librairie Payot S. A
LAUSANNE,GENEv~,VEVEY,

MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

Syria-Syrie
Librairie universelle
DAMAS

Turkey--Turquie
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

Union of South Mrica
Union Sud-Africaine
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG, CAPETOWN,
DURBAN

United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
H.M. Stationery Office

p.a. Box 569

LONDON, S.B. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops at
LONDON, EDINBURGH,
MANCHESTER, CARDIFF,
BELFAST and BRISTOL

United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

Yugoslavia-Yougoslavie
Drzavno Preduzece
J ugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
