12

General Assembly-Eleventh SeHion

programmes, thus facilitating the economic development of Jess developed countries;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General, in his
analysis of the possibilities and desirability of the 1:1se
of surplus foodstuffs for the above purpose, to examme
whether such use may lead to displacement of markets
for those commodities and what effects it may have
on the economic and financial position of those countries which depend primarily on the export of similar
commodities ;
3. Requests the Economie and Social Council to
consider the possibility of postponing until its twentyfifth session its examination of the report of the Secretary-General, in order to be in a position to take
fullv into account the discussions and the expert
technical studies being undertaken by the Food and
Agriculture Organization concerning the establishment
of national food reserves;
4. Invites both importing and exporting Member
States to continue to consult, through the appropriate
bodies established by the Food and Agriculture Organization, with a view to facilitating the establishment
of national food reserves, with due regard for the
principles of surplus disposai recommended by the
Food and Agriculture Organization, 6 particularly the
need to avoid harmful interference with normal patterns
of production and international trade and to ensure
that the use of surplus reserves will result in genuine
additional consumption as defined in the principles of
the Food and Agriculture Organization.
656th plenary meeting,
20 Febrttary 1957.
1026 (XI). Establishment of a world food
reserve
The General Assembly,
Having in mind the desirability of achieving the
objectives set forth in General Assembly resolution 827
(IX) of 14 December 1954 and Economie and Social
Council resolution 621 (XXII) of 6 August 1956,
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and other agencies, to explore the desirability
of setting up a working group to examine the practical
possibilities of implementing the various proposais
made in the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization7 as well as the various suggestions made
at the twenty-second session of the Economie and
Social Council and at the eleventh session of the General Assembly, and to report to the Council not later
than at its twenty-fourth session for appropriate action.

656th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1027 (XI). Development of international economic co-operation and the expansion of
international trade
The General Assembly,
N oting the growth in world production and trade
since the Second World War,
• Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Commodity Policy Studies, No. 10 Functions of a World
Food Reserve-Scope and Limitations (Rome, 1956), annex
III.
• Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Commodity Policy Studies No. 10, Functions of a World Food
Reserve-Scope and Limitations (Rome, 1956).

Recognizing the need for continued efforts to reduce
or remove obstacles to international trade and to promote its expansion on a multilateral basis,
Considering that the further development of mutually
beneficial international economic co-operation, and particularlv a continued expansion of international trade,
would 'contribute to the expansion of the economies
of ail countries,
Considering in particular that a high and stable lev~l
of international trade is indispensable to the econom1c
development of'the Jess developed countries, and especially to those countries which depend for their foreign
exchange earnings largely on the export of one commodity or a few commodities,
Recognizing that existing international bodies and
agreements concerned with international trade provide
a framework for the effective consideration of trade
problems, payments arrangements and related economic
problems of mutual interest, and are doing valuable
work in this field,
Recognizing further the desirability of avoiding the
waste of resources and the weakening of existing organizations in the field of international trade through
the duplication of their functions and activities,
l. Urges the Governments of Member States to
continue their efforts to reduce existing barriers to
international trade in a mutually satisfactory manner
for the purpose of expanding such trade at the fastest
feasible rate and, in particular:
(a) To continue to work toward this objective
through the international organizations which are working successfully for the expansion of world trade, and
to continue to avail themselves of services offered in
the field of trade by these organizations;
( b) To red uce or remove restrictions and/or discrimination with regard to trade and payments as soon
as their balance of payments and reserve positions
permit, having due regard to the special problems
arising from the economic development needs of the
less developed countries ;
( c) To conduct their trade policies with due regard
to their possible harmful effects on the economies of
other countries, especially countries which are dependent on exports of relatively few commodities;
(d) To follow internai economic, monetary and
fiscal policies which promote high levels of production,
employment and investment, keeping in mind the relationship between such internai policies and the possibilities of expandnig world trade;
2. Endorses Economie and Social Council resolution
614 (XXII) of 9 August 1956 and requests the
Council to continue to give particular attention to
developments in the field of international trade;
3. Looks forward with interest to the establishment
of the Organization for Trade Co-operation and urges
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the specialized agencies to act with a view to approving the agreement establishing the Organization for
Trade Co-operation.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1028 (XI). Land-locked countries and the expansion of international trade
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the need of land-locked countries for
adequate transit facilities in promoting international
trade,

13

Resolutions adopted on the reporu of the Second Committee

Invites the Governments of Member States to give
full recognition to the needs of land-locked Member
states in the matter of transit trade and, therefore, to
accord them adequate facilities in terms of international
law and practice in this regard, bearing in mind the
future requirements resulting from the economic development of the land-locked countries.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 19S7.
1029 (XI). International commodity problell18
The General Assembly,
Noting that the World Economie Survey 19S5 8 again
stressed the importance, both for world economic stability and for the economic development of underdeveloped countries, of the problems arising in international commodity trade,
Considering the need to promote adequate consideration of these problems through research and international consultation,
1. Draws the attention of the Governments of Member States to the opportunity that exists, under paragraph 3 of Economie and Social Council resolution
557 F (XVIII) of 5 August 1954, for them to bring
commodity problems to the attention of the Commission on International Commodity Trade;
2. Notes Economie and Social Council resolution
620 (XXII) of 9 August 1956;
3. Requests the Economie and Social Council to
invite the Commission on International Commodity
Trade to give special consideration, within its present
programme of work-bearing in mind the relevant
parts of the introductory statement of the SecretaryGeneral9 at the twenty-second session of the Council
and the debates in the Second Committee at the eleventh
session of the General Assembly-to the importance
o_f present international commodity problems in relation to world economic stability ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give his full assistance, within the limit of available
resources, to the work of the Commission on International Commodity Trade, and in particular to the
preparation of studies suggested by it.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1030 (XI). Question of the establishment of a
Special United Nations Fund for Economie
Development
The General Asscmbly,
Convinced that an expanded flow of capital to underdeveloped countries, by contributing towards the improvement of their economies, would, especially in the
light of existing disparities in the rates of growth as
between the developed and the under-developed countrie~, serve the cause of peace, and help towards the
attamment of greater prosperity in ail countries,
Mindful of the growing desire for increased action
by the United Nations in the field of financing economic
development, especially for the financing of non-selfliquidating projects,
• United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1956.II.C.1.
'Official Records of the Economie and Social Council,
Twenty-second Session, 934th meeting.

Recalling that the establishment of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economie Development has been
under close study by the General Assembly for a number of years, starting with its resolution 520 (VI)
of 12 January 1952, and that various special committees and experts have submitted their views on the
question,
H aving e.ramined the interim report 10 submitted to
the Economie and Social Council at its twenty-second
session by the Ad Hoc Committee set up by the General Assembly in pursuance of its resolution 923 (X)
of 9 December 1955,
Taking note of Economie and Social Council resolution 619 A (XXII) of 9 August 1956 which expressed
the hope that the General Assembly, at its eleventh
session, would consider what further steps might help
to promote the early establishment of a special fund
for economic development,
1. Commends the Ad Hoc Committee on the Question of the Establishment of a Special United Nations
Fund for Economie Development for the work it has
accomplished in preparing the interim report;

2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee, on the basis
of the views expressed by Governments in their replies
to the questionnaire annexed to General Assembly
resolution 923 (X) of 9 December 1955, the previous
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Economie and Sodal Council relating to the establishment
of a special fund, the reports of previous special committees and groups of experts, and the suggestions
made during the twenty-second session of the Economie
and Social Council and the eleventh session of the
General Assembly :
(a) To set forth the different forms of legal framework on which a Special United Nations Fund for
Economie Development may be established and statutes
drafted;
( b) To indicate the types of projects which might
be provided for in programmes of operations of a
United Nations economic development fund;
(c) To submit to the Economie and Social Council,
at its twenty-fourth session, together with the final
report requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 923 (X), a supplementary report prepared in
accordance with the instructions in sub-paragraph (a)
and (b) above;
3. Authorizes the Ad Hoc Committee to append to
its final report any related suggestions or proposais
for the provision of economic assistance to underdeveloped countries under the auspices of the United
Nations which Governments may wish to put forward;
4. Requests the Economie and Social Council to
forward to the General Assembly, at its twelfth session,
the final and supplementary reports of the Ad Hoc
Committee, together with any recommendations on
further steps which could help promote the early establishment of an international economic development
fund within the framework of the United Nations ;
5. Invites the Governments of Member States and
the Secretary-General to provide the Ad Hoc Committee with ail necessary assistance.

661st plenary meettnu,
26 February 1957.
"'A/3134 and Corr. l and 2.
