57

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commhtee

the Cook Islands 13 and the information on subsequent
developments, 14
H aving heard the statements made by the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision oí the
Elections in the Cook Islands and the representative oí
N ew Zealand,
N oting that, under the Constitution which came into
force on 4 August 1965, the people of the Cook Islands
have reserved their right to move to a status oí complete
independence,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Comrnittec on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countrics and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands;
2. No tes the finclings and conclusions of the United
Nations Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in the Cook Islands and expresses its high appreciation to the Representative and bis staff;
3. E.xpresses íts appreciation of the co-operation extended to the United Nations by the Government of
N ew Zealand in the study of the question of the Cook
Islands;
4. No tes that the Constitution of the Cook Islands
carne into force on 4 August 1965, from which date
the people of the Cook Islands have had control of
their interna! affairs and of their future;
5. Considers that since the Cook Islands have attained full interna! self-government, the transmission
of information in respect of the Cook Islands under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations is
no longer necessary ;
6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United
Nations, under General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), to assist the people oí the Cook Is!ands in the
eventual achievement of full independence, if they so
wish, at a future date ;
7. E.xpresses the hope that the United Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies will
endeavour to contribute in every way possible to the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Cook Islands.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2065 (XX}. Question of the Falkland lslands
(Malvinas)
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
Taking ínto account the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), 1 ~ and in particular the conclusions and recommendations adopted
by the Committee with reference to that Territory,
Considering that its resolution 1514 (XV) oí 14
December 1960 was prompted by the cherished aim of
bringing to an end everywhere colonialism in all its
13 !bid., Twentieth Session, Antie.res, agenda itcms 23 and
24, document A/5962.
14 !bid., document A/5961.
15 /bid., Nineteenth Session, Anne.res, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XXIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Anne.res, addendum to agenda ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter

XXII.

forms, one of which covers the case of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
N oting the existence of a dispute between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over the said Islands,
I. Invites the Governments of Argentina and the
Unitecl Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to proceed without delay with the negotiations recommended by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples with a view to finding a peaceful solution
to the problem, bearing in rnind the provisions and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the interests of the population of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas):
2. R('quests thc two Governments to report to the
Spccial Committce and to the General Assembly at its
twcnty-first session on the results of the negotiations.
1398th plcnary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2066 (XX). Question of Mauritius
The General Assembly,
H a-zn·ng considercd the question of Mauritius and
other islands composing the Territory oí Mauritius,
lI aving examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Regretting that the administering Power has not
fully implemented resolution 1514 (XV) with regard
to that Territory,
N oting with deep concern that any step taken by
the administering Power to detach certain islands from
the Territory of Mauritius for the purpose of establishing a military base would be in contravention of the
Declarat.ion, and in particular of paragraph 6 thereoí,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Cornmittee on the Situation with regard to the
Irnplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Mauritius, and endorses the
conclusions and recornmendations of the Special Committee contained therein ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory of Mauritius to freedorn and independence
in accord:mce with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Invites the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland to take effective
measures with a view to the immediate and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to take no action
which would dismember the Territory of Mauritius
and violate its territorial integrity;
16 lbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter XIV: ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1) chapter

XIII.

'

58

General Assembly-Twentieth Seasion

S. Further invites the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee and to the General Assembly
on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
question of the Territory of Mauritius under review
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.
2067

(XX). Question of Equatorial Guinea
(Fernando Póo and Río Muni)
The General Assembly,
Having e.xamined the situation in the Territories of
Fernando Póo and Río Muni,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power and the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Conntries and Peoples,
Taking particularly into account the conclusions and
recommendations of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of I ndependcnce to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the aforesaid
Territories, 17
N oting that the Territories of Fernando Póo and
Río Muni have been merged and named Equatorial
Guinea,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence;
2. Requests the administering Power to set the
earliest possible date for independence after consulting
the people on the basis of universal suffrage under the
supervision of the United Nations;
3. Invites the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to thc Implernentation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to follow the progress of the implementation of the present resolution ánd to report thereon
to the General Assernbly at its twenty-first session.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2068 (XX). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Having e.xamined the question of Fiji,
H aving studied the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Gr::.:iting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Territory of Fiji, 18
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII)
of 17 December 1962 and 1951 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and the resolution adopted by the Special
Committee on S November 1964,19
N oting with regret that the administering Power has
not yet taken effective measures to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly,
1 7 [bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter IX, parn. 111.
1 8 Jbid., chapter XIII; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes.
addendum to agenda itcm 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter XII.
19 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Anne;res, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter XIII, para. 119.

Taking into account the fact that any further delay
in the irnplementation of those resolutions would create
furthcr hardships for the people of the Territory,
Considering that the constitutional changes contemplated by the administering Power would foment
separatist tendencies and stand in the way of the
política!, economic and social integration of the people
as a whole,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Fiji, and endorses the conrlusions and recommendations set forth therein;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Fiji to freedom and independence in conformity with
the provisions of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Invites the Government of the United Kingdorn
of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland, as the administering Power, to implement imrnediately the resolutions of the General Assernbly ;
4. Requests the administering Power to take, as a
matter of urgency, measures to repeal ali discriminatory
laws and to establish an unqualified system of democratic representation base<l on the principle of "one
man, one vote" ;
5. Further requests the administering Power to
report to the Special Committee and to the General Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution;
(¡_ Invites the Special Comrnittee to keep the question under consideration and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session;
7. Decides to include the question of Fiji in the
provisional agenda of its twenty-first session.
1398th plenm-y meeting,
16 December 1965.

2069 (XX). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British
Virgin lslands, Cayman Islands, Cocos
(Keeling) lslands, Dominica, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hehrides, Niue, Papua, Pitcairn, St.
Helena, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia,
St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands,
Tokelau lslands, Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin
lslands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Papua, Pitcairn, St.
Helena, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St.
Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands,
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands,
H aving examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oí
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 20
2 º lbid., chapters XIV-XVII, XIX XX XXIV and XXV·
ibid., Twentieth Scssion, Amicxes, ¡dden<lum to agenda iten;
23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapters XIII-XVI, XVIII, XIX, XXIII

ancl

XXIV.
