S/PV.7391

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7391st meeting

Tuesday, 24 February 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Jusys
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares
Sir Mark Lyall Grant/Mr. Meek
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

15-04991 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504991*

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): I am honoured to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
world’s largest regional security arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
doing so, I shall present to the Council the main points
of Serbia’s OSCE chairmanship agenda. I shall also
brief members on a number of other issues of critical
importance to peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian regions.
Serbia’s chairmanship of the OSCE comes during
the worst European security crisis since the end of
the Cold War. Mistrust and divisions, confrontational
policies and zero-sum logic are undermining the
cooperative approach to security that is at the heart of
the OSCE’s comprehensive body of commitments and
principles.
The OSCE of 2015 is very different from the
OSCE of just two years ago. The crisis in and around
Ukraine continues to dominate security considerations
in Europe as it did in 2014, but its impact is far greater.
Today, the OSCE faces sharpening institutional
divisions, competition and confrontation in a context
of mutually exclusive perceptions, yet the current crisis
has highlighted the enduring strengths and advantages
of the OSCE as the organization best suited to bridge
growing divides and facilitate cooperative solutions.

2/22

24/02/2015

The OSCE response to the current crisis has
once again demonstrated its relevance to European
security. The Organization has proved itself capable
of substantive engagement under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. The deployment of two OSCE
field missions — the Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, and the Observer Mission at the Russian
Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk — is the most visible
example of the OSCE’s ability to launch collective
actions even during a highly divisive crisis.
The OSCE has been continuously engaged in
seeking a diplomatic solution to the current crisis.
Serbia is now doing its utmost to pursue those efforts
in an impartial and transparent manner. Our highest
priority is to protect the inclusive and cooperative
nature of the OSCE’s work and to prevent the crisis
from escalating into a larger confrontation. Serbia
recognizes that both the OSCE and European security
are at a critical juncture, and is fully committed to
working with the main stakeholders to restore peace
and stability in Ukraine. We are making every effort to
rebuild confidence and trust among participating States
and to restart our work together towards the vision of a
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security community.
I would like to personally acknowledge the
unstinting efforts of the 2014 Swiss OSCE chairmanship,
and of my colleague, Swiss Minister Didier Burkhalter,
to facilitate a political process aimed at de-escalating
the crisis. I would also like to thank Ambassador Heidi
Tagliavini, my Special Representative to Ukraine
and to the Trilateral Contact Group, for her tireless
commitment to helping the parties find the path
towards peace. I also commend the dedicated work of
the Special Monitoring Mission.
Since assuming the chairmanship of the organization
at the beginning of the year, my agenda has been
dominated by the ongoing political crisis and escalating
violence in Ukraine. An increasing number of people
in eastern Ukraine have been impacted by recurring
violence. Waves of civilians have been dislodged from
their homes in a desperate search for safer ground,
accounting for a combined figure of over 1 million
displaced, over 5,000 killed, and more than 12,000
wounded. It is therefore high time for peace to take
hold. The package of measures announced in Minsk
on 12 February is the best available road map to
restore calm to the east of the country. We hope that
the political will displayed by the signatories to the
package of measures in Minsk will prevail in order to

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

ensure that the guns are silenced and human suffering
is eased.
Ukraine is at a critical juncture; what is needed
is full adherence to the ceasefire to allow for the
implementation of the other elements of the package,
notably the withdrawal of heavy weapons and
equipment. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
is ready and willing to play its role to facilitate,
monitor and supervise those crucial activities, in
close coordination with the Trilateral Contact Group.
While the current focus understandably remains on
implementing the military aspects of the second Minsk
agreement, we should not lose sight of the non-military
elements of the arrangement, such as the sorely needed
restoration of socioeconomic ties, local elections and
constitutional reform.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, I wish
to emphasize the importance of coordination and
cooperation between the OSCE and the relevant United
Nations agencies. While the Monitoring Mission is not
a humanitarian presence, it is well placed — given its
large number of monitors in the conflict zone — to
assist in the identification of urgent humanitarian needs.
I welcome the close cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations on the ground on humanitarian
issues and the protection of human rights.
Concerning border-related issues, I would like
to highlight the ongoing importance of the OSCE
Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints
Gukovo and Donetsk. Despite the limited scope of its
operations, it remains the only international presence
on the international Ukrainian-Russian border. The
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission will continue to
conduct patrols to locations on the Ukrainian side of
the border, but increased border monitoring activities
will be dependent upon the security situation on the
ground. I sincerely hope that in the weeks and months
to come we can further build on the measures recently
agreed upon in Minsk, with a view to returning peace
to eastern Ukraine. Serbia’s chairmanship will continue
to do its utmost to help reach that goal.
We must not overlook the detrimental impact of
the crisis in and around Ukraine on the broader OSCE
agenda, in particular on the protracted conflicts in
Moldova and the Southern Caucasus. In particular, as
we prepare to commemorate the fortieth anniversary
of the Helsinki Final Act this year, we need to find
ways to rebuild trust and confidence and to re-engage
in joint efforts to strengthen security across the whole

S/PV.7391

OSCE region. We must keep a close eye on the broader
strategic perspective of European security, and we must
continue to uphold our common values and principles
as enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act and other
landmark OSCE documents. I strongly believe that the
OSCE has a crucial role to play in the overall European
security architecture as an inclusive platform for
dialogue, building trust and bridging the growing EastWest divide. That is captured in the motto of Serbia’s
chairmanship — “Rebuilding trust and confidence in
order to create a positive agenda for the future” — and
we shall spare no effort in pursuing that goal.
In this regard, I welcome the creation of the Panel
of Eminent Persons on European Security as a Common
Project, which was launched in December at the annual
OSCE Ministerial Council in Basel. I am confident
that the Panel has the potential to generate innovative
ideas that can help us recapture the spirit of Helsinki
and I look forward to its recommendations on how to
replace the current culture of confrontation with one of
cooperation and joint action.
Addressing the protracted conflicts is high on
Serbia’s OSCE agenda. All parties should step up their
efforts within the agreed formats to move away from
the current status quo and show more political will
to make progress towards a peaceful settlement. We
believe that small but concrete steps will help improve
trust and confidence among the parties and can pave
the way to address problems effectively.
I am particularly concerned over recent developments
related to Nagorno Karabakh. Last year’s three meetings
between the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan
were an encouraging indication of a renewed appetite
for dialogue. However, since then we have observed
a sharp deterioration of the situation on the ground
and the political process has slowed. Serbia’s OSCE
chairmanship continues to support the efforts of the
Minsk Group co-chairs to facilitate high-level meetings
and to explore, together with the parties, all avenues
that may lead to a long overdue settlement. In Munich
earlier this month, I met with the co-chairs and my
personal representative to discuss further steps to
decrease tensions in the region. On that occasion, I
discussed the situation also with the Foreign Ministers
for Armenia and Azerbaijan. I shall continue my
engagement with the leaders in the region when I visit
them in a few months.
Serbia’s chairmanship continues to support the
OSCE’s close cooperation with the United Nations

15-049913/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

24/02/2015

and the European Union in co-chairing the Geneva
international discussions. Our co-facilitation with
the European Union of a Joint Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanism helps us ensure the safety
and security of people living close to South Ossetia’s
Administrative Boundary Line. The OSCE continues to
support the swift resumption of the meetings of the Gali
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism. We are
keeping the possibility of some form of OSCE presence
in Georgia on the agenda to enhance our support for
both the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism
and the Geneva discussions.

regional organizations acting under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations can make in support of
United Nations-led efforts to fight terrorism. Recent
events have underscored the need for the international
community to remain vigilant and join forces in tackling
this deeply troubling phenomenon. I am pleased to
highlight the OSCE’s close collaboration with virtually
all United Nations entities taking part in the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The benefits of
this kind of collaboration have been plentiful. We are
determined to make the most of all opportunities for
collaboration in the future.

It is unfortunate that the “5+2” process for the
settlement of the Transdniestrian conflict has stalled
in recent months. I intend to try to re-energize the
process. My Special Representative recently visited
Chisinau and Tiraspol precisely for that purpose. The
establishment of the new Government in Moldova will
hopefully also contribute in this regard. Restoring the
regular rhythm of official 5+2 meetings during the
course of the year is the first step. What is needed
now is the political will to move forward and to make
tangible progress. This would benefit the populations
on both sides of the Dniestr/Nistru River.

As we know, the OSCE and the United Nations
share common interests in many parts of the OSCE
area. Increased cooperation will enable us to maximize
synergies globally, regionally and locally. At the same
time, we will use existing resources more effectively and
leverage capacities on the ground, like the OSCE field
operations. At the 2014 Ministerial Council in Basel,
OSCE participating States committed themselves to
countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
as well as kidnapping and hostage-taking for ransom by
terrorist groups. Both ministerial declarations support
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Some years ago, the Western Balkans was riddled
with conflicts similar in nature. Nowadays, however,
cooperation and the solution of problems by peaceful
means prevail. We have decided to include in our
chairmanship, as a matter of priority, the promotion of
cooperation in the Western Balkans, which is telling
proof that, irrespective of height and entrenchment, the
obstacles on the road to peace can be overcome with
political reason and good will.

Thanks to its comprehensive approach to security,
the OSCE not only plays an important role in countering
terrorism, but also helps prevent divisions within
societies and to foster tolerance and non-discrimination.
Our chairmanship will devote special attention to
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and also
to violent extremism and radicalization that lead to
terrorism, particularly the radicalization of youth. We
will convene an OSCE-wide counter-terrorism expert
conference on this issue in Vienna on 30 June and
1 July. The OSCE is well placed to work, through its
participating States and field operations, on promoting
community-based approaches to countering violent
extremism, including through the involvement of youth,
women and civil society. We are also in dialogue on this
issue with our Mediterranean and Asian Partners for
Cooperation.

The OSCE’s activities in Ukraine and in areas affected
by protracted conflicts underline the fundamental role
of regional organizations in maintaining peace and
security in their respective regions, as envisioned in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Serbia’s chairmanship will continue to pursue the
efforts initiated under the Swiss chairmanship to further
operationalize the role of the OSCE as a Chapter VIII
regional arrangement. The OSCE stands ready to make
its experience available to the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. As we speak, the members
of the Panel are visiting Vienna. They will meet with
relevant OSCE interlocutors, including representatives
of the participating States.
The OSCE’s anti-terrorism activities provide
another example of the substantial contribution that
4/22

The partnership between the United Nations
and the OSCE is critical for addressing security
challenges in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian space.
The OSCE engages in political dialogue, coordination
and information exchange with the United Nations on
thematic and regional issues both at the political and
expert level. All OSCE structures work with a wide
range of United Nations entities to enhance security in

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

all three dimensions across the OSCE area and in the
adjacent regions. We highly value this close cooperation.
We are eager to make it more operational and resultsoriented through revamped staff talks, targeted staff
exchanges and the pragmatic implementation of the
existing institutional framework.
The OSCE is also committed to creating new
synergies with the United Nations in key regions of
common interest, including Eastern Europe, South-East
Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia and Afghanistan,
as well as the southern Mediterranean. Both OSCE and
United Nations field operations are precious assets,
and their potential for cooperation should be exploited
to the maximum. The OSCE is eager to intensify its
partnership with the United Nations. I hope that we
can turn creative ideas for cooperation into successful
initiatives.
I thank Council members for their attention and I
am ready to answer any questions they may pose.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Dačić
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council the First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and we thank him
for his comprehensive briefing.
The Russian Federation has consistently championed
the improvement and development of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, first and foremost, its Chapter VIII. It is on this
basis that cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE should be grounded. Cooperation between
the two Organizations is consistent and multilateral
in nature. It encompasses all dimensions of security,
including cross-dimensional issues. The OSCE should
complement the United Nations in dealing with global
issues and assist in the implementation in the areas
of its regional responsibility within the framework of
its mandate of mechanisms that have been agreed at a
global level.
Russia stands ready for constructive cooperation
with the Serbian chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE.

S/PV.7391

We back the policy course adopted by it aimed at
restoring trust and the development of a positive,
forward-looking agenda. We are convinced that it
is going to lead in an impartial way, mindful of the
interests of all participating States, and it can expect
our support in this endeavour. In our view, there is a
need to focus the work of the Organization this year on
continuing — within the framework of the Helsinki+40
process, which we backed from the very outset — the
political dialogue aimed at finding a path to extricate
European security from its crisis, assist in settling the
conflict in Ukraine through participation of the OSCE
in the Trilateral Contract Group and support the work
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
There is also a need to appropriately mark at the OSCE
the seventieth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War.
On the agenda, we also have the very timely topic
of countering terrorism and drug trafficking. In this
context, we deem it important to organize an OSCE
conference on the threat of foreign terrorist fighters as
a way to counter the spread of terrorist and extremist
ideology, prevent the radicalization of the social and
political mood, and combat drug threats stemming
from Afghanistan.
The current situation speaks to the need for
organizing an event on protecting Christians. In this
vein, two meetings on Islamophobia and anti-Semitism
were organized in 2014. It would be useful to hold a
seminar on a comparative analysis of the methodologies
of the Organization and monitoring of elections at the
OSCE, the Commonwealth of Independent States and
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
including an assessment of the conduct of electoral
campaigns and an extension of the comprehensive
analysis of electoral legislation at the OSCE that
was carried out by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) in 2013, upon
the initiative of Russia and Belarus.
The Ukrainian conflict has shown that the OSCE
remains needed in the pan-European area. To fully
realize its potential, the Organization must move
towards a rejection of confrontation and a return of the
discussion to a constructive mode. It is only thus that
we will be able to resolve the accumulated systemic
problems.
The fortieth anniversary of the OSCE this year is
a good opportunity to tackle the issue of updating the
European security system. There is a need to reaffirm

15-049915/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the fundamental principles of the Helsinki Final Act and
the provisions of the Charter for European Security, in
order to take steps towards the implementation of the
principle of the indivisibility of security and implement
States’ commitments not to strengthen their security at
the expense of the security of others. We expect to see
the OSCE return to discussing the issue of forging a
single politico-military-humanitarian-economic space
stretching from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans,
including the issue of incorporating integration
processes — the so-called integrating of integration.
Separately, I would like to touch upon the
importance of relaunching a substantive discussion
on the reform of the OSCE. Russia backed the idea of
the creation of a panel of eminent or wise persons at
the OSCE on issues of European security and sent one
of our leading political experts to participate in it. We
expect that the intellectual contribution of the group
will serve to lend impetus to a resumption at the OSCE
of broad discussion on key issues of security.
On the whole, we welcome the efforts of the OSCE
on assisting and settling the conflict in Ukraine.
In the Contact Group, with the participation of the
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office
in Ukraine, Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, we were able to
achieve positive results. We are satisfied with the
adoption on 12 February of a package of measures on
the implementation of the Minsk agreements and of
resolution 2022 (2015), which backed it up. Now it is
important to achieve the implementation of the package
measures by all the parties of the conflict. In the OSCE,
work has already started on determining modalities and
concrete steps on assisting implementation.
We welcome the active role played by the Special
Monitoring Mission, whose priority areas of work we
see to be monitoring the ceasefire and the withdrawal of
heavy weaponry, assisting in dialogue and investigating
violations of humanitarian law and human rights law.
We are carefully following the Mission’s reports, which
should be free of censorship. What is unacceptable
are cases of pressure being exerted on the monitors.
The security provided for them must be unswerving.
The Special Monitoring Mission plays a key role in
monitoring compliance with the Minsk agreements
of 12 February. The impartial verification activity
of the Special Monitoring Mission must be equally
spread over the whole region comprising the area of the
ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weaponry under
the 12 February agreement. We expect the Mission

6/22

24/02/2015

to continue to fully inform us in its reports of the
situation throughout the entire territory. In that regard,
the Mission will play an important role in closely
coordinating all responsible individuals and structures
from Kyiv, Donetsk and Lugansk.
Nevertheless, there should be no reduction in the
attention paid by the Special Monitoring Mission to
other regions of Ukraine in addition to the south-east.
We back the Special Monitoring Mission with financial
and human resources and we are in favour of expanding
its capacities. We continue to search for specialists for
work in the Special Monitoring Mission based on its
growing needs.
On the whole, we are satisfied with the work of
the OSCE’s monitors at the Russian-Ukrainian border
crossing points in Donetsk and Gukovo. They are noting
the real situation of refugees, and despite fanciful
claims are confirming the absence of the deployment
of any Russian military forces. We see no need for
proposals to expand their mandate to the whole of the
Donetsk-Lugansk section of the Ukrainian-Russian
border, since they are not in keeping with the Berlin
Declaration of 2 July 2014, which was reached by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France, Germany and
Ukraine, for whose implementation the OSCE monitors
were deployed. On this issue, there is a need to reach
agreement with the separatists as one of the parties to
the conflict.
We note the readiness of the OSCE ODIHR to
monitor the elections in the Donbas as soon as all
aspects related to their organization and implementation
in accordance with the package of measures dated
12 February are settled and agreed. The elections will
substantially determine the whole political process of
a settlement. There will be a need to take into account
the fact that a large number of individuals were forced
to leave the conflict zone and now find themselves both
in other regions of Ukraine and abroad.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I very much appreciate the briefing from the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić.
Spain recognizes the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional security
organizations and believes that, under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, this cooperation is

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

called upon to contribute in a marked manner to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
that context, we think that there is broad manoeuvring
room for cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE in the fostering of collective security
in the OSCE region and, in particular, currently, in
contributing to a solution to the conflict in Ukraine,
facilitating humanitarian assistance for the population.
Spain’s commitment to the OSCE goes back to
the origin of the organization. We participated in the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and
signed the Helsinki Final Act, the fortieth anniversary
of which we are commemorating this year. More
recently, as members of the Council know, we presided
over the Organization in 2007. I assure Mr. Dačić that
he can count on the support of Spain in addressing his
priorities, many of which are also our priorities within
the OSCE over which he presides.
First of all, we support the efforts that the OSCE
and its Chairperson-in-Office are undertaking in order
to contribute to a resolution of the crisis in Ukraine.
Spain is aware of the tremendous amount of work that
the Chairperson-in-Office is facing right now as a
result of the clear role he is entrusted with in the current
security crisis, which, I believe, is the most significant
in the OSCE area since the end of the Cold War. Spain
is convinced that the Minsk agreement of 12 February,
which the Security Council endorsed and which includes
an important role for the OSCE — is an opportunity to
move ahead on the road towards a peaceful resolution
to the conflict with respect for the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine. I
should like to thank France and Germany again for
their initiative, which we firmly support.
We also support the worthwhile work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, to which Spain will
continue to contribute human and financial resources.
We believe that the Mission must have the resources
it needs at all times. We also very much appreciate
the excellent work of Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini,
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office to
the Trilateral Contact Group. Moreover, we welcome
the importance that the Chairperson-in-Office will give
to continuing the efforts to resolve prolonged conflicts
in the framework of the formats agreed upon in each
case. We think that his vision of favouring small steps
that build trust between the parties is an essential first
phase before addressing the substantive issues.

S/PV.7391

The fight against terrorism — identified by the
Chairperson-in-Office as one of his priorities — is
another area in which the OSCE can count on our active
cooperation. We are aware of the growing importance
of the transnational threats, such as cyber threats
and organized crime, with its ramifications in drug
trafficking, security and the control of borders. We
would say the same regarding the risk regarding of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In all of
those areas the Chairperson-in-Office will have the
support and know-how of my country.
When it comes to strategies to combat terrorism,
it is essential that we pay particular attention to the
causes and the prevention of violent radicalism. Spain,
along with Turkey, was a driver behind the Alliance
of Civilizations, a crucial tool in promoting dialogue
while fighting against intolerance and radicalization.
The OSCE is participating actively in the Alliance’s
Group of Friends. We must extend political support to
the Alliance, but also provide it with the means that
allow it to work effectively.
Spain also has a long tradition in the area of
mediation and the promotion of dialogue. We welcome
the association framework on mediation between
the OSCE and the United Nations. We wish to make
available to the Chairperson-in-Office our experience
and recent initiatives in that area, in particular with
regard to our mediation initiative in the Mediterranean,
which we launched together with Morocco.
On the political-military dimension, Spain believes
that measures to boost both confidence and security are
an essential element when it comes to military security
within the OSCE space. The conflict in Ukraine has
clearly underscored that military transparency between
and among participating States in the control of weapons
is a matter of particular importance in the framework of
European security.
I should like to conclude by underscoring that the
magnitude of the crisis in Ukraine should not let us
forget that many of the threats to security in the OSCE
area come from the Mediterranean. Spain is committed
to fostering fruitful relations and dialogue with its
Mediterranean cooperation partners. This region offers
a great deal of opportunities, but also a great deal of
challenges.
Mr. Jusys (Lithuania): I wish to welcome Minister
Dačić to the Security Council in his capacity as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

15-049917/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, as well as to thank him
for his briefing.
Forty years ago, the Helsinki Final Act spelled
out fundamental principles governing relations from
Vancouver to Vladivostok: the non-use of force,
non-infringement upon each other’s sovereignty and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the Charter of the United Nations and the fortieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act, we must
recommit ourselves to the constitutional foundations of
the United Nations and the OSCE.
The very foundation of this Organization has been
seriously damaged, as the Charter of the United Nations
and Helsinki Final Act have been violated by Russia’s
military aggression against Ukraine and its occupation
of Crimea. The ink of resolution 2202 (2015) was still
fresh when Russia-backed and -commanded militants
shelled Debaltseve, Gorlivka and Pervomaysk. The
resolution obliges all parties, including Russia, to
implement their commitments under the Minsk
agreement.
The OSCE plays key role. It has the mandate
to facilitate the implementation of all the Minsk
agreements. The challenge is the denial of access. The
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission must be allowed to
carry out its monitoring and verification functions. The
denial of access by pro-Russian militants is a violation
of resolution 2202 (2015).
Effective monitoring of the Russian-Ukrainian
border will be another crucial step, but Russia has so
far denied denied that in order to sustain the war in
eastern Ukraine. In that connection, I wonder, whether
the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office elaborate upon the
possibility of United Nations cooperation with OSCE to
ensure full control over and monitoring of the RussiaUkraine border, of which OSCE currently monitor
80 metres.
The protracted conflicts in Europe have been
simmering for too long. The violent trend in Nagorno
Karabakh is worrisome. There is a clear need for the
highest political involvement in order not to let the
situation spiral out of the control. Russia is using all
means to hinder Moldova’s European integration
process. The 5+2 talks have been taken hostage by
the separatist region of Transnistria and their political
masters by way of conditioning the 5+2 agreements.

8/22

24/02/2015

The so-called agreements between Russia and the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali are a
barely masked annexation and a breach of the principles
of international law and Russia’s commitments made
by President Medvedev in 2008. In that connection,
we wonder if the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office
intends to react to the latest annexation of Georgian
territory — when Russia and Tskhinvali signed the socalled integration agreement?
Fanning protracted conflicts in that corner of
the world should also be seen in the context of the
dismantlement of the European system of conventional
arms control and confidence- and security-building
measures. Lithuania calls for full implementation and
modernization of existing commitments, in particular
the Vienna Document. The OSCE has already made
some tangible progress in its efforts to complement
international processes towards enhancing transparency
in cyber space. It has developed confidence-building
measures to reduce the risks of conflict stemming from
the use of information and communication technology.
The OSCE is also contributing to debates by sharing
best practices and lessons learned.
We commend the focus of the Chairperson-inOffice on implementing the Basel Declaration on
countering foreign terrorist fighters, and on kidnapping
and hostage-taking for ransom. Good coordination
among the the United Nations, the OSCE, NATO and
the European Union is essential. We support it.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of t
resolution 1325 (2000), on women’s role in peace
and security. In order ensure that experiences from
the OSCE region are included in the United Nationscommissioned study, in April Lithuania will hold a
regional meeting on women and peace and security in
Vilnius.
Fundamental freedoms and human rights are under
threat in parts of the OSCE area. OSCE institutions,
along with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, should take a
proactive stance in addressing the human rights abuses
in illegally annexed Crimea, as well as in the areas
controlled by the armed groups in eastern Ukraine. The
United Nations, the OSCE and the Council of Europe
have to be granted secure, safe and unrestricted access
to the whole territory of Ukraine, including Crimea.
The propaganda waged by State-owned media
inciting hatred and aggressive nationalism highlights

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the need to promote tolerance and non-discrimination
and to place fundamental freedoms, especially the
freedom of expression and the freedom of media, very
high on the OSCE agenda.
We look forward to continued cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations in seeking a durable
solution to European security.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting to address the issue of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional bodies and arrangements.
We also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.
In commemorating 40 years of the Helsinki
Final Act, it is appropriate to reflect on the OSCE’s
contribution in ensuring international peace and
security. For Chile, collective action is essential in
tackling both traditional and emerging threats to peace
and security, and it should be strengthened through
cooperation among regional bodies and arrangements.
That is the sense in which my country understands
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Yesterday the Council reflected on history and
reaffirmed the commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations (see
S/PV.7389). My delegation emphasized the full force
of those irrevocable principles in guiding relations
among States. Those values and norms also guide the
OSCE in its work to resolve situations currently posing
a serious threat to regional stability and global security,
including protracted conflicts. We underscore that the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States must be
respected.
In reflecting on the work of the OSCE, Chile
emphasizes the promotion of inclusive development for
the rehabilitation of fractured societies — an idea that
is also related to conflict prevention and peacebuilding
and corresponds to a development model advocating
political stability, democratic governance and
social cohesion. In that context, we reiterate that
mainstreaming of the gender perspective is critical.
The OCSE has contributed to conflict resolution
and stability in Europe and is working to build trust and
confidence in the framework of a positive agenda for
the future. We believe that the organization has assisted
its member States in times of difficulty, including
situations that affected regional stability, security and

S/PV.7391

global peace. In that context, we underscore the support
of the OSCE to democracy, the rule of law and human
rights through its mechanisms and operations on the
ground, on behalf of issues on the Council’s agenda as
well as issues that are not.
Minister Dačić’s briefing made clear that
the main challenge of the organization will be in
maintaining the legacy of dialogue and compromise,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the promotion of
confidence-building measures and the implementation
of the concepts of solidarity, responsibility and
cooperation, which have characterized the organization.
The OSCE remains an essential forum for dialogue and
a stabilizing mechanism — even more so in view of the
challenges facing the region today.
In conclusion, Chile shares the principles, values
and goals that the OSCE follows and promotes, because
we consider it essential that regional mechanisms and
bodies strengthen effective universal action by ensuring
conditions conducive to durable peace and security and
understanding among communities and peoples.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We commend
Minister Ivica Dačić, in his capacity as Chairperson-inOffice, for his efforts to strengthen the range of activities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in promoting regional stability and
security. We acknowledge that it is a challenging role.
As a regional organization, the OSCE has
important functions across the full spectrum of the
Security Council’s mandate — from early warning to
conflict prevention, conflict management and conflict
resolution and tackling root causes. We strongly
support cooperation between the Security Council and
the OSCE, not only in immediate crises but in the full
range of peace and security issues dealt with by the
OSCE.
In particular, we commend and support strongly
the OSCE’s engagement in the situation in Ukraine
and its efforts towards finding a peaceful solution. We
members of the Council must continue to play our role
and our part, including by continuing to apply pressure
on the parties to adhere to the commitments made in
Minsk, most immediately to observe the ceasefire and
withdraw heavy weaponry.
By unanimously adopting resolution 2202 (2015),
the Security Council sent a strong message that it
stands behind the OSCE as it carries out its activities
in Ukraine, particularly the monitoring and verification

15-049919/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

of the ceasefire. It is unacceptable that the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission has not been guaranteed
safe, secure passage to certain areas by the separatists,
including Debaltseve. Without safety guarantees, it
cannot do its job.
We call for all parties to the conflict to ensure safe
and unfettered access by the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission, as provided for under the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minks agreements. Those
provisions must be respected. We reiterate our call on
Russia to use its influence with the separatist groups to
comply with what has been agreed.
Furthermore, in the absence of mandated reporting
from the ground by the Secretary-General, the Special
Monitoring Mission is best placed to provide accurate
reporting on the implementation of the ceasefire and
is an important source of information to enable the
Council to remain properly seized of the situation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the presence of Mr. Ivica Dačić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his
briefing. I congratulate his country on his accession
to the chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2015.
Exactly one year ago, we addressed the situation
in Ukraine for the first time in the Security Council
(see S/PV.7117). The crisis that had begun there
required the OSCE to play its full role, as it was in
a unique position to overcome the concerns of all
involved. In the circumstances, the OSCE was able to
assume its full responsibility by deploying the Special
Monitoring Mission and becoming a party to the Minsk
agreements, which were signed by OSCE Special
Representative Heidi Tagliavini.
Faced with a security and humanitarian situation that
remains alarming, we have a collective responsibility to
spare no effort in silencing the weapons and achieving
an agreement. That was the objective of the approach
chosen by the German Chancellor and the President of
the French Republic a few weeks ago. Last week, in
adopting resolution 2202 (2015), the Council endorsed
the Minsk agreements, putting its full weight and
authority behind the commitments undertaken by the
parties. The OSCE must continue to play its full role
by ensuring the good faith implementation of all of the
Minks agreements, which now from part of a Council
resolution.

10/22

24/02/2015

Yesterday the OSCE received the document
that was agreed to by both the Ukrainians and the
separatists, which disclosed the details with regard to
the withdrawal of heavy weapons. The agreement is a
first positive step in terms of implementing that element
of the Minks agreements. It must be immediately
implemented with the full involvement of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which will
have to control, verify and monitor the withdrawal
of heavy weapons. Its role cannot be limited to joint
patrols along the line of contact, as requested by the
ceasefire control commission, according to information
transmitted by the parties.
This morning in Paris, at a Normandy format
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France, the four
Ministers asked that the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission be strengthened and its mandate extended
with additional personnel, equipment and financing. It
is quite normal that the OSCE should be able in this
task to count on United Nations support. After all, the
United Nations possesses the necessary expertise and
recognized capacities. Channels already exist for both
organizations to offer each other mutual support. We
stand ready to assist both organizations in exploring
ways to improve that cooperation. Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations provides an ideal format
for that dialogue, which the Council has successfully
used in other circumstances.
Above and beyond Ukraine, cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations covers a broad field
of action and various situations — from Central Asia to
Bosnia to Georgia and Kosovo — in which the OSCE
and the United Nations have demonstrated their ability
to work together harmoniously. That complementarity
is primarily based on the multidimensional concept of
security held by the OSCE. Through its field missions, the
OSCE is present in the Balkans, the Caucasus and Central
Asia, and it often works alongside the United Nations in
a number of areas.
In the Balkans, the OSCE, in full cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, enabled voters in Kosovo to participate
peacefully in the elections of June 2014. In addition,
we support the priority Serbia has granted to water
management, a central issue in an area affected by
flooding. The OSCE will tackle that issue during a
forum on economic and environmental issues.

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7391

In the Caucasus, the OSCE works to promote
dialogue and confidence-building. France is especially
committed as a co-Chair of the Minsk Group, alongside
the United States and the Russian Federation, and stands
ready to help Armenia and Azerbaijan to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. We take
note of the commitment of the Serbian Chairperson-inOffice to contribute to the task by promoting dialogue
between the parties.

Accords. France fully supports the dialogue initiated at
the ministerial meeting in Dublin on the political future
of the OSCE within the framework of the Helsinki+40
process. France subscribes to the analysis of the Serbian
chairmanship on the need to strengthen efforts in the
areas of of the rule of law, the freedom of expression,
the freedom of the media and the protection of national
minorities, all issues that the participating States of the
OSCE have been working on for 40 years.

Concerning Georgia, France has lent its support
to the Geneva talks, in which a very important role is
played by the OSCE, side by side with the European
Union and the United Nations. We reaffirm our support
for the territorial integrity of Georgia and reject the
reconciliation agreements signed with the separatist
regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We urge the
parties not to undermine, by any further actions or
words, the dialogue format that has been established.
We also welcome the willingness of the Serbian
chairmanship-in-office to relaunch a discussion on
the OSCE presence on the ground, the institutional
organization of which remains to be determined.

The OSCE covers a vast area from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, an area of shared values, marked by the
conviction that Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security
are closely linked with the promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. All those values are
also at the very heart of the United Nations. I wish to
reiterate to Serbia our wishes for success during its
tenure and to ensure it of France’s support.

Beyond all those issues, we welcome Serbia’s
determination to fully exploit the capacities of OSCE
field missions to ensure that assistance is tailored to the
host country’s needs and provided in a cost-effective
and environmentally friendly manner.
Secondly, reflections on the political-military
aspects within the OSCE framework contribute to an
overall improvement in security, of which the Council
remains the cornerstone. We welcome the commitment
of the Serbian chairmanship-in-office following
Switzerland’s chairmanship, to modernize the 2011
Vienna Document on confidence-building measures and
strengthening security. At the same time, we welcome
its intention to update the OSCE code of conduct on
political-military aspects, which are essential to ensure
democratic control of armed and security forces.
We note with satisfaction the desire of the Serbian
chairmanship to continue discussions on the issues of
reform and governance of security systems, which are
also being evaluated at the United Nations. Similarly, we
impatiently await the events organized by the Serbian
chairmanship on the fight against transnational threats,
a topic on which the Council has also been seized.
The future of the OSCE and its dialogue with the
United Nations will be marked this year by an important
commemoration, the fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić for his briefing as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office. As he has stated,
his chairmanship comes during the worst crisis of
European security since the end of the Cold War. I
should therefore like to focus my remarks on Ukraine
and the OSCE role in that crisis.
Over the past months, the work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission o Ukraine, led by Ambassador
Apakan, has been invaluable in giving some visibility
to the challenges to peace and security that persist in
eastern Ukraine. I pay tribute to the work of the OSCE
and express our full support for the Mission and for
Heidi Tagliavini, the Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office for Ukraine. We believe
that its role should be greatly strengthened.
Last week, the Council adopted resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses a package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreement and underlines
the importance of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire
in eastern Ukraine. However, in the days since the
agreement was signed in Minsk on 12 February, the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has observed
continuous breaches of the ceasefire that threaten to
further destabilize eastern Ukraine and undermine the
Minsk agreements in their entirety.
Minsk called for a ceasefire to begin on
15 February, and for the withdrawal of heavy weaponry
to start on 16 February. Yet within 40 minutes of
coming into effect, the ceasefire was shattered by a

15-0499111/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Russian-backed separatist offensive on Debaltseve.
On 19 February, Ukrainian forces withdrew from the
city. Scores of Ukrainian soldiers were left dead or
injured. The continued presence of Russian military
hardware, including Uragan rocket launchers and
T-72 tanks around Debaltseve, shows that Russia’s
commitment to withdraw foreign military formations,
which was a key element of the Minsk agreement, has
been disregarded. The OSCE reports that convoys are
still crossing the international border and that shelling
persists in Donetsk and Luhansk, in clear violation of
the ceasefire.
There have been some bright spots. We welcome
the exchange of a number of prisoners this weekend
between the Ukrainian armed forces and Russianbacked separatists. However, many more remain
in detention, including the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko. Clearly, that is not yet enough.
We welcome efforts by the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to fulfil its mandate in difficult circumstances.
We were gravely concerned by reports of aggressive
separatist behaviour towards the Mission on 22 February,
when a separatist commander at the Kyivski checkpoint
in Donetsk city threatened to kill the monitors. On the
same day, an unmanned aerial vehicle of the Mission
attempting to monitor compliance with the Minsk
package in the area surrounding the Donetsk airport
was deliberately and consistently jammed. Obstruction
and threats to the Mission are unacceptable. The
Council fully supports the work of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, and we should all unequivocally
condemn the acts of separatists attempting to impede
their work.
The Council has seen that pattern of behaviour
before. We recall how the separatists cynically and
systematically undermined the September Minsk
agreement. We recall how the line of contact was ignored
and redrawn as the separatists seized an additional 550
square kilometres of Ukrainian territory, and we recall
how indiscriminate shelling of civilians brought the
conflict to Mariupol and Volnovakha. As a signatory
to the Minsk agreements, Russia needs to ensure that
the separatist forces respect the ceasefire, and it must
fulfil its own commitment to fully withdraw the heavy
weapons it has supplied them with and its military
formations from Ukrainian territory.
Russian influence can also help expedite the full
exchange of prisoners and guarantee the humane
treatment of any soldiers currently detained. It can
12/22

24/02/2015

also permit the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine to continue its important work in monitoring
the ceasefire and other provisions of the Minsk
agreements. But so far we have seen few signs of
Moscow’s willingness to engage constructively. Russia
has refused to allow the expansion of the OSCE border
observation mission to enable full monitoring of the
international border, leaving hundreds of kilometres
of border open to the flow of weapons and soldiers.
It continues to block the OSCE, including the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the
High Commissioner on National Minorities, from any
access to Crimea.
Nearly a year on from the illegal annexation of
Crimea, we are faced with a crisis that has expanded far
beyond the Black Sea and now threatens the security of
the region and the credibility of the Security Council.
The pattern is familiar from Russian behaviour in
Georgia and Moldova — agreements are reached,
ceasefires arranged, territorial gains consolidated. In
Ukraine, these agreements are systematically breached
within days. The violence resumes, and the push for
more territory begins again. Quite apart from the
terrible human costs, these actions also have profound
consequences for international relations.
It is in no one’s interests to return to an era where
agreements between leaders become worthless.
Organizations like the OSCE and the United Nations
were founded on the principles of dialogue and respect for
peace and stability. The Serbian chairmanship-in-office
has made welcome efforts to bolster respect for OSCE
principles despite continuing efforts by some States to
undermine them. The Security Council must follow this
example and ensure that further breaches of Minsk and
further erosion of the principles that the Council shares
are met with clear consequences. We will be working
with our European Union partners to ensure that
sanctions remain in place until Russia demonstrates a
clear commitment to those fundamental principles.
Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for his briefing and wish him every possible
success in his new mission.
The end of the Cold War saw the emergence
of a new global order where the maintenance of
international peace and security has become more
15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

complex. In a multipolar world, and despite a global
vision and capacity, the United Nations increasingly
requires cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations to achieve the objectives of global peace
and stability. To that end, the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter define the framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and especially with the OSCE, which plays such an
essential role in maintaining peace and security in
Europe.
In that respect, we congratulate the OSCE for
its mediation, assessment and verification efforts
undertaken to minimize the impacts of the crisis
in Ukraine and throughout the region. That work is
carried out in very difficult conditions, such as threats
and kidnapping of the personnel of the organization.
Faced with the resurgence of the fighting following the
adoption, on 17 February, of resolution 2202 (2015),
which supports the package of measures aimed at
the implementation of the Minsk memorandum and
protocol for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Ukraine, Chad encourages the OSCE to step up its
efforts to achieve a ceasefire and a complete cessation
of hostilities as well as the implementation of the
aforementioned agreements.
Chad is concerned by the very serious situation
prevailing in eastern Ukraine, where the civilian
population continues to find itself in the crossfire
between the various combatants. We urge all parties to
show restraint, and we reaffirm that the only solution
of the crisis can be a political one with respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Still on the topic of Ukraine, we commend the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission for its support when
it comes to the crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
with the experts deployed at the crash site to be able
to recover the bodies and investigate the causes of the
accident despite the difficulties encountered in the
conflict zone.
Beyond Ukraine, we welcome the role placed by
the OSCE in terms of national dialogue, peacebuilding,
the rule of law and restoring links of trust in the region.
The conflicts and crises that occurred in Europe during
the 1990s have deeply marked and divided the peoples
and communities of the Balkans. Reforging links
of trust is a fundamental prerequisite for peace and
stability in the region. To that end, we encourage the
OSCE to continue its work in northern Kosovo, on the

S/PV.7391

situation between Armenia and Azerbaijan and on the
resumption of negotiations within the framework of the
5+2 conflict settlement processes with respect to the
Transnistria issue.
In the area of humanitarian assistance, we also
congratulate the OSCE for the assistance provided to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia in May
2014 during the terrible flooding, which left hundreds
of thousands of individuals without shelter or jobs.
Despite the effectiveness of the work carried out by the
OSCE, that work often faces complex and varied threats.
Chad welcomes the fact that among the priorities of the
Serbian chairmanship is the topic of terrorist attacks
and threats, which have had a cruel impact on a number
of countries in the region. Special attention should be
devoted to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and the
resurgence of violent extremism and the radicalization
of conflicts.
In Africa, the strategy in the Sahel region for
the fight against terrorism is one that is aimed at a
comprehensive approach, which includes economic,
social and human aspects, especially targeting youth.
In that regard, we welcome the desire shown and the
efforts made by the OSCE to assist youth in terms of
promoting their employment, their participation in
political life and their inclusion in decision-making
processes in order to counter the recruitment of young
people by terrorist networks and organizations.
Attacks against the media remind us and continue
to demonstrate the need to preserve and promote
the freedom of expression and the protection of
journalists, just like the promotion of the principles
of gender equality, the rights of minorities, tolerance
and non-discrimination. We welcome the taking into
account of threats such as transnational organized crime,
human trafficking and illegal migration, as well as the
issues of combating corruption, water management and
the prevention of natural disasters.Since the topics are
cross-cutting and recurrent throughout a number of
regions in the world, especially in Africa, we encourage
the OSCE to expand its cooperation to other regional
organizations, especially in sharing its experience with
the African Union.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that all
of the achievements and prospects I have mentioned
mean that the OSCE is a key ally of the United Nations.
The search for peace and stability requires knowledge
of the situation on the ground and of the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts. The expertise and the legitimacy

15-0499113/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

of the OSCE, in the year of the fortieth anniversary of
the Helsinki Final Act, consolidates the foundation of
this collective action in favour of peace and stability
throughout the world.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to begin by
congratulating His Excellency Mr. Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, on his assumption of the position of
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2015. We are
indeed grateful for his briefing today on the priorities
of the OSCE under his chairmanship. We commend
his predecessor, Mr. Didier Burkhalter of Switzerland,
who led the OSCE in 2014 with clear priorities for the
advancement of the Organization.
The OSCE is a key component of Europe’s security
architecture. Its importance for building strong and
generally cooperative relationships among its member
States is evident from the briefing we have just heard.
The OSCE is making noteworthy progress as an
regional organization and is cooperating closely with
the United Nations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Nigeria welcomes the high priority that the
Chairperson-in-Office has placed on the agreements
reached between the parties in pursuit of a peaceful
settlement to the crisis in Ukraine. We believe that
the implementation process of the current ceasefire
under the Minsk Agreement can be strengthened with
the support and expertise of the OSCE. We therefore
encourage all parties to cooperate with the OSCE
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. Nigeria would like
to see mediation, dialogue and cooperation accorded
priority in the search for an enduring solution to the
crisis in Ukraine.
Nigeria commends the OSCE for its efforts in
assisting Azerbaijan and Armenia to find a peaceful
solution to the Nagorno Karabakh and South Ossetia
conflicts. We also applaud the Organization’s support
to European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. We urge the OSCE to intensify efforts within
its capacities to assist the United Nations in putting an
end to armed conflicts in the region.
Nigeria supports the OSCE’s work in preventing
terrorism and countering violent extremism and
radicalization. The changing nature of terrorism and
that fact that it is more diffuse, with groups intend of

14/22

24/02/2015

taking advantage of social, economic and governance
vulnerabilities have propelled the Security Council and
the United Nations to recognize that countering violent
extremism is essential for preventing the spread of
terrorism. The OSCE’s community-policing approach
is vital to this end. We take positive note on the outcome
of the two-day workshop sponsored by the OSCE and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, held in Vienna
in October 2014, which focused on the promotion of
a gender-sensitive and human rights-based approach
to fighting terrorism. Nigeria strongly supports any
strategy that empowers women to contribute to efforts
that counter violent extremism and radicalization. We
are firmly committed to the protection of human rights
and civil liberties while fighting terrorism.
Finally, Nigeria commends the OSCE for its
multidimensional approach to security, which underpins
its adaptability and has allowed it to make significant
contributions to peace, security and progress in Europe.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and I congratulate
him on assuming his role as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for this year. We are confident that
Serbia’s effective and strong relations, especially with
States concerned by conflicts within the purview of
the OSCE, will enable him through his chairmanship
to develop communications among the parties and to
create condition conducive to resolving those conflicts
in a comprehensive and cooperative manner.
The OSCE, which enjoys a unique membership,
is able to play a vital and fundamental role, especially
concerning conflicts in the context of European and
Central Asian States. Through its efforts aimed at
resolving conflicts, be they intra-State or regional in
nature, the OSCE has since its establishment sought
to find solutions and to remedy a number of conflicts
which, without the joint efforts of that Organization and
other members of the international community, would
have intensified and continued much longer.
Based on the purposes and objectives of the OSCE,
Jordan supports all forms of cooperation between that
organization and the United Nations in keeping with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
in fulfilment of the Charter objectives, especially those
aimed at making today’s turbulent world more secure,

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

stable and peaceful and welcoming of all persons,
without discrimination or exclusion.
Jordan also supports the role of the OSCE in
maintaining diplomatic channels between parties
to conflict as a forum enabling communication
among the parties. In this context, we look forward
to further progress in efforts to resolve the ongoing
conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia through
the good offices of the OSCE, given its leading role
in dealing with that conflict through the Minsk Group,
by finding a peaceful solution for it that respects the
unity and sovereignty of the internationally recognized
Azerbaijani territories and ends the suffering of the
refugees resulting from that conflict. It should be
based on the various relevant resolutions issued by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the OSCE.
We also commend of the positive role of the OSCE
in the Ukrainian crisis since it began, especially in
facilitating communication and dialogue between
the stakeholders and its efforts to provide tangible
measures on the ground to de-escalate the situation and
pave the way to a peaceful and sustainable resolution to
that conflict.
Promoting human rights, the rule of law and
democracy in post-conflict countries is fundamental
in building sustainable piece in those communities. We
cannot therefore overlook the role of the OSCE in those
fields in addition to numerous efforts and initiatives in
dealing with conflicts and ending tensions, especially
in the Southern Caucasus and Afghanistan, and as
far afield as the Balkans, where we hope that, under
the current chairmanship of the OSCE, there will be
improved good-neighbourly relations.
As Council members know well, the topic of
security, in the broadest sense, is at the top of the
priorities and concerns of the OSCE, specifically when
carrying out its periodic discussions. Among the most
prominent common security threats facing all of us today
are those resulting from terrorism and terrorist entities
which threaten international peace and security. In this
context, Jordan calls for intensified joint cooperation
with relevant organizations, including the OSCE, in a
unified international effort to combat terrorism through
a comprehensive and effective approach to tackle this
scourge and save our world from it.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that
Jordan, as an active Member of the United Nations
and a Mediterranean partner in the OSCE, will spare

S/PV.7391

no effort in promoting cooperation between these
two Organizations and supporting them in all fields,
especially human rights, disarmament, the environment
and dealing with the consequences of natural disasters.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this meeting of the Security Council and thank him
for his briefing outlining the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) priorities under his
chairmanship. We wish Serbia the greatest of success in
discharging these responsibilities.
Cooperation with regional arrangements strengthens
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, prevent conflicts and restore stability in
post-conflict situations. Chapter VI of the Charter of
United Nations provides the appropriate framework
for promoting greater participation of regional
arrangements in matters related to international security
international peace under Security Council authority.
Forty years after the conclusion of the Helsinki
Final Act, an important agreement for stabilizing
peaceful coexistence amid the Cold War, we praise the
important role played by the OSCE in strengthening
security and cooperation in early warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation, proving that the organization continues
to play a key role as a reliable partner of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions.
Angola also praises the important role played
by the OSCE in post-conflict transition processes,
including in supporting the promotion of dialogue
among Kosovo communities, a wide range of reforms
in the Western Balkan countries and the continued
efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group in
assisting Azerbaijan and Armenia in finding a peaceful
solution for the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We also
acknowledge the positive role played by the OSCE in
Ukraine, in particular the role played by the Special
Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office of the
OSCE, Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini, and the Special
Monitoring Mission with a view to reducing tensions
and thus fostering peace, stability and security.
We support the call made by the trilateral contact
group to all sides in the conflict in Ukraine to fully
respect and ensure the safety and security of the
personnel of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission. It

15-0499115/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

is our expectation that the OSCE will be able to make
a positive contribution to the implementation of the
package of measures agreed in Minsk on 12 February
and that the sustained ceasefire will allow for the
further implementation of the package of measures and
the establishment of peace in Ukraine.
We welcome the priorities outlined by Serbia for
its OSCE chairmanship, and we note the particular
importance attached to regional and interregional
cooperation and a balanced approach to the three OSCE
security dimensions, namely, the political and military,
the economic and environmental and the human, with
a view to addressing conflicts and the root causes of
security-related problems.
Angola attaches great value to the mandate of
the OSCE, and we would like to encourage the OSCE
to strengthen cooperation with African regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of
shared responsibility in addressing counter-terrorism,
cybersecurity, transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, human trafficking, trafficking in weapons,
foreign terrorist fighters, violent extremism and
radicalization, in particular youth radicalization.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela thanks
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In his briefing, he reviewed the activities of the
organization he chairs and indicated the priorities of
his country’s chairmanship. My country would also
like to congratualte Serbia for having assumed the
OSCE chairmanship. We are certain that they will be
successful in their leadership with a view to resolving
the conflicts in the region. They can count on my
country’s full support.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
in line with international law. Direct negotiation is
the most appropriate means for achieving that goal.
Likewise, on various occasions, we have underscored
that mediation by regional organizations is one of the
paths towards a negotiated resolution of conflicts, and
we therefore support the efforts of the OSCE. Under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
16/22

24/02/2015

we can promote effective measures to be taken on
the ground through the contribution of regional and
subregional organizations and the OSCE, given the
three security areas it addresses, which are important
tools in responding to international challenges and
fostering stability and peace. That work will always be
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, with regular dialogue
under a system of coordination and complementary
actions in order to avoid any redundancy of effort in
the various areas.
We recognize that the OSCE has played an
important role in the rapprochement of peoples through
dialogue. This is reflected in the fact that, despite the
diversity of its 57 members, they have been able to
overcome differences by employing an inclusive model.
Important consensus has been reached in different
situations that have required such consensus.
We welcome the fact that during his chairmanship
Serbia will continue to work towards a peaceful
resolution of crises, confidence-building measures
and measures to strengthen solidarity, accountability
and cooperation. Those are essential elements in these
times and in situations such as in the dispute between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, where there are Security
Council resolutions that must be implemented within
the framework of a process of negotiations between
the parties. We also recognize the crucial role of the
OSCE in the Ukrainian conflict, in which important
diplomatic initiatives have been taken. Regarding the
situation in the Ukraine, we would like to reiterate our
support for the Minsk agreements signed by the Heads
of State of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany as
the only means of reaching a political resolution to the
conflict. We stress that the ceasefire must be respected,
there must not be an escalation of the conflict and there
must be a focus, beyond extraregional interests, on an
agreement being reached and on the continuity of the
diplomatic efforts for peace. We reject the discourse of
war. We think that an opportunity should be given to
options for the peaceful resolution of this crisis and a
process that will allow for the humanitarian needs of
civilians to be addressed, help to be provided to the
victims of the crisis and its root causes to be addressed.
We must continue to work to prevent conflict to
complement the principles of the OSCE through a
multidimensional approach that deals with current
challenges in the complex and multifaceted international
system. With regard to relations between the OSCE and

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7391

the United Nations, our country supports the process
launched within the organization to make missions
more effective on the ground and bring them in line
with the specific needs of each host country, always
on the basis of the necessary close cooperation with
the United Nations in general and the Security Council
more specifically.

It is imperative that OSCE observers be allowed
to operate safely and be granted unfettered access
to all areas in order to effectively monitor the terms
of the ceasefire and the subsequent withdrawal of
heavy weaponry, foreign troops and mercenaries, in
accordance with the Minsk agreements and resolution
2202 (2014), which we just adopted last week.

In addition, we are sure that the OSCE, under
Serbian leadership, will be able to play a relevant
role in the cooperation to fight against transnational
threats, international terrorism, which we repudiate
in all of its forms, organized crime, drug trafficking,
trafficking in persons and illegal migration, as well as
in promoting tolerance and dialogue among cultures.
It will also help to fight effectively against xenophobia
and discrimination, thus ensuring respect for the rights
of national, religious and linguistic minorities.

Under the terms of the Minsk memorandum, OSCE
observers are supposed to be allowed to monitor and
verify the ceasefire, and monitor and verify security
zones in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation. Under the terms of the Minsk protocol,
OSCE observers are supposed to be allowed to
monitor the ceasefire, monitor the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, and monitor the withdrawal of all foreign
militarized formations, military equipment, militants
and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine. Under
the terms of the Minsk implementation package, OSCE
observers are supposed to facilitate the withdrawal of
heavy weapons, and monitor and verify the ceasefire
regime and withdrawal of heavy weapons from day one.

Finally, we hope that the channels of communication
and coordination with the OSCE can be enhanced to the
benefit of international peace and security.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to welcome the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office,
Minister Dačić, to the Security Council and thank
him for his briefing on OSCE activities under Serbia’s
leadership. The partnership between the OSCE and the
United Nations is critically important, and we welcome
the opportunity to hear about OSCE priorities.
The OSCE has taken on a very difficult and
important set of responsibilities in Ukraine, and we
strongly endorse the Chairman-in-Office’s continued
focus on brokering peace in Ukraine and serving as an
impartial observer to the September 2014 agreements
and the February 2015 implementation package signed
in Minsk.
Of course, OSCE engagement and focus cannot
alone turn commitments on the many papers that have
been signed in Minsk into tangible realities on the
ground, though the OSCE can, uniquely, shed light on
those who undermine the path to peace. So it should
come as no surprise that in addition to repeated attacks
on Ukrainian positions well past the agreed line of
contact, repeated failure to withdraw foreign fighters
and military equipment, and repeated failure to pull
back heavy weaponry, Russian-backed separatists have
also repeatedly frustrated the access of OSCE observers
to the very places they have pledged to ensure such
access. This must end.

And yet, six months after the signing of the Minsk
memorandum and protocol and almost two weeks after
the signing of the Minsk implementation package,
OSCE observers have yet to receive full access from
the separatists to all areas to monitor and verify the
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons and foreign
fighters, or security along the border.
Even today, after laying ruthless and deadly siege
to the city of Debaltseve last week, approximately 30 to
40 kilometres beyond lines established by the September
Minsk agreements, separatists have yet to allow the
OSCE’s special monitoring mission unrestricted and
unfettered access to that city to observe the situation
on the ground. So if we are serious about improving
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations, let us start with this: let us recognize
that the work of the OSCE is critical to making the
agreed ceasefire and any effort at de-escalation stick,
as agreed by all 57 OSCE participating States, and let
us take whatever action is necessary to ensure that all
actors uphold their commitment to provide unfettered
access to the OSCE in eastern Ukraine and that all
parties respect the neutrality of its mission and its
monitors.
Protecting their access is important because reports
of the OSCE’s special monitoring mission to Ukraine
have been a key source for timely and impartial
information on the situation in the Donbas area and

15-0499117/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

notably on incidents such as the downing of the MH-17
plane, the appearance of weapons, troops and support
flowing from Russia into Ukraine, and the shelling of
civilian targets in eastern Ukraine.
We commend the OSCE’s efforts thus far and
encourage the Chairperson-in-Office’s continued
dedication to monitoring the ceasefire and ensuring
that all commitments made in Minsk are upheld, despite
the very difficult conditions in which the mission
works. He has the full backing of the United States,
and, with the adoption of resolution 2202 (2014), the
endorsement of the Security Council to implement the
Minsk agreements.
The United States strongly endorses the Chairman-​
in-Office’s focus on bolstering OSCE field missions
and independent institutions such as the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the
High Commissioner on National Minorities and the
Representative on Freedom of the Media. The OSCE’s
field missions contribute to our collective respect for
human rights and the institutionalization of the rule of
law.
We also welcome the passage by the OSCE
Ministerial Council in December 2014 of two decisions
on countering the phenomenon of foreign fighters
and countering kidnapping for ransom. We support
Mr. Dačić’s efforts as Chairperson-in-Office to
encourage implementation of those important decisions
and to continue the work of OSCE field missions
in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans on
counter-terrorism issues, including countering violent
extremism.
We welcome more OSCE awareness-raising
and capacity-building efforts, which promote a
multidimensional approach to countering violent
extremism, and we encourage collaboration among
stakeholders, particularly in the areas of youth, civil
society, gender, community policing and human-rightscompliant approaches to addressing terrorism and violent
extremism. We also thank the Chairman-in-Office for
planning to host a regional expert-level summit in June
to follow up on all of these efforts.
Lastly but importantly, in recent months we have
seen what should be considered an alarming display
of anti-Semitism in Europe, from the shootings at the
Jewish Museum in Brussels, to the horrific anti-Semitic
attack on a kosher supermarket in Paris, to the recent
wide-scale desecration of a Jewish cemetery. Just as

18/22

24/02/2015

anti-Semitism in Europe is rising, so, too, must our will
to combat and defeat it. For any organization that has
a role in the maintenance of security and peace must
also confront the kind of hate that undermines both,
and anti-Semitism, as history has shown time and time
again, is certainly that.
As such, it is all the more important that the
OSCE has undertaken the important work that it has
to address anti-Semitism and intolerance, including its
declaration to enhance efforts to combat anti-Semitism,
adopted at the Basel Ministerial as a follow-up to the
commemoration in November of the tenth anniversary
of the OSCE Conference on Anti-Semitism in Berlin.
And yet, despite all that has been unfolding
across Europe at this 10-year anniversary meeting of
the historic inaugural session, a third fewer countries
showed up at the 2014 Conference. Of course, meetings
and declarations will never alone quash hate, but they
are important to focus our collective efforts, galvanize
our collective will and force our collective action.
The United States urges the Chairperson-in-Office to
continue the OSCE’s critical work on this issue, and we
encourage OSCE participating States to help uphold the
commitments enshrined in the declaration.
The United States, as an active member of the
OSCE, remains fully committed to the important work
of the organization. A strong OSCE is a good partner
for the United Nations and a good partner in our cause
of championing fairness, security, justice and peace.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other speakers in
welcoming His Excellency Ivica Dačić, Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council today. I
wish to congratulate him on his assumption of the
post of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2015,
and we are grateful for his in-depth briefing, especially
in outlining the priorities of the OSCE under Serbia’s
chairmanship.
As the largest regional security organization,
consisting of 57 countries of Europe, Central Asia
and North America, the OSCE plays a crucial role in
contributing to peace, security and stability in Europe,
as envisaged by Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE to continue close

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

cooperation with the United Nations in upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
As mentioned by Mr. Dačić, this year marks the
fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act, which laid
down principles to guide relations among participating
States. Those principles, which include sovereign
equality, refraining from the threat or use of force,
the inviolability of frontiers, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention in internal matters and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
remain as relevant today as they were 40 years ago.
In upholding the aforementioned principles, which
provide the basic tenets for the work of the OSCE, we
welcome the efforts made by the Serbian chairmanship
to focus on dialogue and compromise, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, confidence-building, solidarity,
responsibility and cooperation. We also believe that the
motto of the Serbian chairship — “Rebuilding trust and
confidence in order to create a positive agenda for the
future” — is very timely, in view of the divisions and
numerous challenges facing the region today.
Three weeks ago, the Munich Security Conference
honoured the OSCE with an award for its outstanding
contribution to peace, stability and security in Europe,
and particularly for its efforts regarding the Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, as well as its diplomatic
attempts to end the crisis there. We congratulate it
on a well-deserved award, especially in view of the
dangerous situation on the ground in eastern Ukraine.
Malaysia would also like to take this opportunity to
express its sincere gratitude to the OSCE for facilitating
the recovery and investigation efforts related to the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in eastern
Ukraine. Last year, with OSCE assistance, the Dutchled recovery and investigation teams managed to get
access to the site, despite the ongoing fighting, in order
to recover the wreckage and the remains and belongings
of the victims.
We reiterate our commitment to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Ukraine, based on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, including respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We fully support the role of the OSCE in Ukraine, now
even more visible with the signing on 12 February of
a package of measures for implementing the Minsk
agreements that tasks the OSCE with monitoring and
verifying compliance with the agreements. We are very
concerned about the fact that the OSCE has been denied
entry into some conflict areas in eastern Ukraine.

S/PV.7391

We strongly urge all relevant parties to abide by the
obligations laid down in the Minsk agreements and
endorsed by the Council, and to cooperate fully with
the OSCE in order to enable it to carry out its mandate.
We take note of the fact that the Western Balkans is
a key priority for the Serbian chairmanship of the OSCE.
We fully support the OSCE’s continued presence in
the Western Balkans, including its missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Kosovo, in support of the postconflict transition processes. By building institutions
and promoting reconciliation, the OSCE has been vital
to enabling the countries of the Western Balkans to
make progress with their political, judicial, electoral,
economic and social reforms.
Concerning various protracted conflicts, including
those in Central Asia, the Southern Caucasus and
Moldova, we hope that the Serbian chairship’s focus
on dialogue and mediation will provide a new impetus
for resolving the conflicts that is consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and various United Nations resolutions, as well as the
Helsinki Final Act.
We fully agree on the urgent need to combat
terrorism, extremism and radicalization as one of the
OSCE’s key priorities. We also welcome the statement
made by Mr. Dačić at the special meeting of the OSCE
Permanent Council in Vienna on 15 January, in which he
said that our societies should remain united in the face
of attempts to create divisions on the basis of religion.
At the same meeting, he also called on Governments
to take the necessary measures not only to counter
terrorism and provide their citizens with security, but
also to foster tolerance and non-discrimination in their
societies.
Malaysia hopes that the Serbian chairmanship of
the OSCE will further intensify its efforts to combat
all forms of racism, xenophobia and discrimination,
including Islamophobia. Malaysia has long called for the
voices of moderation to unite and prevail against those
espousing hatred, violence and extremism. We reaffirm
our strong and unequivocal condemnation of all violent
acts, methods and practices of individuals or groups
against innocent civilians, with the intent to create fear
and terror for religious, political or ideological reasons.
We strongly believe that terrorism must be addressed
in a comprehensive manner and not necessarily through
the use of force alone. Countering it effectively requires
a multifaceted approach that addresses the underlying
factors that breed terrorism and extremism. In that

15-0499119/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

regard, we stand ready to support the work of the OSCE
in combating terrorism and extremism.
In conclusion, we wish Serbia success with its
chairship for 2015. As an outsider, since Malaysia
is not a member of the OSCE, we have observed that
the organization has played a rather quiet, behindthe-scenes role in resolving conflicts and contributing
to peace, stability and security in Europe. However, that
approach has proved effective time and again, since it
builds trust and confidence, whether by engaging with
stakeholders, mediating between conflicting parties
or building institutions in post-conflict societies. We
greatly appreciate the OSCE’s valuable contribution
to the maintenance of peace and security and its close
and complementary relations with the United Nations.
We would like to assure the OSCE of our continued
commitment to supporting its efforts under its Serbian
chairship for 2015.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
I would like to thank Mr. Dačić, Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for attending
today’s meeting. I listened carefully to his statement.
In recent years, the OSCE has taken active measures
in conducting preventive diplomacy, enhancing
security and mutual trust, mediating regional disputes
and fighting terrorism. China would like to express
its appreciation for that, and we encourage the OSCE
to continue its efforts to settle disputes peacefully
through good offices and mediation, in order to play a
constructive role in the maintenance of peace, stability
and security. The Security Council and regional
organizations each enjoy unique advantages and
strength when it comes to maintaining international
peace and security. China supports the quest of the
United Nations and the Council, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, to continue to deepen
their cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in a way that complements one another’s
efforts, enabling them to work together to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter and the basic
norms of international relations.
With regard to the issue of Ukraine, the Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2202 (2015)
unanimously, in a show of firm support on the part of
the international community for the diplomatic efforts

20/22

24/02/2015

of the leaders of Russia, France, Germany and Ukraine,
and for a political solution to the issue. In order to
address that question, it is imperative that we adhere to
the overarching premise of a political settlement, which
is necessary if the legitimate rights and aspirations
of the various ethnicities in various parts of Ukraine
are to be fully accommodated. Attention could also
be paid to resolving the reasonable concerns of the
parties involved, so as to achieve a balance of interests.
What is needed is a comprehensive, balanced and
durable political settlement, whose achievement is in
the fundamental interests of the parties concerned.
China calls on them to act according to the provisions
of resolution 2202 (2015), to fully implement the
consensus arrived at among the four leaders, and to
work to swiftly ease the situation in eastern Ukraine,
in order to achieve that country’s peace, stability and
development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make two brief comments.
First, some members of the Council have abused
today’s meeting, which is supposed to be devoted
to the activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Particularly unfortunate
was the statement made by the representative of
the United Kingdom, which was devoted entirely to
Ukraine. Our British colleague once again painted
a very one-sided and distorted picture of what is
happening. It is apparent that the United Kingdom
does not have a complete understanding of the OSCE’s
role, and that is clearly a result of the fact that Britain
is rapidly losing its international position, including
on the European continent. The representative of the
United States made a statement in a similar key, and
that country’s role throughout the Ukrainian crisis has
been exclusively destructive. All we can do now is hope
that the United States will not try to put a wrench in the
works of the Normandy process.
Secondly, these days such comments are often used
to achieve a desired political and psychological effect.
The conflict in Ukraine is the most complex crisis
Europe has seen since the end of the Cold War. It is
clear that the crisis needs to be assessed in a calculated
way. Let us recall that, even after the end of the Cold

15-04991

24/02/2015

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

War, war broke out in the territory of the former
Yugoslav Republic and NATO bombed Serbia. In many
cases, the causes for such crises are the very forces
that provoked the crisis in Ukraine. Unfortunately, the
geopolitical ambitions of a number of forces precluded
the flowering of a harmonious political order on the
European continent following the end of the Cold
War. We need to draw lessons from that. The OSCE’s
mission is to play a very important role in the process
of such rethinking.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked to speak for a second
time.
Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): In response to the
point made by our Russian colleague, the focus on
Ukraine reflected the serious nature of the situation
on the ground there, precipitated by Russia’s actions
and support for the separatists involved in the conflict.
Our calls throughout have been clear. We have called
on all sides to observe the ceasefire and implement in
full the arrangement set out in the Minsk agreements
of September last year and 12 February just past.
Where we see flagrant and one-sided breaches of those
arrangments, we are duty-bound to draw them to the
attention of our colleagues on the Council at briefings
such as these.
As my Permanent Representative said, only
40 minutes after the ceasefire came into effect
separatists backed by Russia launched a final, all-out
assault to secure the town of Debaltseve, something
they had clearly been aiming for in the days just before
the ceasefire came into effect.
The provisions that will facilitate a resolution of
the conflict in eastern Ukraine are clearly laid out in
the Minsk agreements. We call again on all parties,
including Russia, to play their part in implementing
those agreements fully, verifiably and transparently,
and in supporting efforts to de-escalate tensions and
bring the violence to an end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to Mr. Dačić to respond to the comments and questions
raised.
Mr. Dačić (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I would like to thank all
Security Council member States for the support they
have expressed to our chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

S/PV.7391

I would also like to reiterate our wish to cooperate
as closely as possible with the United Nations, and
therefore value this very beneficial and important
meeting. I express my full willingness and readiness,
along with those of our Secretary General, Mr. Zannier,
and my Special Representatives in various areas, in
particular my Special Representative in Ukraine, to
participate in the work of the United Nations and to
brief the Council on the situation on the ground. The
OSCE is the only organization present in Ukraine. That
is why the support of the United Nations is of crucial
importance to OSCE activities and why I welcome the
holding of this meeting.
Without mentioning all of the areas of OSCE
engagement, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to several topics on our agenda, including the campaigns
against anti-Semitism and human trafficking, and water
management. I will not mention the various frozen
or protracted conflicts except to say that we will use
existing means to resolve such situations as those in
Nagorno Karabakh, Moldova and Georgia.
I would also like to reiterate that I, as Chairperson-inOffice, together with my team, intend to visit all areas
that have an OSCE presence. I have already visited the
OSCE missions in the the Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and, strange as it may
seem, Serbia as well. Against that backdrop, I wish to
familiarize myself with all existing issues. I intend to
visit the OSCE missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Albania, Kosovo, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, of course Ukraine, and the five central Asian
countries of Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan,
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.
I recall that Switzerland assumed the chairmanship
of the OSCE in 2014; before Switzerland, Ukraine
held the chairmanship. The 2013 Ministerial Council
was held in Kyiv only two or three months before the
eruption of the crisis in Ukraine, and there was no
notion or early warning that the crisis would happen.
That is a demonstration of how complex the situation
is and how difficult it is to plan any activity in an
organization such as the OSCE.
We have adopted an budget enabling us to carry out
all our activities on the ground. I am grateful for the
work of the OSCE troika — Germany, Switzerland and
ourselves — and the Normandy group, which includes
Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France. The Normandy
format meeting took place this morning in Paris, and
any participation, whether via video-teleconference,

15-0499121/22

S/PV.7391

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

conference call or personal presence involving either
Ms. Tagliavini or Mr. Apakan, is crucial to enabling us
to implement the Minsk agreements. I welcome these
agreements and hope that some progress will be made
on the ground.
I discussed the topic yesterday with my counterparts
from Russia and Ukraine, Mr. Lavrov and Mr. Klimkin.
The mandate of the Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine will come to an end in late March. We have
already started to reflect on a new mission, and two
ministers have agreed that the current Mission could
be extended. The mandate is currently 6 months; we
propose that it be extended to 12 months. We also
discussed whether there are a sufficient number of
observers, and touched on the topic of equipment, of
which there was some mention in accordance with the
agreement, but which we do not possess. Those include
satellite images, drones and armed vehicles. We also
broached topics such as the budget, and touched on
the issue mentioned by the Lithuanian representative,
namely, the mandate of the mission. It remains to be
seen whether the scope of the mandate will be changed
or remain the same. We will do that in accordance with
the agreements under the Normandy format.
I would just like to remind the Council of the scope
of responsibility of the Special Monitoring Mission. It is
not only to verify the ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy
weapons or the exchange of hostages and prisoners;
it will also have to address the law on amnesty and
pardons, the reconstruction of social and economic
ties, and issues related to gas and electricity, pensions,
salaries and trafficking, as well as political issues that
were preconditions to achieving full normalization.
The agreement envisaged that the Ukrainian authorities
would take control of the border the first day after local
elections were held in Donetsk and Luhansk, based
on agreements that remain to be concluded through
mediation under the auspices of the Trilateral Contact
Group. The completion of the dialogue, the agreements
reached therein, the drafting of the constitution and
the role of the OSCE are all highly significant on
the ground. That is why various task forces must be
established to take charge of the different issues.
I believe that the mission requires full support.
There are two missions on the ground. The first is the
Special Monitoring Mission, headed by Mr. Apakan;

22/22

24/02/2015

the second is the Observer Mission at the Russian
Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk, headed by the
French diplomat, Mr. Picard. The Swiss Ambassador,
Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, is my Personal Representative
to the Trilateral Contact Group. It is very important
for us to enjoy the support of the United Nations and
the Security Council to provide the authority to those
missions and thereby enable them to conduct their work
in an impartial and fair manner.
We have not made significant progress regarding
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, but
our missions need to verify that. We have been told that
the parties have started to implement the ceasefire in
Donetsk and Luhansk and to withdraw weapons. That
is why I called on the parties to provide access to our
monitors so they can verify the actions on the ground to
determine the truth of the matter. I raise this issue only
to illustrate the difficulty of carrying out a mission that
is neither military nor combat in nature, but civilian.
At the same time, not all members of the Security
Council or other United Nations States Members
are aware of the enormous size of the territory of
Ukraine. It is the second largest country in Europe.
The contact line is 480 kilometers long. The part of the
border between Ukraine and Russia that is not under
the control of the Ukrainian forces is more than 400
kilometers long. Our mission of 350 personnel needs
to be functional and able to conduct its activities. If the
political will exists to sign the agreement and adopt the
implementation plan, we will make every effort to fully
implement the agreement.
I would like to again thank the Council for its
assistance in that regard. The OSCE considers the
support of the United Nations on the ground to be of the
highest importance to ensuring its ability to perform
its functions and to de-escalate the crisis in Ukraine,
although I do not wish to downplay other ongoing
problems. I, my Secretary General and my Special
Representatives are ready to respond to the Council’s
call to participate in debates such as this or on any of
topic of great importance to our organization.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

15-04991
