General Assembly-Twenty-second Session

54

I
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of th~ people of
Ifni to self-determination in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Ifni and endorses the consensus
adopted by the Special Committee on 14 September
1%7·
3. 'Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government of Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of
the indigenous population, the pr~cedures for t~~ transfer of powers in accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Invites the administering Power to continue the
dialogue which has begun with the Government of Morocco, with a view to implementing the provisions of
paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of Ifni
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session;

II
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Spanish Sahara to self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara and endorses
the consensus adopted by the Special Committee on
14 September 1967:
3. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sahara and
in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania and
Morocco and any other interested party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum under United
Nations auspices with a view to enabling the indigenous
population of the Territory to exercise freely its right
to self-determination, and, to this end:
(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia, the return of exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum ;
( c) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sahara;
( d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to
participate actively in the organization and holding of
the referendum ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately the special mission
provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite its dispatch to
Spanish Sahara for the purpose of recommending prac-

tical steps for the full implementation of the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, and in particular for determining the extent of United Nations participation
in the preparation and supervision of the referend_um •
and submitting a report to him as soon as possible
for transmission to the Special Committee ;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session.
1641st plenary meeting.
19 December 1967.

2355 (XXII). Question of Equatorial Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Equatorial Guinea,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the administering Power.
Having considered the chapter of tlie report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples rela ting to Equatorial Guinea,211
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further the provisions of its resolutions
2067 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 2230 (XXI) of
20 December 1966,
Having noted the constitutional conference which
opened in Madrid on 30 October 1967,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Equatorial Guinea;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Regrets that the administering Power has not yet
set a date for the accession of Equatorial Guinea to independence in accordance with the wishes of the people
of the Territory;
4. Reiterates its request to the administering Power
to ensure that the Territory accedes to independence as
a single political and territorial entity not kiter than
July 1968;
5. Invites the administering Power to implement
as soon as possible the following measures :
(a) To ensure respect for all democratic freedoms;
( b) To institute an electoral system based on universal adult suffrage and to hold, before independence,
a general election for the whole Territory on the basis
of a unified electoral roll ;
(c) To transfer effective power to the government
resulting from this election ;
6. Urges the administering Power to reconvene the
constitutional conference referred to above in order
to work out the modalities of the transfer of power,
2e Ibid., chapter VIII.

Resolatiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

including the drawing up of an electoral law and of
an independence constitution ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action, in consultation with the administering
Power and the Special Committee, to ensure the presence of the United Nations in the Territory for the
supervision of the preparation for, and the holding of,
the election envisaged in paragraph 5 ( b) above and
to participate in all other measures leading towards the
independence of the Territory;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the administering Power
and to report to the Special Committee on its implementation ;
9. Decides to maintain the question of Equatorial
Guinea on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
2356 (XXII). Question of French Somallland
The General Assembly,
Having._ considered the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti),
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2228 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djibouti), 27
Considering the circumstances in which the referendum organized by the administering Power took place
on 19 March 1967,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Regrets that the administering Power has not cooperated with the United Nations in the application
of resolution 1514 (XV) and did not implement General Assembly resolution 2228 (XXI) ;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to create the
political conditions necessary for accelerating the implementation of the right of the people to self-determination and independence, including the full exercise of
political freedoms, and to allow the return of all refugees to the Territory;
4. Urges the administering Power to co-operate fully
with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and with the United Nations in accelerating the process
of decolonization in the Territory and to grant independence to the inhabitants at an early date;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in French Somaliland
(Djibouti) and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
6. Decides to keep the question of French Somaliland
(Djibouti) on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
21 Ibid.,

chapter XII.

55

2357 (XXII). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands,
Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat, New
Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland,
Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Cocos_ (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Tokelau Islands,
Turks and -Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of tlw
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 28
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1~10 1 \'. \' 11 1
of 17 December 1962, 1956 (XVIII) of 11 December
1963, 2066 (XX) of 16 December 1965. 20(19 ( \'. \'.) of
16 December 1965, 2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
2232 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2288 ( XXl I) of
7 December 1967,
Noting the constitutional changes that were introduced in February and March 1967 in the Territories
of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla and St. Lucia and that are envisaged for the
Territory of St. Vincent,
Noting further the decision taken by the Special Committee that General Assembly resolution 15 I 4 ( X\')
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions continue to apply to these Territories,
Deeply concerned at the information contained in the
report of the Special Committee on the conti11uati<1n of
policies which aim, among other things, at the disruption of the territorial integrity of some of these Territories and at the creation by the administering Powers
of military bases and installations in contravention of
the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Deplorinp the attitude of some administering I 'owers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visiting missions to visit these Territories,
Conscious that these situations require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations i11 the
achievement by the peoples of these Territories of their
objectives, as embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of f 11dependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of geographical
location and economic conditions of some of these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the I mplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of I112s Ibid., chapters XI, XIV to XVIII, XX and XX!ll
