UNITEDNATJIONS

SECURITY

COU

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-THlRD

YEAR

2107”

MEETING:

NEW

t’m41981
2

14 DECEMBER 1978

pl;“\

c;~Il.k.i~,.. i’l3’24’

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 107) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12946 and Add.1)
. . . . , , . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . .

1

SlPV.2107

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2107th

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday;14
Mr. Riidiger VON WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

B-&dent:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2107)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12946 and Add.1)
The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l 2946 and Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT: I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion. I
therefore propose, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
this proposal.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides (Cj~prus),
Mr, Papouh’as (Greece) and Mr. Era@ (Turkey) took places
at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of Turkey, in which he requests that Mr. Nail Atalay should
be invited to participate in the discussion. I therefore
propose, if I hear no objection, to extend an invitation to
Mr. Atalay in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
It was so decided.

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus [S/12946 and Add.11 for the

December

1978, at 5 p.m.

period 1 June to 30 November 1978. In addition, the
Council has before it the text of a draft resolution
contained in document S/12968, which was drawn up
during the course of consultations among the members of
the Council.
4. I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
I7ze draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none. 1
One member (China) did not participate in the voting,

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I call.
6. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, I wish, in the
first place, to thank you and the members of the Council
for inviting me to participate once again, on behalf of my
Government, in the discussions on the item. I would also
take this opportunity to express to you our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the office of
President. We feel certain that your high qualifications,
your diplomatic skill and your experience will serve the
Council well in the conduct of its deliberations.
7. It is also my pleasant duty to express once again, on
behalf of my Govertiment, our deep appreciation and
feelings of gratitude to the Secretary-General for his tireless
and devoted efforts in promoting the objectives of the
United Nations and in the cause of peace. He has once again
demonstrated his wisdom and his humanity. Our grateful
thanks go also to his collaborators, both in New York and
in Cyprus. We are indebted to Ambassador Galindo Pohl for
the objectivity of his approach, his diplomatic skill and,
more particularly, his dedication to the principles of the
Charter.
8. I should be remiss if I did not mention General Quinn,
who has been devoting so much effort to dealing with this
situation. Our.thanks are due also to the officers and men
working under him in the interests of peace in Cyprus, at a ,,
time when the whole cause of peace is in such danger in
that part of the Middle East. Our particular gratitude goes
to the Governments which make the United Nations
operation in Cyprus possible through their contributions in
men and money, thus demonstrating a praiseworthy dedication to the concept of peace-keeping through the United
Nations.
9. Perhaps on this occasion I might commend
Mr. Gleiasner for his dedicated services, I understand that
1 SW resolution 443 (1978).

he will be leaving us to become Ambassador to the United
Kingdom, and we congratulate him.

to be equal to those of their counterparts in the Greek
Cypriot community.” [Ibid., para. 38.1

10. The Council meets today for the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) for a further six-month period, with
the consent of the Government of Cyprus, as required by
the original Security Council resolution on the establishment of UNFICYP
and its functions [resohtion
186 (1964)/. The Force is doing very good work, in spite
of difficult circumstances. The function of the peacekeeping operation is, inter alia, to guard the cease-fire line
and the buffer zone, and also to afford protection to the
civilian population.

14. That shows the difference in the treatment of
UNFICYP by the two sides and in their attitude towards
human rights, and, although stated in very moderate
terms-because, probably, it could not be otherwise-it is
indicative of the situation.
15. I shall not go into further details on that score because
it is unnecessary. However, what I should like to emphasize
in this respect is that the functions of UNFICYP are of
course not part of the Charter; they are practised on a
pragmatic basis and fall far short of a United Nations force
for peace, which is provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter and intended to give validity and effect to the
decisions of the Security Council. UNFICYP is doing what
it can, but with a mandate so restricted that it cannot help
the situation. Hence we have in Cyprus a recurring situation
of the presence of the peace-keeping force, whereas what
was needed wasa United Nations force to put an end to the
aggression and the invasion by implementing the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly. And
that is a failure not only with regard to Cyprus; it is the
main problem of the United Nations. Cyprus happens to be
a very obvious example of General Assembly resolutionslike resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was adopted unanimously, with the vote of Turkey and without any abstentions, and endorsed unanimously by the Security Council,
and I challenge anyone to. cite another resolution on a
particular dispute and not on a global issue which was
adopted without a single vote against or a single abstention-that have been ignored, by-passed and trodden upon
by the invader, who is proud of it and finding full support
in this attitude in a manner that is astonishing and that will
be an historically important aspect of the function of the
United Nations.

11. The Secretary-General’s report indicates that
“IJNFICYP continues to use its best efforts to discharge
its functions with regard to the security, welfare and
well-being of the Greek Cypriots living in the northern
part of the island.” [S/12946, para. 10.1
Of course, it is also performing in the same sense in the
Government-controlled area with regard to the protection
of Turkish Cypriots, and I shall come to that later. The
report goes on to say:
“UNFICYP accessto that area”-the Turkish area, that
is, the area occupied by the Turkish army-“remains
restricted, but humanitarian work has been carried out on
a reasonably satisfactory scale. , . . There has been an
increase in the transfer of Greek Cypriots from north to
south . . . a total of 150 having moved during the period
under review .” [Ibid. J
12. I should like to make it clear that what we have here is
the fact that UNFICYP has no freedom of movement and
that it cannot carry out its duties, as stated in other parts of
the report. We have reports that, although there was some
amelioration, there has now been increased harassmentrobberies, killings and threats to life-which is making life
for the remaining Greek Cypriots in the north very
difficult. That is why mention is made that there has been
an increase in the number of those moving to the south.
There are concrete cases-very important cases-showing
that, when they report their suffering from robberies,
threats, the throwing of stones and general harassment to
the Turkish police, the victims who complain are arrested
and beaten severely, so that, in the end, there can be no
complaint. That is the situation in the north.

16. That has been recurring for over four years now:
repeated resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council are being ignored. Is this a matter of little
concern for the Council? It is astonishing if it is, and I
should really like note to be taken that, no matter what the
afterthoughts of any member of the Council, the fact
remains in clear-cut letters that the resolutions of the
Assembly and the Council are ignored.
17. The General Assembly at its last three regular sessions
has therefore taken particular care to call on the Security
Council to implement its resolutions. In 1976 the Assembly
began by expressing the hope that the Council would
implement its resolutions by the adoption of practical
measures; then, in 1977, it went on from hope to make that
a recommendation to the Council; and, in 1978, it not only
recommended this implementation but added a time-limit
for accomplishing it. Hence world public opinion is
increasingly concerned not merely with regard to the
situation in Cyprus, but with the implementation
of
Security Council resolutions, because, without such implementation, the authority and the validity of the United
Nations are non-existent.

13. Now, Iet us see what the situation is in the south. In
the same report it is stated, with regard to Turkish Cypriots
in the south, that

/ j
/ :
/

/

3:
,I
:!

“i
/

“UNFICYP continues to take the responsibility of
making periodic visits to some 200 Turkish Cypriots
living in the south to assessany assistancethey may need
and to help maintain some contact with their relatives in
the north. To date, these Turkish Cypriots have given
UNFICYP to understand that they are satisfied with their
living conditions. A check on their dwellings was carried
out during the month of September and these were found

18. in this respect I wish to quote from the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the work of the Organization, in which
2

he distinctly says that this non-implementation
of the
resolutions and the lack of international security has tended

solution should be such as to preserve the independence,
territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of the Republic
of Cyprus. In order to ensure this, account must be taken
of the United Nations resolutions. There certainly may be
negotiations, and we should welcome negotiations, but they
cannot ignore the resolutions, they must be within the
framework of the resolutions. Those resolutions distinctly
refer to the speedy withdrawal of the foreign occupation
forces, the cessation of intervention, the return of the
refugees and, on the constitutional matters, negotiations
between the two communities. Constitutional matters are
certainly matters of concern to the people of Cyprus as a
whole and appropriately a matter for discussion between
the two communities, but negotiations on the question of
the foreign occupation of the territory of Cyprus, which
cannot be ignored in any solution of the problem, are a
matter which involves Turkey, and Turkey should be a
party to any such negotiation. Of course, we know that
behind the Turkish Cypriots there is Turkey, and that they
are acting as the instruments of Ankara, but we want
Turkey also to be responsible for the agreements that are
reached. We have had the experience of the solemn
agreement reached in the presence of the Secretary-General
on 2 August 1975 [S/11789, annex]; that agreement
reached by the Turkish Cypriots was reneged and negated
by the actions of the Turkish Army in expelling the
remaining Greek Cypriot population in the north instead of
giving it freedom of life, security and all the amenities
provided for in the agreement.

“to downgrade the prestige and effectiveness of the
Organization and to detract from its primary purpose as
the impartial and respected guarantor of international
peace and security. The practical result has been that
some small States no longer”-and these are his words
now after some years of experience in the United Nations
and particularly after the case of Cyprus-“turn to the
United Nations as the protector of their sovereign
lights.“2
That is very pertinent to the present case. The SecretaryGeneral went on to say:
“For this and other reasons, there are now, as always,
conflict situations which Governments do not wish to
bring before the United Nations” because there is no
effectiveness in the Security Council.
“Recent developments in the Horn of Africa and in
Zaire are good casesin point. While I do not question the
reasons why Governments have not seen fit to bring such
problems to the United Nations, I do believe that when
problems of such magnitude do not come before the
world Organization, and when they cannot be dealt with
effectively by the appropriate regional organization, they
constitute a potential risk to international peace and
security which is of legitimate concern to all Governments.“2

21. We see therefore that, although Turkey is behind the
Turkish Cypriots, it does not accept the commitments
undertaken by them. Therefore in any future negotiationswhich I should welcome-it
must be understood that
whatever is agreed on is guaranteed by Turkey, which will
not afterwards say yes or no according to its wishes. Of
course, as I have said, the involvement of Turkey should
have been as a party to the negotiations, since it bears the
responsibility. No one else but Turkey-not
Turkish
Cypriots-can be made responsible for the invasion of
Cyprus and for the occupation of the territory by a foreign
Power.

19. I dare say that the question of Cyprus has been
pre-eminently the problem that has made the impotence of
the Security Council apparent to the world. It is obvious
blecause it is stated here, and these reports by the
Becretary-General never appeared before; they have only
appeared in the past three years, in 1975 and 1976, then
more in 1977 and more in 1978. I am now arguing the
cause not of Cyprus but of the United Nations. When the
United Nations was established, its main purpose was the
maintenance of international peace and security under the
Charter. This appears in Article 1 of the Charter and in the
Preamble. Therefore I say that, from this aspect, Cyprus
considers that the resolutions should be enforced.

22. These are the fundamental premises on the basis of
which the question of Cyprus must be considered, and I
should like now to turn briefly to the relevant resolutions.
As I have said, pertinent to this case is the original
resolution of 4 March 1964. The second resolution is the
one that wasadopted less than a month ago by the Security
Council [resolution 440 (19 78,Jj. Previous to that there was
the General Assembly resolution of 9 November 1978
[resolution 33/1S/. We then have the present resolution. As
I said before, General Assembly resolution 33115

20. Now I come to another aspect that is rather important
with regard to Cyprus. Of course, implementation is not
necessarily enforced implementation; there can be volunta.ry implementation, and particularly there can be implementation through negotiations. Negotiations can lead to
thle implementation
of resolutions, as in the case of an
international conference, where the conference deals with a
subject and eventually arranges for implementation
by
agreement. But there must be implementation, and there
ca.nnot be a just solution of the problem of Cyprus without
regard to the General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. In this respect, it is important to remember
that there is complete agreement on all sides, including
Turkey and everybody else, all the members of the Security
Council and Members of the United Nations, that the
2 OftJicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Supplement No. 1, p. 2.

“Recommends that the Security Council should
examine the question of the implementation, within a
time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider and
adopt thereafter, if necessary, all appropriate and practical measures under the Charter of the United Nations
for ensuring the implementation
of the resolutions of the
United Nations on Cyprus”.
Following that
came Security Council resolution
(1978) which, after taking note of the relevant Gemal
Assembly resolutions concerning Cyprus,
440

Session,

3

of the urgency of solving the Cyprus problem
further delay,

report, it is not necessary for me to go over the same
ground.

its
resolutions
365 (1974). . .,
” 1. Reaffirms
367 (1975) . . . and subsequent resolutions, including
resolution 410 (1977) . , .;I’

28. None the less, I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to express, on behalf of the Greek Government, its
deep appreciation to the Member States which are providing contingents to UNFICYP at considerable cost to
themselves, as well as to those Govgmments which are
making voluntary contributions for the maintenance of the
Force. Further, we express our sincere thanks to the Force
Commander, Major-General Quinn, and to the officers and
men of UNFICYP who are carrying out, with exemplary
devotion and efficiency, their difficult responsibilities and
humanitarian tasks.

‘fMindfu1

without

-resolution
365 (1974) endorsed the unanimously adopted
resolution 32 12 (XXIX)“2. Calls upon the parties concerned to comply with
and co-operate in the implementation of those resolutions
within a specific time-frame;
“3. Urges the representatives of the two communities
to resume negotiations, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, on an agreed basis, bearing in mind the
aforementioned resolutions”.

29. I wish also to join in the congratulations just addressed
to Mr. Gleissner on the assumption of his new important
assignment for his country, Austria.

Consequently any negotiations must bear in mind the
aforementioned
resolutions and should be within that
framework, because, unless they are within that framework,
they cannot be negotiations for a just and lasting solution
of the problem-but
will merely complicate the situation,
create further trouble and worsen the whole situation in the
island and in the region concerned.

30. The resolution just adopted once again requests the
Secretary-General to continue his mission of good offices,
to keep the Security Council informed of the progress made
and to submit a report on the implementation of the
resolution by 31 May 1979. In this respect I wish to
reiterate that the Greek Government will continue, as in the
past, to lend its full support to the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices and will give him every assistance in
his tireless efforts aimed at the resumption of the intercommunal dialogue on an agreed basis by the two parties
concerned.

23. I have given the facts in this case, and we express the
hope that there will be a possibility, through negotiations,
of voluntary implementation
of the Security Council
resolutions. That is the only way to do justice and to
provide a lasting solution to the problem of Cyprus, in the
interests of peace in the area and in the world.

31. As we all know, the Secretary-General has, with the
greatest dedication and perseverance, been trying over the
past years to promote a just and peaceful solution of the
Cyprus problem. I would, on this occasion, convey my
Government’s deep appreciation and sincere thanks to him
and to his distinguished collaborators, particularly UnderSecretary-General Brian Urquhart and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. Galindo
Pohl.

24. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, to whom I now give the floor.
25. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to extend to you my warmest and most
sincere congratulations on your accession to the Presidency
of the Security Council for this month. Your high
qualifications, your authority and prestige, as well as your
vast experience in United Nations affairs constitute the best
guarantee that this debate will be concluded successfully. It
is particularly gratifying to my delegation that you represent a country, the Federal Republic of Germany, which is
linked with my country by traditional ties of close
friendship and culture. Moreover, your country assures for
the current period the presidency of the European Community of the Nine, to which Greece hopes to be added as a
tenth member in the near future. I would also thank you
and the members of the Council for having allowed me to
participate in this discussion,

32. To those thanks I wish to add, since I will be
relinquishing my post here very shortly, the expression of
my personal gratitude to our esteemed Secretary-General
and his distinguished collaborators for the invaluable
assistance I received from them in the discharge of my
duties as Permanent Representative of Greece to the United
Nations.
33. I would also-and I would be remiss if I did notexpress the same feelings of gratitude and thanks to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for their
understanding and sympathetic attitude whenever my
delegation had to participate in the Council’s deliberations.

26. The Security Council has, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, .decided to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months. The resolution, to which the
Government of Cyprus has agreed, has the support of my
Government.

34. The PRESIDENT: The riext speaker is Mr. Atalay. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
35. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I would thank you and,
through you, all the members of the Council for having
given me the opportunity to speak today in order to
present to the Council the Turkish Cypriot views on, the
current state of the Cyprus problem. I would also express

27. In view of the fact that the representative of Cyprus,
Mr. Rossides, has already made, on behalf of his Govemmen& pertinent observations on the Secretary-General%
4

--

our thanks to you especially. We fully appreciate your
efforts and the diplomatic skills which cave-made possible
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus.

implementation in no way restricts entry into the north. On
the contrary, it has facilitated matters. If there has indeed
been any restriction, this is because the members of
UNFICYP were instructed by the Special Representative in
Cyprus to refuse to carry, even temporarily, the stickers
issued by the Turkish Cypriot authorities.

36. On behalf of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus,
we exprless our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his dedicated efforts to achieve a just and lasting
solution of the Cyprus problem.

44. I ask Council members: Which is more important, to
deny everything-including
social, economic and political
rights-which is vital for the survival of a community, or
indirectly to restrict entry, for temporary security reasons,
to those who use Greek-owned motor vehicles for recreational purposes in the north?

37. On this occasion, allow me to express our deep
apprecia.tion to the Special Representative of the Secretary
General in Cyprus, Mr. Galindo Pohl, to the Commander of
the Folrce, Major-General James J. Quinn, and to the
officers and men of UNFICYP and its civilian staff, as well
as to all contributing countries.

45. Paragraph 10 of the report states:
“UNFICYP
access to that area [Karpas] remains
restricted, but humanitarian work has been carried out on
a reasonably satisfactory scale.”

38. Last but not least, I would thank the staff of the
Secretariat, in particular Mr. Brian Urquhart, Mr. George
Sherry, Mr. Gleissner and their assistants for the efficient
manner in which they have discharged their difficult
responsibilities.

If there have been some restrictions on the movements of
UNFICYP, they are due to the absence of an agreement
regulating such matters with the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus. It is hoped that those matters, although very
limited in nature, will be regularized as soon as possible.

39. I thought that this would merely be a procedural
meeting, for the purpose of extending the mandate of
UNFICYP. But, unfortunately, my counterpart has again,
as usuall during his lifetime at the United Nations, dealt
with the substance of the issue and proved once more that
there was no need for the previous meetings of the Council.
Therefore, with your permission, Mr. President, I feel
compelled to respond to him in the same manner and tone.

46. In paragraph 37, after it is rather reluctantly conceded
that “there appears to be no restriction on freedom of
worship in the north wherever the services of a priest are
available”, in an effort to balance that, space is allotted to
malicious Greek Cypriot propaganda material prepared for
the purpose of influenc;ing the report. The truth about the
incident presented as the razing of the two churches is the
following. Two of the then existing six chapels at Trikomo
had to be tom down some eight months ago when they
became dangerous owing to the heavy rainfall. The remaining four chapels and two of the churches are still open
and are used by the 22 Greek Cypriots in the village. The
matter has no connexion whatsoever with freedom of
worship. It is rather sad that UNFICYP has thus been used
for the propaganda purposes of Greek Cypriots.

40. Ftrst, I would refer to the report of the SecretaryGenerals before us [S/12946/.
41. During the period under review, the Greek Cypriot
side continued to use the usurped title of “the Government
of Cyprus” as a tool for economic, social and political
aggression against, the Turkish community, including the
imprisonment of the captains of the ships which called at
the Turkish Cypriot ports. Armed activists for enosis
continue to dominate and menace the political atmosphere
in the south. The actual and potential danger which they
pose to the Turkish Cypriots and to the re-establishment of
the legitimate bi-communal Government of Cyprus needs
no elaboration. ‘But, unfortunately, there is not even a
single reference to these actions in the report.

47. On the question of missing persons, as representatives
will recall, the General Assembly, with a view to resolving
the question, adopted resolution 321128 on 16 December
1977 envisaging the establishment of an investigatory body
with the participation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross ([CRC) which would be in a position to
function impartially, effectively and speedily. At the time
of its adoption and on several occasions thereafter, the
Turkish Cypriot side, which has been suffering the agony of
missing persons since 1963, announced that it supported
the provisions of the resolution and was ready and willing
to set up immediately the investigatory body with the
participation of ICRC, which is the only competent organ
having the expertise and the experience in the field.

42. On the other hand, there is a direct reference in
paragraph 18 to denying entry to the north “to most
privately owned motor vehicles that carry registration
plates issued by the Cyprus Government” who wish to go
there “for recreational and related purposes”.
43. The fact of the matter is that this has no connexion
whatsoever with the duties and functions of UNFICYP.
There have been some practical restrictions, for security
reasons, for controlling the Greek-rented and Greek-owned
privat.e vehicles with Greek Cypriot registration plates. The
numbler of these vehicles has increased conspicuously in the
north in recent months. Moreover, it was unfortunately
discovered that some of these vehicles were being used for
the purpose of smuggling. Therefore, the restrictions were
applied not to persons at all but to the vehicles. This

48. While the framework provided by resolution 32/128,
adopted with the consent of the parties directly concerned,
remains intact, the new recourse by the Greek Cypriot
Administration
to the General Assembly seeking a new
resolution on the subject, in complete disregard of agreements previously reached and with the exclusion of ICRC
from the investigatory body, is a clear demonstration of the
5

L

-

lack of goodwill and a betrayal of the real motives in
bringing the question before the United Nations in the first
instance. That is an attitude hardly compatible with the
current efforts to bring about intercommunal reconciliation
and Serves no purpose other than anti-Turkish propaganda.

dispute. It is a matter of regret that the Greek Cypriot
leadership is doing its utmost in order to destroy all chances
of reconciliation. That is in accordance with a preconceived
policy.
56. Allow me to point out some of the blatant examples
of that policy. On 5 October 1977 a Danish captain,
Mr. Svinth, was fined 500 Cyprus pounds, on 27 October
1977 an Egyptian captain, Mr. Ayat, master of the
Lebanese vessel Omar, was gaoled for one month, and on
4 October 1978 the captain of an Italian vessel, Mr. Antonono, was sentenced to a term of three months’ imprisonment or a fine of 400 Cyprus pounds. Why? For calling at
the port of Famagusta in the north. Is that justice?

49. For this reason and upon instructions from my
President, Mr. Denktaa, I regretfully informed the Secretary-General that the draft resolution adopted by the Third
Committee
on 12 December 1978 would in no way be
acceptable to us and that the Turkish Cypriot side would
not consider itself bound by its provisions [S/12967,
annex/.
Nevertheless, the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus, motivated by humanitarian concerns, continues to
be ready to co-operate in the establishment of the
investigatory body, as provided for in resdlution 321128.

57. Those are consistent and malicious actions by the
Greek Cypriot Administration
aimed at disrupting the
Turkish Cypriot economy, in line with its over-all policy of
isolating the Turkish Cypriot community economically and
politically
through
a vicious international economic
bloCkade. I am confident that no Member of the United
Nations can accept or tiondone that.

50. Before 1 conclude my remarks on this particular issue,
I wish to express our deep concern that the SecretaryGeneral has not seen fit to refer to the I977 resolutionwhich is still valid-but has brought in a new element. In
paragraph 68 of the report, it is stated that the third
member of the Committee “could be jointly appointed by
the Secretary-General and the President of ICRC”. I am
sorry to point out that there has been no prior agreement
on that particular issue, as implied in the report, and,
unfortunately,
that that assertion influenced the debate in
the Third Committee two days ago on the issue of missing
persons in Cyprus.

58. it is most discouraging indeed that, despite efforts to
create an atmosphere conducive to the resumption of the
intercommunal
talks and to reconcile the differences
between the two communities, the Greek Cypriot leaders
have chosen to intensify their vicious economic warfare
against the Turkish Cypriot community, and at the same
time continue to make statements which express hostility
towards my community. Such actions against the Turkish
Cypriot community
are clearly incompatible with the call
in all the United Nations resolutions for an end to unilateral
actions by either side. It must be obvious to the Greek
Cypriot side that its hostile actions cannot possibly increase
trust and confidence between the two communities, which
must surely be a fundamental prerequisite for a permanent
solution.

5 1. As recorded in paragraph 67 of the report, absolute
peace and tranquillity prevail between the two communities
in the island. The relevant passage states:
“During the period under review, peace-keeping in
Cyprus continued to function well. The situation along
the cease-fire lines has remained quiet, owing in great part
to the vigilance of the United Nations Force and to the
co-operation of the parties.”

59. Furthermore, the daily output of anti-Turkish prop
aganda by the Greek press, radio and television, and the
provocative statements by the Greek Cypriot leaders have
been climaxed
by their public speeches. Mr. Spyros
Kyprianou, while speaking to the Creek community over
the New York radio during his visit to the city in
September 1978, declared quite openly:

52. I have to point out once again that the Turkish
Cypriots, who, as recorded in the Secretary-General’s
reports, suffered immense hardship from 1963 to July 1974
while defending themselves in all Turkish areas and having
to care for nearly 30,000 refugees for 11 years, have felt
secure in their own region since July 1974,

“We [the Greeks] shall continue our long-term struggle
until the Greek flag is once again hoisted and flying on
the bastions of Famagusta, Kyrenia, Morphou and the
Karpas.”

53. The points raised and the allegations made by the
Greek Cypriot representative in the statement that the
Council has just heard are not new. Although all his
allegations have been adequately answered in the past, I
have to comment on some of the points raised by him.

60. This statement clearly and certainly does not augur
well for Cyprus. It is incompatible with the United Nations
resolutions, as well as with the agreement reached between
the two communities for the establishment of a bi-national
independent federal republic on a partnership basis. Moreover, it definitely leads one to doubt seriously the good
faith and sincerity of the Greek leadership. It is indeed
ironic that this statement, which is remarkably similar to
statements recefitly made by other Greek Cypriot leaders,
including Archbishop Chrisostomos, manifesting intentions
of “driving the Turks to the sea”, should have come from
the same man *ho, less than two months ago, put on an

54, We are blamed again by the Greek Cypriots for
prolonging the Cyprus problem and not doing our best to
find a just and peaceful solution. We deny that, We
sincerely believe that we have done and are doing our best
to find a just solution to the problem on a realistic basis. It
is our view that it is the negative approach of the Creek side
that has caused the situation to drag on.
55. Representatives will appreciate that the resumption of
the intercommunal
talks needs a calm atmosphere, forbearance and the good intentions of the parties to the
6

impressive show of pretence, in view of his past record, in
the General. Assembly to convince that august body of his
alleged love of the Turkish Cypriot community.

Turkish Cypriot side has fulfilled all its obligations in
respect of the resumption of the intercommunal talks by
submitting new proposals on both the constitutional and
the territorial aspects of the Cyprus problem on 13 April
1978 [S/12723, annex/, which were described by the
Secretary-General as “concrete, substantial and voluminous”. These proposals were rejected by the Greek
Cypriot side without any serious consideration and in a
very indignant manner. Subsequently, my President,
Mr. Denktaq, made a statement very recently reiterating the
Turkish Cypriot side’s belief in

61. These outbursts of the Greek Cypriot leaders should
be a cause of concern to all those who know the origin and
background: of the Cyprus problem. The Cyprus problem
started in its violent form in December 1963, when the
Greek Cypriots attacked the Turkish Cypriots in order to
Hellenize the bi-communal island of Cyprus. Turkish
Cypriot partners of the bi-communal government refused to
bow to the Hellemzation of bi-communal Cyprus and for
11 years put up a heroic resistance to prevent this. It was
because of that resistance that the bi-communal independence of Cyprus was saved. The Greek coup of 15 July
1974 was a new attempt to usurp complete power in
Cyprus. The ultimate aim of the coup was also the
annihilation of the anti-enosis Turkish Cypriot elements.
Had Turkey not come in to save the situation,
Mr. Kyprianou and the rest of the Creek leaders would
today have been rejoicing over the realization of their
centuries-old dream.

“sustained, intensive, good-faith negotiations between the
Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities with a view to
reaching a just, lasting and mutually satisfactory settlement” fSJl2715 of 23 May 1978, annex].
He also expressed his readiness to meet Mr. Kyprianou
personally “anywhere, any time, and to discuss the problem
with him even without any agenda” /ibid./. But the only
response of Mr. Kyprianou and of the Creek Cypriot
leadership to all these calls have been venomous attacks and
malicious propaganda against Turkish Cypriots and Turkey.

62. I should like to comment on the resolution that has
just been adopted here. In it there is a reference to the
Government of Cyprus, which we do not recognize for
reasons which we have explained before the Council.
Therefore, the resolution is unacceptable to us as a whole.

67. Even under these circumstances it is my ardent hope
that the Creek Cypriots will return to the negotiating table
soon and will further refrain from forcing the Turkish
Cypriot side to resort to extreme measures.
68. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.

63. However, I should like to put it on record that the
Turkish C!ypriot side is giving its consent to the extension
of the rnandate of UNFICYP and is ready, as it has
always been, to resume the intercommunal talks under the
auspices of the Secretary-General on the basis of the
Denktag-Makarios
guidelines of 12 February 1977
[S/12323 of 30 April 1977, para. S].

69. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Mr. President, I should like to
congratulate you warmly upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to express to you our deep appreciation for
the efficient and tactful manner in which you have
conducted the consultations in connexion with the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus. In paying a tribute to your widely appreciated
wisdom, eminent diplomatic skills and experience, I
should like also to stress the satisfaction we feel in seeing as
President of the Council the representative of a country
with which Turkey traditionally enjoys cordial and constructive relations in all fields.

64. The Turkish Cypriot side believes that the substance
and spirit of the United Nations resolutions calls for the
settlements of the Cyprus problem through the intercommunal talks, and we firmly stand by the agreements
reached at various stages of these talks. These are the
population exchange agreement reached at the third round
of talks at Vienna on 2 August 1975 [S/11789, annex],
which paved the way for a bi-zonal federal settlement of
the Cyprus problem, and the four-point framework agreement reached between President Denktag and the late
Archbishop Makarios on 12 February 1977 in the presence
of the Secretary-General. This framework envisaged the
establishment
of an independent,
non-aligned, bicommtmal, bi-zonal federal republic.

70. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate to the
Secretary-General that we highly value his tireless ano
dedicated efforts to promote the negotiating process within
the framework of his mission of good offices.
71. A tribute is also due to the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Galindo Pohl, and to UnderSecretary-General Urquhart and his staff for their devoted
efforts in the fulfilment of their functions.

65. I should like to draw the attention of the Council once
more to the fact that in view of the present realities in the
island the mandate of the United Nations Force in its actual
form is no longer realistic and must therefore be changed to
conform with the present situation.

72. I should also like to commend the Force Commander,
Major-General Quinn, and to renew our gratitude to the
officers and men of UNFICYP and its civilian staff.
Moreover; I wish to reiterate our appreciation to the
countries providing troops and contributing financially @?
UNFICYP.

66. In concluding my statement I must emphasize once
again that, if there is still no final solution in Cyprus today
despite the positive atmosphere prevailing in the island for
the resumption of the intercommunal
talks and the
establishment of permanent peace, the responsibility for
this doles not rest with the Turkish Cypriot side. The

73. I should like to explain very briefly the position of my
Government on the resolution which the Security Council
7

the Soviet Union has studied attentively the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Force in Cyprus
and agrees with the recommendations contained therein for
the extension of the stationing in Cyprus of that Force for
a further six-month period. The need for such an extension
is dictated by the fact that the situation that has arisen in
Cyprus and around it cannot fail to give rise to the most
serious concern. There remains the threat to the independence, sovereignty and territorial *integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus. Attempts are still being made aimed at
the partitioning of Cyprus and the elimination of a single
State of Cyprus. As a result of the constant foreign
intervention, normal life in the Republic of Cyprus has
been disrupted and the historic links that have been forged
between the two Cyprus communities have been interrupted. The decisions adopted by the Security Council and
the General Assembly designed to bring about a settlement
of the Cyprus crisis have not been complied with.

has just adopted. In the third preambular paragraph there
is, as in previous resolutions on the same subject, the
irrelevant reference to a “Government of Cyprus”. The
Council must be familiar with our basic unchanged position
in that respect. As a result of the developments that took
place after the notorious coup of 15 July 1974, there exist
today in Cyprus two distinct administrations. This reality
was recognized on 30 July 1974 by the three guaranteeing
Powers-namely, Turkey, Greece and the United Kingdomat the first Geneva conference on Cyprus. A reference to
the so-called Government of Cyprus-an entity which in our
view does not exist either in law or in practice-is all the
more misleading since the DenktavMakarios framework
agreement of 12 February 1977 established the basis of an
independent, non-aligned, bi-communal Federal Republic
and provided for the merging of the two separate Turkish
Cypriot and Greek Cypriot administrations. Consequently,
any compliance or co-operation with the peace-keeping
effort in Cyprus on our part would be cbnditional upon the
exclusion of the concept of a Government of Cyprus.

77. The Security Council recently discussed the Cyprus
problem in substance and adopted a resolution expressing
itself deeply concerned at the lack of progress in the
solution of the Cyprus problem and calling for the
implementation of its earlier resolutions on Cyprus.

74. The resolution contains two operative elements. In
paragraph 1, the Council gives UNFICYP a mandate for
another period of six months. We concur in that extension,
having heard the representative of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus, Mr. Nail Atalay, who informed the Council
of his consent in that respect. It should be noted, however,
that Mr. Atalay has once again underlined the necessity of
reviewing the mandate of the Force as established in 1964
in order to adapt it to the circumstances now prevailing in
Cyprus and to the new and reduced dimeniions of the
problem. In paragraph 2, the Council requests the Secretary-General to continue his mission of good offices in the
intercommunal negotiations, as established by paragraph 6
of its resolution 367 (1975). As has already been stated on
numerous occasions, the Turkish Government fully supports the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General.
In our view, the intercommunal talks within the framework
of the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General
constitute the only valid exercise in achieving a just and
lasting solution of the Cyprus problem based on the
Denktaa-Makarios framework agreement of 12 February
1977.

78. From the very beginning of the outbreak of the crisis
in Cyprus the Soviet Union has consistently maintained
that the search for ways and means to bring about a
settlement should be carried out on the basis of unconditional respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its policy of
non-alignment. This presupposes the withdrawal from the
island of foreign troops and the elimination of foreign
bases.
79. The Soviet Union believes that, in the present circumstances, it is important to make every effort to restore the
spirit of mutual trust and co-operation between the two
Cj;@ot communities. The internal affairs of Cyprus should
be solved by the Cypriots themselves, taking into account
the interests and rights of the Greek and Turkish communities in the island. The Soviet Union opposes any
attempts to find ways of settling the Cyprus problem
behind the backs of the people of Cyprus in the narrow
interests of various countries or military blocs, and we are
against the imposing on Cyprus by anyone whatsoever of
their own plans and decisions.

75. And now just a word with reference to the statementor rather the lecture-by the distinguished and venerable
representative ,of the non-government of Cyprus. I should
like to say very briefly that in the course of many years we
have exchanged ideas across this table with Ambassador
Rossides, and 1 now hear he is about to go back home. But
I regret to say that he could not restrain himself from firing
a Parthian shot on his way out. His statement was, of
course, full of the usual misrepresentations and misinterpretations. I shall briefly say that General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), to which he referred and to which
we agreed, should be taken as a whole and that in our view
the mainstay of that resolution is that negotiations should
get under way md that all the other aspects of the problem
x$ Cyprus can be taken within the context of those
nyotiations. That is where we stand and that is where we
1:o.rt to go.

80. The Soviet Union is in favour of the immediate
implementation
in full of United Nations decisions on
Cyprus. The settlement of the Cyprus problem on the basis
of those decisions would be promoted, we are convinced,
by the convening of a representative international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United
Nations.
81 I The delegation of the Soviet Union did not object to
the extension of the stationing of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus for a further six-month period, taking into
account in this connexion the fact that the Government of
the Republic of Cyprus had given its consent to such an
extension. It is of course understood that the financing of
the Force will continue to be carried out on a voluntary
basis.

76. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republicsj (‘interpretation from Russian): The delegation of
8

82. Mr. B,4RTON (Canada): Mr. President, you have just
presided over the thirty-fourth extension of the UNFICYP
mandate. Having myself been in the position of presiding
over the Council for the extension of an UNFICYP
mandate, I have considerable appreciation of the task you
have faced, and I should like to express my admiration for
the way in which you have conducted the negotiations
leading to the decision we have just taken.
83. I am Ispeaking now because this is probably the last
statement Canada will be making in the Council during its
current term of office and because, as the representative of
a country ,which over the last 14 years and more has had
something ‘like 20,000 Canadians stationed in Cyprus, I feel
there is something I should say.
84. We wlere pleased to read in the Secretary-General’s
clear and comprehensive report that peace-keeping in
Cyprus had continued to function well over the last six
months and, more particularly, that the situation along the
cease-fire lines had remained quiet.
85. But the fact remains that the United Nations forces in
Cyprus have been there far too long. They were established
in 1964 to facilitate a return to normal conditions and to
alleviate the sufferings caused by intercommunal disturbance. They have been there for over 14 years and in
that time I must say that there have been very few positive
indications that the two communities are moving towards a
peaceful, equitable and lasting solution to their problems.
86. It is interesting that, although the intercommunal
negotiations have made no recent progress and that it has
not been possible, as we have seen the last day or two, to
achieve practical agreement on the modalities for an
investigative body for the tracing of and accounting for
missing persons of both communities, despite the fact that
the estabhshment of such a committee was agreed to at a
high level a year ago, the two communities have been able
to reach one agreement after a year of negotiation: on a
sewagesystem at Nicosia.
87. We wonder how long the parties to this dispute can
expect the international community to pour money and
resources into a situation which they themselves do not
seem to be working energetically towards alleviating. I
think we are approaching the limit of the patience of the
international community in this particular case. I say this
because we know that the way is open to the parties to
negotiate and reach an agreement. The Secretary-General
reports that the parties and he have been given certain
specific suggestions which it washoped would contribute to
the prospect of a resumption of the intercommunal
negotiating process, My Government has associated itself
with those suggestions as a possible basis for a resumption
of negotiations on a meaningful and sustained basis, and we
urge the parties concerned to seize this opportunity to
negotiate in a co-operative atmosphere to reach a solution
which will enable Cyprus to enjoy the peace its citizens
must surely long for.
88. I should like to express our appreciation to the Force
Commander, to the officers and men of UNFICYP and to

the members of the Secretary-General’s staff for all the
support which they have given to the Force.
89. Before I close,since this is the last occasion on which I
expect to be speaking here, I should like to say that the
Past two Years have been a memorable experience for. the
Canadian delegation. I hope we have made a contribution
to the work of the Council. I am sure that I could introduce
a motion that would carry the support of at least five
delegations, that the membership of the present Council
should be extended for another year, but I shall forbear to
do that. 1 should like to say to all my colleagues on the
Council that we have enjoyed the spirit of camaraderie and
the support of the Secretariat, the Secretary-General and
particularly Mr. Gleissner, who is moving on to newer and
better things.
90. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Canada for his statement and for the kind words addressed
to me. I should like to recall on this occasion that it washe
who laid the groundwork for the resolution that we
adopted here this evening.
91. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): We have carefully read the
report of the Secretary-General. Nigeria has always supported the extension of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus, as everywhere else. But I cannot fail on
this occasion, as in the past, to reiterate that peace-keeping
should not become logistic support for military occupation
and intervention, 1 have said this again and again, in
reference to Korea, in reference to Cyprus and in reference
to the Middle East, including, recently, Lebanon. This is
not to minimize the efforts being made by the Secretary
General but in fact to emphasize that those who have
created confusion and problems in Cyprus should begin to
yield to the general will of the international community.
92. Also I think that the presence of peace-keeping forces
in Cyprus should not give solace to the Turkish aggressors
who have decided to land forces in Cyprus and to challenge
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of that country. I
believe that if this becomes the pattern of international
relations and if the international community continues-as
the representative of Canada has just said, if I understood
him clearly, this is the thirty-fourth time-automatically to
approve the extension of the Peace-keeping Force without
any commensurate advance or improvement of the atmosphere in Cyprus, as in the other areas I have mentioned,
then we shall be failing in our duty in the Council to accept
our responsibilities and obligations towards international
peace and security.
93. I would add that between enosis and the Turkish
military occupation of part of Cyprus we have come full
circle, and it is a lesson which we would do well to learn
from this situation in Cyprus. But let us recall that under
the great leadership, of the late President Makarios an end
was put to the aspirations of the radicals of the Greek
community who wanted to integrate Cyprus with Greece.
In the same way, he fought hard to protect the Turkish
Cypriot community and to ensure that it would no longer
be subjected to injustice. But the late President Makarios
*
died without seeing the achievement of his objectives.

94. The unanimous support which the international community continues to give to Cyprus is, I believe, a pointer
to what action we would wish to see Turkey take. I do not
believe that the presence of Turkish forces in parts of
Cyprus will in any way help to solve the problem. Again,
we do hope that the Government of Cyprus-and I regret
that the representative of Turkey called it a “non-government”-will
continue to maintain its restraint, and that
there will be a solution to the problem before long.
95. Mr. ROBINSON (United Kingdom): I am not going to
follow those who have spoken once again on the broader
issues. We had ample substantive debate in the Council as
recently as last month, and I seenothing useful to be added
to that today.
96. My Government is happy to renew this mandate for a
further six months. It hopes to maintain the British
contingent at approximately its present strength for the
next six months, and we shall continue to meet its full cost,
as well as the cost of the logistic support we supply to
UNFICYP, for we continue to believe that UNFICYP plays
an essential part in maintaining peace in Cyprus. We should
like to extend our thanks yet again to the officers and men
on the ground for their untiring efforts.
!
/
R
/I

I
I

97. We believe that the problems are not inherently
insoluble, but that their resolution requires a willingness on
each side to make concessions and to acknowledge the
needs and aspirations of the other. For this reason, my
Government continues to urge the parties to adopt a
constructive and flexible approach to the resumption of
intercommunal negotiations, which we consider to be the
most likely vehicle for arriving at the satisfactory outcome
for which we all wish.

settlement of the problem
successful.

101. I wish to extend the thanks of my delegation to the
of the Secretary-General,
Representative
Special
Mr. Galindo Pohl, and to the Commander of the Force,
Major-General Quinn, and the officers, soldiers and civilian
personnel. We assure them of our support and appreciation
as they pursue their mission, which remains essential in our
search for peace.
102. As it is likely that we are meeting here for the last
time this year, I wish to associate myself with the
comments that have been made and express my delegation’s
gratitude to all our colleagues whose terms of office are
ending, The spirit of co-operation and friendship which
they have demonstrated at sometimes difficult moments
has made the work of the Council easier. I wish them
increasing successin their United Nations activities.
103. Mr. President, I shall certainly have other occasions
in future to say how much I appreciate the excellent
relations of confidence and friendship I have had with you.
I would thank you today for that and pay a tribute through
you to your great country, which enjoys close and friendly
relations with France.
104. In conclusion, I wish to express my best wishes to
Mr. Papoulias in connexion with the important mission that
has been entrusted to him. Although we are disappointed at
losing such a valuable colleague and good friend, we know
that the cause of peace and co-operation will find in him a
talented advocate and an ally.
105, The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakers, I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of the FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.

!

98. Mr.

LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
Last June, a few hours late, we renewed the
mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus. We stated
then that the situation was regrettable and we pointed out
the dangers. Today, thanks to the wisdom of the parties
and to your ingenuity, Mr. President, we have reached a
decision in time and that is a matter for satisfaction.
French):

,I
‘1
‘I
‘I
I

of missing persons will be

‘106. In concluding this debate in the Council I wish to
express my appreciation to the parties concerned, which
co-operated with the Council and showed their goodwill
and spirit of compromise in order to permit the renewal of
UNFICYP’s mandate and the conclusion of our meeting
well before the deadline of midnight tomorrow. I also wish
to thank all members of the Council for their helpful
attitude on this question which allowed us to adopt the
resolution unanimously and with a minimum of debate.
Such a spirit of co-operation makes it a pleasure to preside
over the meetings of the Council.

99. In the report he submitted on 1 December, the
Secretary-General stated that the presence of UNFICYP
was indispensable, both to maintain calm in Cyprus and to
facilitate the search for the peaceful settlement which we
all desire. More than ever before, we should take advantage
of that decision to seek a negotiated settlement, which will
necessarily involve the resumption of intercommunal talks
on a basis acceptable to all the parties. The French
Government takes this opportunity to voice its confidence
once again in the Secretary-General and to pledge him our
support at a time when certain positive developments make
his mission of good offices more essential than ever before.

107. I am aware that this good spirit is due largely to the
tireless efforts of my predecessor, the representative of
Gabon, who led complicated and protracted negotiations
last month in order to reach agreement on another
resolution of the Council on Cyprus. I should especially like
to thank him for his success.
108. In concluding this last debate on Cyprus in 1978, I
think it most appropriate to say a word of farewell to
Ambassador Papoulias, who will soon be taking up his new
post at Ankara. He has always been helpful in the many
discussions of the Council on Cyprus, and he has good
judgement of the art of the feasible. And if we were able,
for the most part, to avoid acrimony in those debates, it

100. We are very pleased that no serious incident occurred
during the period under consideration and that the ceasetire *has been respected. We hope that the freedom of
movement of the Force will be ‘improved, particularly as
regards its accessto the observation posts. Finally, we hope
that the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a
10

was largely due to his good temper. If anybody can help
improve relations between Turkey and Greece we are
confident that it is our friend Ambassador Papoulias.
109. I do not know whether the Council will meet again
during the month of December. Actually, this is a possibility which can never be excluded, but on the other hand
there is a fair chance that today’s meeting may be the last
in the current month. I should like, therefore, to express
personally and on behalf of all the members of our
delegation our warm thanks for the co-operation and
understanding that we have always found during our
two-year term.
110. When we remember the sense of partnership and, in
fact, fri’endship which prevails in the Security Council
regardless of basic political differences, we certainly withdraw from the Council table with a feeling of considerable
regret. We are surely relieved, on the other hand, that we
shall not have to bear some of the burdens, such as the late
beginning of meetings and that sort of thing, any longer.
111. In assessingthe work which has been done during the
last two years my delegation may gain some satisfaction at
what hais been achieved. But I am bound, on behalf of the
Federal Republic of Germany, to strike a clear note of
disappointment that on one issue-which is not on today’s
agenda-we have not achieved what we had hoped to by the
end of this year. Even though we shall no longer be a
member of the Security Council, my Government will
maintain an active interest in bringing about freedom and
indepen’dence under internationally recognized conditions
for Namibia.
112. I should now like to resume my functions as
PRESIDENT of the Council.
113. On behalf of all members of the Council, I wish to
express my own good wishes and those of the Council to
those delegations which will be leaving the Council together
with my own delegation at the end of the year. I think that
everybody around this table will agree when I say that the
delegations of Canada, India, Mauritius and Venezuela have,
during ithe last two years, made contributions that will long
be remembered to the work of the Council and the aims of
the Organization. It is thanks not least to the efforts of
their Permanent Representatives and their delegations that
the spirit of confrontation which in former years could
sometimes be noticed in the Council has largely given way
to the spirit of co-operation and consensus which has
luckily prevailed during the last two years. The Council has
thus been able to work towards the fulfilment of its
mandate, although a lot still needs to be done.

their shoulders during the current year. I shall mention only
the setting up of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and all the advanced planning for the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group, including Mr. Ahtisaari’s mission to Namibia.
116. As this year nears its end, our good wishes go to all
those officers and men who, in Cyprus and other striferidden areasof the world, are on watch in order to keep the
peace.
117. I should also like to add a very special word of
thanks to Mr. Heinrich Gleissner, who is leaving us shortly
as he has been appointed Ambassador of Austria to one of
the permanent members of the Council. I am not quite
certain how long the line of Presidents of the Council who
relied on his advice really is. One thing is certain: every one
of them would have been lost without Heinrich Gleissner’s
advice and guidance, and we have the highest regard for his
dedication to the Council and the Organization. As he is
honoured by the decision of his Government, I think that
the whole Security Council may also feel honoured by his
new appointment.
118. I conclude by wishing all of you around this table
and your families a peaceful holiday season and a bright
and successfulnew year.
119. I have three requests for the exercise of the right of
reply. The first is from the representative of Cyprus, on
whom I now call.
120. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): It is not my intention to
disturb this atmosphere of congratulations, good wishes and
good words in exercising the right of reply. I merely wish to
say that my entire statement was simply a statement of
facts. There was no implication whatever against anyoneeither person or State. But if facts themselves constitute an
accusation-and they are true-of course the other side
becomes offended. But that is remarkable since in my
statement I did not at all mention the Turkish Cypriots,
because, surely, they are not responsible for the facts I
stated concerning the situation in Cyprus. The non-withdrawal of the Turkish occupation forces, the non-cessation
of foreign intervention, the non-return of the refugees to
their homes because the occupation army will not allow
them, are the responsibility of Turkey.
121. But, instead of the representative of Turkey replying
to my statement, it was the Turkish Cypriot who replied.
The representative of Turkey simply sits back and whenever
he does speak he merely says: “misrepresentations”. But,
surely, he cannot deny any of the facts, which he has called
misrepresentations. What are these so-called misrepresentations? Do they include the statement that there have
been many resolutions of the Security Council calling for
the speedy withdrawal without further delay of the foreign
occupation forces in Cyprus, namely the forces of Turkey?

114. I wish the remaining members of the Council, as well
as those which will join the Council in 1979, courage and
wisdom in their work in the future. A well-functioning
Security Council is essential for the confidence of world
public (opinion in the United Nations.

122. With regard to the way in which the Turkish Cypriot
spoke, I should like first of all to say that he did not respect
the rules of this body. I did not wish to raise a point of
order, so as not to waste time. However, a person who
speaks before the Council under rule 39 of the provisional

115. On behalf of all the members of the Council, I wish
to express our appreciation and gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. He and his staff have coped
brilliantly with the heavy burdens which the Council put on
11

rules of procedure has absolutely no right to call the
Government of a State Member of the Organizationrecognized bY the entire membership as a State-a “nongovernment”
and to call its representative by something
other than his recognized title.
123. That issue has been raised and a legal opinion was
given to the effect that one has no right to use other names.
I believe that the United States some years ago raised the
question that no Member of the United Nations can sling
names it chooses at another Member State while speaking
officially in the Security Council. But, a fortiori, a person
who
comes here under rule 39 merely to give information,
who is not the representative of a State, has no right to
speak in such an offensive way of Members. I believe that
You, Mr. President, or someone else, such as the SecretaryGeneral, should draw the attention of those who come here
to speak under rule 39 that they cannot behave in this way.
124. In any case, Mr. Atalay spoke as an individual
He
give himself whatever titles he likes, such as the
representative of the Federated State of Cyprus-which is
non-existent because there would first have to be a
federation in Cyprus and there is none, It is patently a false
representation. And what is this so-called Federated State
of Cyprus? It is the area occupied by Turkey as the result
of aggression and invasion by Turkey, It has occupied 40
per cent of the territory of Cyprus presumably to protect
the rights of the Turkish Cypriots, while the ‘T&&h
Cypriots form only 18 per cent of the population, And this
is an area which has 70 per cent of the island!s resources.
They now remove those resources, bring populations from
Turkey and establish them on the usurped properties of the
indigenous Greek Cypriot majority who have been expelled.
I call that an international crime: the occupation by force,
the expulsion of the indigenous population,. the bringing in
of massive population from outside to usurp their houses
and their land. The original Turkish Cypriot population
today in that area is only 18 per cent. The rest has been
brought from elsewhere and has no right to the properties
or the land there. They call that international crime the
“Turkish Federated State of Cyprus”, and it is really
surprising that a Member of the United Nations responsible
for that crime presents this situation as the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus.
can

125, The next question is: can the representative of
Turkey speak of the Government of another Member State
as a “rron-government”?
Those are not facts, but what I
said in my statement were facts, and if they were offensive
it is because they were facts about crime. But he calls
names without constituting facts.
126. In any case, what is important is this: the voice of
Mr. Atalay is not that of the Turkish Cypriots. We know
very well and we have ample evidence that the Turkish
Cypriots are not at all satisfied with the situation in the
northern part. The former Turkish Vice-President
of
Cyprus, Mr, Kiiqiik, said publicly that since the occupation
this paradise island had become a “hell”. That was his
word.
12’7. So that is the view of the Turkish Cypriots, not the
view of the person who comes here as an instrument of the
invader, one who does not speak as a Cypriot but, in a case

of aggression and invasion, sides with the aggressor.
Therefore I say that what Mr. Atalay has said supports what
I have already said. I did not touch upon the Turkish
Cypriots, but this supports the fact that the Turkish
Cypriots are the instruments of Ankara. This goes to the
verY root of the problem of negotiations. Negotiations
require good faith. I wish they would show good faith and
honesty so that we could have real, true negotiations on a
solution of the problem, but not with*instruments of the
aggressor pretending to represent the Turkish Cypriots and
acting for them in the negotiations. That is the problem
that makes the negotiations difficult. However, we hope
that in spite of all these difficulties the problem wilI be
overcome in the sense of having reasonable negotiations on
a solution of the problem.
128. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): In the first place I should lie
to associate myself whole-heartedly with the congratulations addressed to our colleague, Ambassador Papoulias,
who is on his way to Ankara, the capital of my country. We
are greatly honoured to have such a distinguished dipIomat
and such an able and charming person coming to our
country. I know that he will contribute a great deal to the
solution not only of the problems that we have between
our countries but also of those that concern our two
countries. Once again I congratulate Ambassador Papoulias
and wish him well during his tour of duty in my country.
129. Having said that, I should like to return to a rather
painful episode that took place today in the Council. The
representative of Nigeria gave ample proof that he has no
comprehension whatsoever of what this issue is all aboutnone at all-and he has no intention of trying to understand
it. He referred to aggression on the part of Turkey. He
referred to occupation. There is no occupation. There is no
aggression. Aggression was committed against the Government of Archbishop Makarios by the Greek junta. We are
used to these expressions being used by Mr. Rossides and
the Greek Cypriot representatives from time to time for
propaganda purposes, but for a representative of a great
country like Nigeria to become the tool of that propaganda
and to forward the aims of that propaganda is truly
regrettable. There is no aggression, there is no occupation in
Cyprus. The Turkish forces there are peace-keeping forces.
It is significant that between 1964 and 1974 there was no
peace in Cyprus, in spite of the presence of UNFICYI’.
Since then there has been peace in Cyprus. So I forcefully
reject what he said and resent such words being spoken in
the Council chamber.
130. Perhaps it would help the representative of Nigeria to
understand why I keep referring to the Greek Cypriot
Administration
as a “non-government”. The Greek Cypriot
Administration
claims to have legitimacy because of s
document: the Constitution of Cyprus. They have torn it to
shreds. They have distorted it. Therefore it does not exist
anymore. When Cyprus became a fulI Member of the
United Nations, with the blessing and the sponsorship of
the Turkish Republic, there was a Government of Cyprus.
Now what is there in Cyprus? Let me read to you the
‘composition of the Government of Cyprus under article 46
of the so-called and now-defunct Constitution of Cyprus:
“The President and the Vice-President of the Republic
in order to ensure the executive power shall have s

Council of Ministers composed of seven Greek Ministers
and three Turkish Ministers . . .

Turkey has troops in Cyprus. That is what I was referring to.

“One of the following Ministries that is to say the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Defence or
the hlinistry of Finance, shall be entrusted to a Turkish
Minister.”

134. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): In reply to the representative of Turkey, I will put a question to him. Can he
deny that Turkey is guilty of invasion of Cyprus? Can he
deny that there was napalm bombing of the island at the
time of that peace-keeping operation, as he calls it, with
hundreds’ and hundreds of deaths for no reason, an act
carried out against open cities? Can he deny that there’was
the burning, through the use of napalm bombs, of extensive
pine forests and great destruction in Cyprus, merely for the
sake of destruction? Can he deny that there were violations
of human rights that were witnessed by the Red.Cross and
were also the subject of a report of the European
Commission of Human Rights to which The 5’unday Times
referred as a horrendous indictment of Turkey, which
stands accused of these crimes and is in danger of being
ousted from the Council of Europe? Does he deny that
these crimes are so abundantly clear that everyone knows
them? Does he deny that the territory which he calls a
“Turkish Federated State” with such a peculiarly innocent
face is really the territory which was occupied by these
actions, unthinkable in our time, of international crime?
Does he deny that 200,000-one-third
of the whole
population of the island-were forcibly expelled from their
ancestral homes and properties, which were usurped by an
alien population transported from Turkey?

Where are those Turkish Ministers now? What is this
Government of Cyprus, this Council of Ministers which is
supposed to be composed in accordance with this Constitution? They have been kicked out, under threat to their
lives, and this so-called government has usurped power in
Cyprus. That is why I refer to it as a “non-government”. We
are trying to bring about a legitimate government of
Cyprus, through negotiations between the two communities, in a federated State. This was agreed to in the
agreement of 12 February 1977 between Archbishop
Malcarios and President Denktas, and let us go on in that
direction.
131. Regrettably, once again Mr. Rossides referred to the
Turkish Cypriot community as being the tools of the
Turkish Government. This is absolutely untrue. Mr. Rossides has been away from his country for some time and he
probably does not know what is going on there. The
poltical situation within the Greek Cypriot community has
evolved a great deal. They are tired of the dilatory tactics of
their representatives. They are tired of going to international bodies and trying to get resolutions blaming this,
condemning that. They want peace in Cyprus. Some of
those refugees want to return as soon as possible to their
homes., and the behaviour of the leaders of the Greek
Cypriot community makes that impossible.
132. It would help perhaps to reflect this tendency within
the Greek Cypriot community if I were to quote from the
Greek Cypriot press on the occasion of the celebration on
7 November of the October Revolution at Nicosia, when
Mr. Andreas Fantis, the Acting Secretary-General of the
Greek Cypriot AKEL Party, the largest political party in
the Grleek part of Cyprus, declared:
“Not even the United Nations can impose a just and
lasting solution acceptable to both sides. The duty to
work out such a solution through constructive negotiations is incumbent upon the Turkish and Greek
comlmunities. If we wish to arrive at a rapid solution, we
must emphatically declare that we are ready to start
negotiations within the framework agreement reached
between Makarios and Denktag. Within that framework
we must ask Mr. Waldheim to undertake more effeclive
action within the limits of his powers and duties.”
133. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): I do not want to waste
any of the Council’s time on polemics. I merely wish to say
that members of the Council were probably amused, when
the representative of Turkey claimed that Nigeria had
becomle a tool of Cyprus. If he had listened carefully, he
would know that I said that Nigeria would never support
the la&ding of forces in any country to protect another
country’s interests and would never support the use of
peace-keeping forces as logistic support for such OCCUpation. I am happy that that representative has stated tl>at

135. These crimes were committed by his country and he
tries to blame members of the Security Council, ‘as he
blamed the representative of Nigeria for realizing these facts
and expressing himself, in a very moderate way, in support
of the Charter of the United Nations and of peace in the
world, and against aggression. Or does he deny that &his is
aggression? He says they went in to carry out peacekeeping operations to protect the Turkish Cypriots. Is it
protecting the Turkish Cypriots to bring in massively, from
Turkey, 40,000 or 50,000 Turks from the Anatolian
part-uncouth, uncivilized-and
dump them among the
Turkish Cypriots, who are suffering from their criminal
activities? Is this a peaceful operation, or is this an
operation to change by force the demography of Cyprus
and destroy its people, of Greek and Turkish origin alike, in
pursuance of the partitionist and annexationist policy of
Turkey? Where is the good faith of a CCJ~mt~ that behaves
in this way in the Security Council itself, which, denies
every true statement and tries to throw blame on those who
defend their rights under the Charter?
136. I will not take up any more time since facts speak for
themselves. Everyone -whd knows the facts-and nobody
can ignore them-ought to be able to judge in the same way
as did the representative of Nigeria, to whom I offer our
gratitude for speaking the truth and for holding up what is
right.

137. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker, who also wishes
to exercise his right of reply, is the representative of
Kuwait, to whom I give the floor.
138. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): My delegation hopes that
the resolution just adopted will contribute to t!rc prumotion of a just peace in Cyprus.

work for the betterment of the situation between the
communities in Cyprus. As he is retiring soon, we would
have expected him to correct his record in the United
Nations. He has lost his last chance. Therefore, I will refrain
from answering his baselessallegations.

139. We pay a sincere tribute to you, Mr.President, for
your originality, and unflagging efforts. We shall miss you. I
particularly shall miss you because we have been exchanging cigarettes for the last 12 months. We have served
with you and other members of the Council for a year. We
have benefited enormously and significantly from their
wisdom, which all of us shall miss. My delegation indeed
will miss the wisdom and the advice which we sorely need.
But we are hopeful and certain that the incoming members,
as well as the present members of the Council, will make up
for this sense of loss.

148. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cyprus has
asked to exercise his right of reply and I give him the floor.
149. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): It is not enough, in
replying to the question “Can you deny this fact? ‘0 simply
to say “Yes”. One should say, “Yes, I deny it because . . .“.
It is very futile and childish just to say “Yes, I deny
everything”, without giving any grounds for that denial.

140. My delegation wishes the representative of Greece
the best of luck in his new assignment. His new assignment
is a challenge indeed, and we are certain that he will
successfully face it. It is also an eloquent testimony of his
ability.

150. Secondly, I do not consider it necessary to reply to
what Mr. Atalay has said because, again, the facts are there.
If they want amelioration of the situation they surely can
obtain it by behaving in a proper way-not as aggressorsall
the time, every time, every day. Up till now they are
expelling people from the north. We received reports today
about the sufferings of the remaining Greek Cypriots in the
north who have to move away. Those facts are not denied
by mere use of words or of names that make no sense.
Therefore, I do not think it necessaryto make any reply to
what has been said here.

141. We shall also miss our friend Mr. Gleissner. We wish
him the best of luck in London.
142. The problem with Security Council resolutions is
that we sometimes think of them as self-implementing
resolutions. They are not. Very few of these resolutions are
action-oriented, as in the case of resolutions on sanctions
on Southern Rhodesia. But generally these resolutions serve
as guidelines which require colossal efforts on the part of
certain Member States which have a political leverage with
parties involved, in order to work for just solutions of
problems based bn the guidelines embodied in the resolution,s of the Council. I should like to emphasize this point
and say that we should not treat these resolutions as
self-implementing, since it seems that we derive comfort
from adopting resolutions without observing the efforts
reqi’l ?d for implementing them.

15 1. My career has been spent in standing for what is
right. They know very well that there is no venom in me. I
am simply standing for what is right-and that is the duty
of every member of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
1.52. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker is the representative of Greece, who wishes to make a concluding
statement, and I call on hi.

143. Finally, Mr. President, we wish you and all members
of the Council, and indeed the members of the Secretariat,
a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.

153. Mr.

PAPOULIAS (Greece) (interpretation from
I should like to addressmy profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, to the representative of France,
Mr. Jacques Leprette, to the. representative of Turkey,
Mr. Eralp, and to the representative of Kuwait, Mr. Bishara.
I am very grateful for the very kind words which have been
addressed to me. I should like to assure you that I shall do
my best to justify the confidence which has just been
expressed with regard to my new mission at Ankara.
Rench):

144. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker, again exercising
his right of reply, is the representative of Turkey, to whom
I give the floor.
145. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I shall be very brief. I cannot
blame Mr. Rossides for pouring out the self-generated
venom in his heart on this last occasion. He has addresseda
number of questions to me: do 1 deny this or do I deny
that? At this late hour my reply will be monosyllabic: yes.

154. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Greece for his statement, and I am sure that I speak on
behalf of all the members of the Council in wishing him
well.

146. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. Atalay wishes to make a further statement. With the
concurrence of the Council, I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

155. The Security Council has thus concluded the present
phase of its consideration of the item and may have
concluded its business for the month of December and also
for the year 1978. So let me repeat what I said earlier by
wishing all in this room-not only those around the
table-and their families a peaceful holiday season and a
very successful and bright New Year.

147. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, thank you for allowing
me to take the floor for a second time. You have heard
Mr. Rossides again and again. He added nothing to the
wisdom of the members of the Council, nor to the search
for a peaceful settlement of the problem of Cyprus. I
attribute it to his age and even to his personal ambitions. At
a time when he is retiring, I beg him again and again to

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.
14

. . I.“.“l-llll”.
Litho

in United

.NUions,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00

70005~May

1980--2,200
