United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/59/104
Distr.: General
16 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 67

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/461)]

59/104. Report of the Conference on Disarmament
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, 1
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral
disarmament negotiating forum of the international community, has the primary role
in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Recognizing the need to conduct multilateral negotiations with the aim of
reaching agreement on concrete issues,
Recalling, in this respect, that the Conference has a number of urgent and
important issues for negotiation,
Taking note of active discussions held on the programme of work during the
2004 session of the Conference, as duly reflected in the report and the records of the
plenary meetings,
Taking note also of significant contributions made during the 2004 session to
promote substantive discussions on issues on the agenda, as well as of discussions
held on other issues that could also be relevant to the current international security
environment,
Stressing the urgent need for the Conference to commence its substantive work
at the beginning of its 2005 session,
Taking note of the decision reached on 12 February 2004 with regard to
enhancement of the engagement of civil society in the work of the Conference 2 and
the statement by the President made thereafter, 3
1.
Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community;
2.
Calls upon the Conference to intensify consultations and explore
possibilities with a view to reaching an agreement on a programme of work;
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/59/27).
Ibid., para. 19.
3
Ibid., para. 20.
2

04-48250

A/RES/59/104

3.
Takes note of the strong collective interest of the Conference in
commencing substantive work as soon as possible during its 2005 session;
4.
Welcomes the decision of the Conference to request its current President
and the incoming President to conduct consultations during the intersessional period
and, if possible, to make recommendations, taking into account all relevant
proposals, including those submitted as the documents of the Conference, views
presented and discussions held, and to endeavour to keep the membership of the
Conference informed, as appropriate, of their consultations, as expressed in
paragraph 46 of its report;1
5.
Requests all States members of the Conference to cooperate with the
current President and successive Presidents in their efforts to guide the Conference
to the early commencement of substantive work in its 2005 session;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the provision to the
6.
Conference of adequate administrative, substantive and conference support services;
7.
Requests the Conference to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament”.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

2
