S/2012/891

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 8 November 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you regarding the financing of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The Management Committee of the Special Court for Sierra Leone has
informed me that the Court will run out of funding in December and that it will not
be possible to secure the necessary voluntary contributions to enable it to complete
its work. In addition, the Committee has suggested exploring alternate means of
financing the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone was established at the request of the
Security Council by an agreement between the United Nations and the Government
of Sierra Leone. Its mandate is to prosecute persons who bear the greatest
responsibility for the commission of crimes against humanity, war crimes and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as crimes under
relevant Sierra Leonean law committed within the territory of Sierra Leone.
Although financing through assessed contributions is a more viable and
sustainable financial mechanism, the Security Council decided that the Special
Court for Sierra Leone should be funded from voluntary contributions. Various
appeals have been made for funding for the Special Court. Despite these efforts,
there will not be sufficient voluntary contributions for the completion of the work of
the Special Court.
As you are aware, article 6 of the agreement establishing the Special Court for
Sierra Leone provides that, “should voluntary contributions be insufficient for the
Special Court to implement its mandate, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council shall explore alternate means of financing the Special Court”. Pursuant to
that provision, I wish to propose to members of the Security Council that one way of
addressing the shortfall would be for all of the costs of the Special Court to be
provided by assessment, while preserving the independent nature of the Special
Court. I recall that previous shortfalls in funding for the Special Court were
addressed similarly in 2004-2005 and 2010-2011.
I am aware that when the Security Council concurred with my proposal to seek
supplementary means of funding for the Special Court for Sierra Leone in 2010, it
did so with the expectation that there would not be additional subventions for the
Special Court. At that time, the Special Court was scheduled to complete its work
in early 2012. However, it is not possible to project the progress of judicial
proceedings with absolute certainty. The trial judgment in the final case before the
12-61510 (E) 281112

*1261510*

S/2012/891

Special Court, involving Mr. Charles Taylor, former President of the Republic of
Liberia, was delivered only on 26 April 2012, and he was sentenced on 30 May
2012. Owing to the complexity of the case, it is currently projected that the appeal
would be completed by the end of 2013.
It is evident from the statements made during the briefing of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone to the Security Council on 8 October 2012 that the Special Court
has been successful thus far in carrying out its mandate. But its work is not yet
complete, and some challenges still remain. The possibility of the Special Court
running out of funds and, consequently, being unable to complete the appeal in the
case of Mr. Taylor is a very serious concern. A collapse of this appeal due to lack of
funding would raise very substantial issues for the international community. As I
have said before, the legacy of the Special Court and the progress that has been
made towards ensuring accountability and restoring peace and security in Sierra
Leone and the region would be at risk.
The shortfall for the period until the closure of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone in late 2013 will be in the region of $14 million. The Security Council may
wish to invite me to bring the matter to the attention of the General Assembly with a
view to seeking the appropriation of funds for the Special Court, while preserving
the independence of the Special Court.
In July 2010, I notified the Security Council of my intention to seek to
negotiate and conclude with the Government of Sierra Leone an agreement
establishing a residual mechanism for the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
statute of the residual mechanism. The members of the Security Council took note
of this intention and agreed to my proposed manner of proceeding. I therefore
concluded with the Government of Sierra Leone an agreement establishing the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, which entered into force on 2 October
2012. The Residual Special Court will commence functioning immediately upon the
closure of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. I am grateful that the Security Council
recently welcomed the agreement and expressed its intention to support the Residual
Special Court.
The Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone will carry out the functions of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone that must continue after its closure, including
supervising the enforcement of sentences of the persons convicted by the Special
Court for Sierra Leone, managing the archives, protecting and supporting witnesses,
reviewing judgments and sentences, responding to requests for access to evidence
by national prosecuting authorities, conducting contempt of court proceedings and
providing defence counsel and legal aid for any proceedings before the Residual
Special Court. It will be a very small and efficient entity, with a minimal number of
staff. The estimated annual budget for the continuous activities of the Residual
Special Court amounts to $2 million. In addition, there may be costs for ad hoc
activities that might arise periodically.
When the agreement was concluded, it was thought that it would be possible to
secure voluntary contributions for the operations of the Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone. The recent experience of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, however,
has led to the conclusion that, particularly given the long-term nature of residual
mechanisms, it would not be prudent to leave the funding of the Residual Special
Court to the uncertainties of voluntary contributions. Nor would it be practical to
engage in continuous appeals for funding for this purpose. I recall that the Security

2

12-61510

S/2012/891

Council recently encouraged me to find practicable solutions to address the needs of
the Residual Special Court in the most efficient and effective manner. In this
connection, article 3 of the agreement provides that alternate means of financing the
Residual Special Court may be sought. Pursuant to that article, it is necessary to find
a viable and sustainable financial mechanism to ensure secure and continuous
funding for the Residual Special Court. Accordingly, I intend to submit a proposal to
the General Assembly for alternate means of financing the Residual Special Court.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-61510

3
