S/PV.8066

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8066th meeting

Tuesday, 10 October 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen/Mr. Delattre

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
China
Egypt
Ethiopia
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Russian Federation
Senegal
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Uruguay

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-31747 (E)
*1731747*

S/PV.8066

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

ballistic missiles towards other countries in the Gulf
region represent a counterproductive escalation of
rhetoric.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Responsive Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): The
parties to the conflict in Yemen are pursuing a futile
and cruel military conflict, which is eroding the path
to peace. At the same time, the people of Yemen are
suffering from an entirely man-made humanitarian
catastrophe.
Clashes and exchanges of heavy fire have continued
on all major frontlines, including Taiz, Ma’rib, A1 Jawf,
Al Bayda, Hajjah and Sa’dah governorates, and the
Saudi-Yemen border areas. The recent sharp increase in
civilian casualties show the parties’ continued disregard
for the loss of civilian life and their obligations under
international humanitarian law. An airstrike against a
residential suburb of Sana’a took place on 25 August
reportedly resulted in the killing of 14 civilians and
the injury of 16 others, and caused further damage to
civilian infrastructure.
In Taiz city, shelling of residential areas from
zones controlled by Houthi forces and forces loyal to
Ali Abdullah Saleh has continued. In two incidents on
15 and 18 September, rocket-fire killed and injured tens
of civilians, including eight children. In addition, on
23 September the coalition intercepted a Houthi missile
fired towards the Saudi city of Khamis Al-Mushayt.
The Houthis’ recent threats to expand the firing of
2/9

10/10/2017

Resolution 36/31, recently adopted by the Human
Rights Council, supports the Yemen National of Inquiry
and establishes a group of experts to examine alleged
violations and abuses of international human rights
and international law. It is a significant sign of the
increased engagement of the international community
and a step forward towards accountability and reducing
future violations.
I have consistently reminded the warring parties of
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including their obligation to
stop the recruitment of child soldiers and to end sexual
and gender-based violence. Targeting civilians and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure are unacceptable.
The conflict is creating a desperate situation in
every facet of daily life. The economy is shrinking even
further and the use of dwindling State revenues to fund
the war continues to hinder the salary payments on
which millions of Yemenis depend. There are continuing
efforts to reactivate the Central Bank and stabilize the
Yemeni economy, as recently discussed in the track-II
event held in Germany for the interest of repayment of
salaries to Yemeni civil servants, including those in
the education and health sectors. This will hopefully
decrease the humanitarian and economic strife.
Appproximately 17 million individuals are food
insecure, and over one third of the country’s districts
are now in severe danger of famine. The destruction
of infrastructure and the breakdown of public services
have fuelled the world’s worst outbreak of cholera,
which has already killed more than 2,100 individuals
and continues to infect thousands each week.
If things remain unchanged, future Yemeni
generations will have to suffer and bear the burden
of this conflict — including the massive destruction,
malnutrition, lack of education and economic
deterioration it has caused. In the absence of a political
solution, the outlook can only become bleaker. An
agreement to end the war is urgently needed so that
a new Yemeni unity Government, supported by the
international community, can be formed and begin the
process of rebuilding the country’s economy and State
institutions.
17-31747

10/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

I welcome the efforts of the World Bank and
UNICEF to mitigate the impact of the economic
crisis. The first disbursement of cash assistance to
the most vulnerable Yemeni households took place on
20 August. The $400 million programme will reach all
of its beneficiaries in the coming weeks and months.
The programme is providing vital support to those
households and is maintaining a critical safety-net
system.
There are no winners on the battlefield in Yemen.
The losers are the Yemeni people, for it is they who
are suffering from this war. They are getting poorer
while their influential leaders are getting richer. These
leaders are not interested in finding solutions because
in a settlement they will lose their power and control.
Nevertheless, the parties have to commit to ending all
hostilities and start discussions for a comprehensive
peace agreement.
Common ground must be found in order to relieve
the effects of conflict, hunger and disease and to
increase mutual trust. An agreement that provides for
secure access for humanitarian and commercial goods
to reach Hudaydah and get distributed to the rest of the
country, for the opening of the Sana’a airport and for
ensuring more consistent civil-service salary payments
will be an essential step in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis. However, those steps cannot replace the broad
solution we are trying to achieve, which will be a part
of a larger comprehensive peace agreement.
To reach such a peace agreement, I held meetings
with Yemeni and international officials during the
opening week of the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly in New York. I continue to be in
communication with the parties. I am currently in
the process of discussing a proposal that includes
humanitarian initiatives to rebuild trust and steps to
bring the parties back to the negotiating table. We will
discuss the details of this proposal with the Government
of Yemen and the alliance of the Houthis and General
People’s Congress, which have committed to engaging
in further discussions on the details of the proposal.
We hope that this commitment will translate into action
by the parties and that it will deepen their engagement
with me with respect to those initiatives, with a view to
achieving a peaceful political solution.
The bloodshed and destruction in Yemen has to end.
There are no excuses. There are no justifications. People
are asking the United Nations to provide a solution for

S/PV. 8066

salary-payment issue while others are actively working
to hinder talks on the issue as if they able ignore the
fact that millions of Yemenis are suffering. Many of the
powerful in Yemen benefit from the current conflict at
a time when their citizens are facing the worst suffering
in the history of the country.
At a time when the gap between the Yemeni people
and those in power is growing, the people want this war
to end. Yemeni young people, women and civil-society
groups are calling for peace, stability and accountability
for crimes committed. In the southern governorates,
past injustices and calls for greater autonomy remain
unaddressed despite the urgent need for them to be
addressed. The Yemenis themselves are not without
many positive ideas for tackling these issues in a
peaceful manner, but the parties need to show greater
flexibility and listen to the people. If they do not do
so, the fissures in Yemen’s political and social fabric
will only become wider, thereby increasing the danger
of further fragmentation and with it the potential for
terrorism.
The United Nations is using all its political,
logistical, administrative and advisory capabilities to
support the Yemeni cause, but only the warring parties
can decide to reach peace. They are the ones who will
be held to account for a failure. I reiterate that the only
viable path for the future of Yemen is a negotiated
settlement. The proposals that I have put forward meet
the concerns of both parties. Their implementation
would bring real benefits to the Yemeni people.
Finally, I request the Security Council to use all
its political and economic power it to apply pressure
on all parties to commit to a path of peace. The parties
must climb out of their trenches and put an end to
hostile rhetoric. Instead of fighting over Yemen, let us
cooperate for the best interests of Yemen.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: Last month, Yemen entered the third
year of its armed conflict with no clear end in sight.
The human cost of this conflict has been devastating.
Air strikes, shelling and ground fighting continue in
urban areas, where civilians are being injured or killed
and the critical infrastructure they rely on is being
destroyed. The international community has witnessed
the devastation in which the Yemeni people now live,

17-317473/9

S/PV.8066

The situation in the Middle East

and because of the crisis approximately 15 million
people lack adequate access to clean drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene, or health services; and about
7 million people are faced with the threat of famine.
Worse, all of this has been exacerbated by the largest
single-year outbreak of cholera ever recorded. As
the conflict continues, some 2 million people remain
displaced. They live in crowded, unsafe, unsanitary and
undignified spontaneous settlements, where shelters
made of rags, cardboard and just about anything their
residents can find in the streets are exposed to the
elements. The conflict in Yemen remains a man-made
crisis, generating intolerable suffering for the Yemeni
people.
I take this opportunity to highlight three of the
challenges facing the Yemeni people, and humanitarians
in particular — humanitarian access and its limitations,
the impact of civil-servant-salary interruptions on food
insecurity and critical services, and the ongoing risks
in commercial access to the country.
Humanitarians face unacceptable obstacles from
all sides in carrying out relief efforts in Yemen. The
biggest problem is actual prevention of humanitarian
access. For example, the authorities in Sana’a regularly
deny access and have arbitrarily delayed or denied
dozens of requests for humanitarian personnel to enter
the country via Sana’a. Furthermore, for several weeks
now, humanitarian partners have been reporting a freeze
on the issuance of visas by the authorities in Aden for
international non-governmental organizations.
Such obstacles are abhorrent in a country where
the threat of famine looms over millions, where there
are over 800,000 suspected cases of cholera across
90 per cent of communities, and where only 45 per
cent of health facilities are functioning. Quite simply,
these obstructions cost lives. We hope that the recent
commitments made by the parties will translate into
giving priority to unfettered humanitarian access.
The interruption of regular salary payments for
1.25 million civil servants is an additional driver of
humanitarian need, particularly food insecurity, as
affected public employees and their families represent
nearly a quarter of the population. Where food is
available in markets, people now lack the cash to buy
basic necessities. The prices have risen significantly.
Recent market analysis puts the average price of a
food basket 30 per cent higher than pre-crisis prices,
and in some cases as much as 60 per cent higher,
4/9

10/10/2017

despite the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism’s facilitating the majority of Yemen’s
average food requirements each month. The price
of cooking gas in Aden and Hudaydah is more than
70 per cent higher than the pre-crisis level. That reality
is having a negative effect on the capacity of the
population to cope. People are now taking to such acts
as selling their assets and taking on debt to buy food.
Children are paying a particularly high price, not
least the 460,000 who are severely malnourished. Even
if the fighting were to stop today, stunted growth and
delayed cognitive development would linger for an
entire generation. The loss of livelihoods for adults also
means that thousands of children are forced to work
rather than go to school, with child marriage rates also
increasing as families claim incapacity to support their
children.
In addtion, the lack of civil-servant salaries has
disrupted the provision of basic services to the wider
population. Already stressed critical services are
unavailable if employees are not present to operate
them, most notably in the health, water and sanitation
and education sectors. We seek the support of the
Council in finding a way to prioritize salaries for those
sectors. It is not difficult to draw a clear link between
the near-absent health, water and sanitation services
and the unprecedented cholera outbreak.
As the Council is aware, Yemen has long been
reliant on the importation of commercial goods to meet
its basic food and fuel needs. However, commercial
traffic to Yemen, by both sea and air, remains
challenging. Any significant decline in imports due to
bureaucratic delays risks making the threat of famine
a reality. In that regard, we renew our calls for the
protection and continued operation of Hudaydah port
and for the unconditional instalment of the four World
Food Programme mobile cranes. The closure of Sana’a
airport to commercial traffic has blocked thousands of
Yemenis from travelling for medical care, and students
from attending universities abroad. A resumption
of commercial flights is urgently and immediately
needed. There appears to be no legitimate reason that
the inspection mechanism operated by the coalition
prior to August 2016 cannot be reinstated.
The Yemen humanitarian response plan is 55 per
cent funded, with $1.3 billion of the $2.3 billion required
to reach the 12 million people in need of humanitarian
support and protection this year. We thank Member
17-31747

10/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

States for their generosity and funding. Despite the
complexity of the response, this year humanitarians
have already reached 7 million people with direct
assistance. We therefore encourage Member States to
directly support our efforts and to do more through
the response plan. This year, the Yemen Humanitarian
Fund has reached $128 million, the largest globally. The
Fund was nimble in rapidly responding to the cholera
outbreak and famine prevention. Over 21 per cent of
the Fund’s allocations have gone to national partners.
We salute them for their efforts on the front lines of
the humanitarian response and, again, we thank donor
Member States for their generosity.
As we desperately wait for a political solution and an
end to the conflict, we call upon all States to exert their
influence on all parties to the conflict to comply with
their obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and human rights law. The Human
Rights Council’s recent adoption by consensus of
resolution 36/31 is one example of the influence States
can exert. The parties and their supporters need to show
greater commitment to finding a political solution. We
need the international community to step up its efforts
in support of a viable solution that addresses the root
causes and restores the hope of the Yemeni people for a
better future. They deserve nothing less.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ging
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and the Director of the
Operational Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings. We express our full support for their work.
Despite the numerous pronouncements made by the
Security Council on the situation in Yemen, including
the presidential statements of 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7)
and 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), and in spite of the
repeated calls that the Council has made to the parties
with a view to their commitment to a cessation of
hostilities and initiation of dialogue to achieve a
political solution to the conflict, the situation in the
country has not improved, and the humanitarian crisis
unfortunately continues to worsen without signs of
progress.

S/PV. 8066

Aside from the conflict, which has generated
nearly 3 million internally displaced persons, and has
left 9.8 million people in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance, according to data published on 1 October by
the World Health Organization, the cholera outbreak has
spread to 96 per cent of governorates in Yemen, causing
over 2,000 deaths and possibly infecting 750,000
people, a one third increase over the number reported
at our previous briefing, in August (see S/PV.8027),
where the figure was around 500,000 people.
Regrettably, the presence of armed groups,
checkpoints and indiscriminate airstrikes, especially in
the governorates of Al-Yauf, Marib, Sa’ada, Hudaydah
and Sana’a, among others, continue to hamper the
distribution and deployment of humanitarian assistance,
not only because of the transit and transit restrictions
that those entail, but because of the high risk that
humanitarian workers are subjected to when entering
those places, where they have been subject to attacks
with firearms on a number of occasions, the origin
of which should be a matter deserving of the careful
attention by the Council. In that regard, we reiterate to
the parties involved in the conflict that they must allow
and guarantee the security and integrity of the agencies
that provide humanitarian assistance. We also remind
them that it is prohibited to identify such agencies as
military targets by any reasoning. Moreover, they must
ensure the unconditional and unrestricted access of aid
to all places where it is needed.
With regard to the food shortage in Yemen, as
reported by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations last September, 60 per cent of the
population lives with food insecurity, and 7 million
people are at risk of famine. This situation is aggravated
by the fact that 90 per cent of the food staples required
by the population to survive are imported. Furthermore,
the ports that are currently providing services do not do
so in full capacity and are not capable of meeting the
demand. In that regard, we call on the parties to ensure
the full operation of all ports and routes of access to
the same, including the port of Hudaydah and Sana’a
airport.
For all of those reasons, we reiterate our call on the
Council and the membership in general to maintain a
unanimous and firm position in condemning belligerent
acts and campaigns that aggravate the crisis in Yemen
and that generate the damaging instability that threatens
the lives of millions of innocent people.

17-317475/9

S/PV.8066

The situation in the Middle East

We also reiterate our call on the parties involved in
the conflict to comply with the provisions of resolution
2216 (2015), to commit to a cessation of hostilities
and to establish a sustained process of dialogue and
negotiation that will allow for a peaceful, inclusive and
orderly political transition that meets the demands and
aspirations of the Yemeni people, and that is framed in
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Yemen.
Finally, we consider it important to reiterate the
request made by the former Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, to
create an independent international body to investigate
possible violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, thereby preventing impunity from
silencing the voices of the thousands of victims that this
conflict has claimed.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and to the representative of the Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for their briefings. We also thank the French presidency
for convening this public briefing.
Uruguay sees no other way to arrive at a solution to
the bloody conflict in Yemen except through a Yemeniled negotiation process in which all parties involved
participate in an inclusive, peaceful and democratic
manner. There is no military solution to the conflict.
Uruguay emphatically urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table without preconditions and in good
faith and to agree to put an end to the armed conflict
in a peaceful way as quickly as possible. On a military
basis, none of the contenders will prevail.
Uruguay also calls on the parties to the conflict to
fully comply with the cessation of hostilities to facilitate
negotiation and as a first step towards establishing
peace. They should understand that, if the war were
to continue, it would favour the actions of Al-Qaida
and Da’esh. Furthermore, those countries that have
influence on the parties must cooperate in the search
for a peaceful solution to the conflict.
The lack of concrete results in the peace process
continues to create suffering for Yemeni civilians,
causing great harm every day to the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is on the verge of collapse,
which is aggravated by famine and the outbreak
of cholera.
6/9

10/10/2017

With regard to the humanitarian situation, Uruguay
is concerned by the dire situation of civilians, in
particular that of the most vulnerable groups, such as
women and children. According to a recently published
report by Yemen Protection Cluster, led by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, during the
first half of 2017 the number of air attacks reported
exceeded the total number of air attacks for all of 2016,
with a monthly average almost three times greater for
the present year. The same phenomenon applies to the
data on armed clashes. Civilians are the ones paying the
highest price for those acts — with their lives.
Uruguay condemns each and every violation
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law that are taking place in Yemen. In that
connection, we urge all parties to distinguish at all times
between the civilian population and the combatants.
Civilians are not a target, and humanitarian assistance
must be allowed to reach them without restrictions
or interruption.
My delegation has spoken on several occasions
in the Council about the need for accountability for
the serious widespread violations of international
humanitarian law committed by all warring parties.
We are pleased by the recent adoption by the Human
Rights Council of a resolution that provides for the
establishment of a panel of experts to monitor the
situation of human rights in Yemen, including violations
and abuses committed by all the parties to the conflict
since September 2014. In that regard, Uruguay calls on
the parties, in accordance with the provisions of that
resolution, to provide full and transparent access to the
international investigative committee and to cooperate
with it so that it can fulfil its mandate.
All parties involved in this prolonged conflict have
committed war crimes and other serious violations of
international law — and continue to do so with total
impunity. They must be held accountable before justice
for their actions. Accountability is crucial to achieve a
lasting settlement to the conflict.
Similarly, Uruguay welcomes and appreciates the
annual report (S/2017/821) of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, as well as the inclusion
in the attached list of perpetrators of serious violations
against children in Yemen.
Finally, allow in particular to thank the Special
Envoy for his work and reiterate our strong support
to him. We are also grateful for the continuous work
17-31747

10/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

carried out by humanitarian workers and agencies in
Yemen, who are trying to help millions of persons
under extremely difficult conditions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I extend
to the Security Council a greeting of peace on behalf of
the people of Yemen, who aspire to peace.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your excellent leadership of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
express our great gratitude to you, Sir, for giving us
this opportunity to speak before the Council today. We
would like to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed for the great efforts they are undertaking. The
Yemeni Government fully supports their efforts aimed
at achieving at a sustainable peace agreement that would
put an end to the coup against the Yemeni State and
end the war that has been waged by the Houthi-Saleh
coalition against our people since September 2014.
The Council meets today two weeks after a great
deal of activity at the United Nations following the
opening of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly. The Republic of Yemen participated in the
opening of the session with a high-level delegation, led
by His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour. The meetings and dialogues held with various
senior United Nations officials, as well as Security
Council member States, with regard to the situation
in Yemen were especially important. The primary
message of those meetings can be summarized in the
willingness of the Yemeni Government to immediately
meet the requirements for sustainable peace and in
order to put an end to the war in Yemen under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Yemen.
However, we cannot put an end to the war and
achieve peace unilaterally. On the contrary, putting
an end to the war requires the acceptance by the coup
party to return to the negotiating table and to accept
the elements of peace, as well as the terms of reference,
in order to put an end to the suffering of our patient
Yemeni people.
The opening of the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly coincided with the three-year
anniversary of the war, which is being waged by the

S/PV. 8066

Houthi/Saleh coalition against the people of Yemen. The
war runs contrary the national consensus, embodied
in the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its means of implementation, and the outcomes of the
National Dialogue for a peaceful political transition in
Yemen, which was adopted under the auspices of the
United Nations and with the blessing of the Security
Council. The Security Council held an extraordinary
meeting in Sana’a in January 2013 in order to support
the aspirations of the Yemeni people towards building a
democratic federation based on justice, equality, human
rights and good governance.
Three years have passed since the Houthi/Saleh
coup d’état — the greatest catastrophe ever witnessed
by Yemen — began, and the miserable circumstances
in my country are apparent. The coup has displaced
millions of Yemeni people, inside and outside Yemen.
It has killed tens of thousands of Yemeni citizens and
it continues to indiscriminately shell the heroic city of
Taiz. It has caused the spread of cholera and turned
Sana’a into an enormous prison detaining thousands of
Yemen’s best citizens in terms of thinkers, academics,
students and journalists, not to mention the fact that
children are being recruited. The coup has demolished
the homes of its opponents and has changed the
educational curriculums in line with a narrow,
dynastic, religious perspective that proclaims a divine
right to govern the population without observance of
the principles of democracy and pluralism in which we
all believe.
Three years after the beginning of this human
suffering, which is unprecedented in the history of
Yemen, all observers can see that the Houthi/Saleh
alliance is exploiting the security, stability, sovereignty
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. The spread of
health-related disasters is being used in a strategy of
precariousness hatched by Tehran in the context of its
expansionist view of the region and carried out with
the Houthi tentacles in Yemen. In Yemen we can either
accept the rule of the Houthi militias and the imposition
of a Hizbullah-like model or face death and destruction,
as well as the spread of instability and tension in
the region.
The Houthi-Saleh alliance continues to usurp
authority. According to the final report of the Panel
of Experts established in accordance with resolution
2266 (2016), that alliance has looted 70 per cent of the
State’s resources (see S/2017/81). It rejects the peace
initiatives that have been submitted and presented by

17-317477/9

S/PV.8066

The situation in the Middle East

the Special Envoy to the Secretary-General on Yemen
in Geneva and Kuwait, the most recent of which was
the Hudaydah initiative, which was welcomed by the
Yemeni Government and discussed in detail by the
President during his meetings in New York. What
cannot be disputed is that the Houthis do not have the
political will to directly engage with the requirements
for peace in Yemen. The political will of the Houthis is
being held hostage by outside forces that do not hope
for security and stability in Yemen or the region.
The Yemeni Government continues to believe
that war cannot be the means by which the Yemeni
crisis will be settled. As everyone knows, the Yemeni
Government did not resort to taking up arms when the
Houthi militias controlled Sana’a. The Government has
made concessions in order to arrive at the controversial
Peace and National Partnership Agreement, which was
rejected by the party responsible for the coup. That
party then hijacked the State, thinking that they would
get away with it by killing the State’s leadership and
its opponents and burying the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the results of the National
Dialogue Conference, which all Yemenis agreed to. The
attendance and participation of the party that carried
out the coup in all the rounds of negotiation in the past
were simply maneuvers used in order to gain time and
impose a criminal scheme that aims to destroy Yemen
and assault neighbouring States. That is all within an
agenda that is being carried out by Iran in order to
spread tension and destabilize the region by creating
tension and fabricating conflicts, which fuel sectarian
violence and swell feelings of hatred. Such actions
spread violence and chaos within the region.
Sustainable peace will not be achieved if Iran does
not stop interfering in Yemen’s affairs and in the affairs
of the region. The world must today take a collective
stand in order to reign in Iran’s expansionist greed.
The experience of the Ayatollah’s oppressive regime,
which was rejected by the Iranian people, cannot be
imposed on Yemen. The terms of reference for peace
in Yemen, which are embodied in the initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council, the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, include the necessary elements to guarantee
a sustainable solution to the Yemeni crisis. Moreover,
resolution 2216 (2015) is gaining more strategic
importance with time. The framework of reference for
the international community is growing, along with the
unified position of the Security Council regarding the
8/9

10/10/2017

Yemeni crisis. It strongly confirms that any sustainable
solution to the Yemeni crisis can be based only on the
withdrawal of the militias responsible for the coup and
the return of power to the State, as well as the handing
over of weapons and rockets of the State. Only the State
should be in possession of weapons.
Before the General Assembly, President Hadi said
that the rockets targeting the territories of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as well as those that the militias
have threatened to use against the territories of the
United Arab Emirates, which have a range of over 600
kilometres, are Iranian rockets (see A/72/PV.11). He
said that they are distinct from the rockets that are in
the possession of the Yemeni army.
The Yemeni Government has limited capabilities
and is undergoing a very complicated situation.
Additionally, it faces great challenges in the economic,
security and services sectors because of the war and the
destruction that it has wrought on all facets of daily life.
Yemen is in dire need of international assistance in order
to support its own efforts to entrench peace and security
and activate services in the liberated areas, commence
reconstruction and remedy security breaches. It must
also continue with its efforts to combat terrorism. Yemen
continues to need support, due to the levels of poverty
and the lack of food security, especially in areas that
are being shelled on a daily basis by the militias, such
as the besieged city of Taiz, which has been under siege
for over two and a half years. In the governorates under
control of the coup forces, there is a dire humanitarian
situation, as a result of the rebels’ refusal to pay wages
to employees of the State in the sectors of health care
and education. The militias continue to loot funds and
resources from the customs and tax authorities. They
continue to loot the reserves of the Central Bank in
order to fund the so-called Houthi popular committees
and war efforts. They continue to fully drain economic
and financial institutions.
The role of the private sector has diminished
and, in its place, a sector of war merchants has been
created. That has been enabled by capital being gained
during the war by people who are taking advantage of
opportunities to rob humanitarian aid in order to traffic
fuel and weapons, loot public funds and impose mafiastyle protection tactics on normal citizens who are being
deprived of their monthly wages. School curriculums
have not been safe from the onslaught. They have
been replaced by extremist, racist curriculums that
encourage a culture of conflict, violence and religious
17-31747

10/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

sectarianism, which represents a clear reproach to the
rest of the world. The Yemeni Government calls upon
the international community to pressure the rebels to
accept the Hudaydah initiative of Mr. Cheikh Ould
Ahmed. There must be further initiatives in order to
build confidence and mobilize the resources of the State
and transfer tax and customs revenues at the Hudaydah
port to the branch of the Central Bank in Hudaydah, in
coordination with the branch in Aden. The Government
has also pledged to cover the deficit accrued from
paying the salaries of civil servants, especially in major
sectors, such as education and health care and areas
under militia control.
Our people have not been paid in a year and
the militias refuse to cooperate with the Yemeni
Government, the Special Envoy or international
organizations, such as the World Bank, to pay the
wages of our people. Faced with such a catastrophic
situation, we call upon Member States to shoulder the
responsibilities of the Yemeni crisis by pressuring the
rebel forces to implement Security Council resolutions
and offering real concessions, so that Yemen can be
spared from further bloodshed. We must work towards
allowing access to humanitarian aid for all Yemenis
living under the control of rebel forces.
The Yemeni Government is most concerned with
alleviating the suffering of our people. The Yemeni
Government has repeatedly expressed its readiness to
reopen the airport in Sana’a to humanitarian flights,
provided that the militias exit the airport and hand over
management duties of the airport to the professional
staff that ran it before September 2014, under the

S/PV. 8066

supervision of the United Nations. We could open
the airport in Sana’a today if the militias abided by
those conditions.
Dealing with the Yemeni crisis from a humanitarian
perspective, despite its importance, without paying
due attention to the political perspective or working
towards arriving at a sustainable political solution
to the Yemeni issue, is simply an exercise in damage
control that would prolong the war and suffering caused
by the coup carried out by the Houthi-Saleh militias.
Therefore, the Security Council’s serious desire to deal
with the humanitarian situation in Yemen is being put
to the test, because it must help deal with the root causes
of the crisis, as opposed to just treating the symptoms.
In conclusion, we highly value the great efforts
being exerted by the international community and the
Ambassadors of the Group of 18 to achieve security and
stability in Yemen. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the call made by President Hadi to the friends of
Yemen to resume their efforts to implement peace and
reconstruction in the country. On behalf of Yemen, I
would like to renew our thanks and appreciation to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
as well as to the rest of the States of our coalition, for
their efforts to restore legitimacy, security and stability
in Yemen and aid its people.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-317479/9
