General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

H8

ritory and of their non-involvement in its intemal
affairs,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,85 in particular its intention to respond positively
to the aspirations of the people for genuine independence,
Regretting that the administering Power has failed
to co-operate with the United Nations in the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its unqualified support of the right of
the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti) to
immediate and unconditional independence m accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Considers that the situation in the Territory
could become a threat to peace and stability in the
region and might affect adversely international peace
and security unless an urgent solution to it is found;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to create
the necessary conditions in order to accelerate the
process of independence of the people of so-called
French Somaliland (Djibouti) by effecting in particular
the release of political prisoners and the return of the
representatives of the liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity and of all refugees, in accordance with the Convention of the Organization of African Unity Governing the Specific Aspects
of Refugee Problems in Africa, 1969;
4. Calls once again upon the Government of France
to grant immediate and unconditional independence to
the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti)
a_nd to withdraw ali its military forces from the Terntory;
?· Cal/s upon all States, particularly the administenng Power and the neighbouring States, to refrain
from any .action, unilateral or otherwise, which might
alter the mdependence and the territorial integrity of
so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti);
6. Calls upon all States to renounce forthwith any
and all claims to the Territory and to declare null and
void any and all acts asserting such claims;
1. Urges ali Member States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, in co-operation with the administering Power, to
render all possible moral and material assistance to
the people of the Territory;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory
under active consideration, including the dispatch of a
visiting mission to the Territory, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3485 (XXX). Question of Timor
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of ali peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the U nited N ations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
85 Jbid., 2168th meeting.

Having examined the cbapter of ·the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples reIating to the question of Timor,86
H aving heard the statements of the rerresentatives
of Portugal, as. the administering Power,8 concerning
develo:pments in Portuguese Timor and the implementation wtth regard to that Territory of the relevant provisions of the Charter and the Declaration, as well as
those of General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Bearing in mind the responsibility of the administering Power to undertake ali efforts to create conditions
enabling the people of Portuguese Timor to exercise
freely their rigbt to self-determination, freedom and
independence and to determine their future political
status in accordance with the principles of the Charter
and the Declaration, in an atmosphere of peace and
~~

.

Mindful that ali States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
intemational relatlons from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
of any State, or from taking any action inconsistent
with the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Deeply conctrned at the critical situation resulting
from the military intervention of the armed forces of
Indonesia in Portuguese Timor,
1. Calls upon ali States to respect the inalienable
right of the people of Portuguese Timor to self-determination, freedom and independence and to determine
t~eir future political status in acc~rdance with the princ1ples of the Charter of the Umted Nations and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Calls upon the administering Power to continue
to make every effort to find a solution by peaceful
means through talles between the Government of Portugal and the political parties representing the people of
Portuguese Timor;
3. Appe~~ to ali the parties in Portuguese Timor to
respond pos1t1vely to efforts to find a peaceful solution
through talks between them and the Government of
Portugal in the hope that such talks will bring an end
to the strife in that Territory and lead towards the
orderly exercise of the right of self-determination by
the people of Portuguese Timor;
4. Strongly deplores the military intervention of the
armed forces of Indonesia in Portuguese Timor;
5. Calls upon the Govemment of Indonesia to
desist from f~er violation ~f the terr~torial integrity
of Portuguese Timor and to w1thdraw w1thout delay its
armed forces from the Territory in order to enable the
people of the Territory freely to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Cbarter
t~ the critical situation in the Territory of Portugues~
Timor and recommends that it take urgent action to
protect the territorial integrity of Portuguese Timor
an~ the inalienable right of its people to self-determinatlon;
86 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.l ), chap. VIII.
87 lbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourt/r Committee, 2178th 2184th
and 2185th meetings.
'

Res~lutiona adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

nial Countries and Peoples and requests the Committee
to send a fact-finding mission to the Territory as soon
as possible, in consultation with the political parties
in Portuguese Timor and the Govemment of Portugal.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975

1. Calls upon all States to respect the unity and
territorial integrity of Portuguese Tunor;
8. Requests the Government of Portugal to continue its co-operation with the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colo*

119

"'

"'

Other decisions
Report of the Trusteeship Council

(Item 13)
At its 2437th plenary·meeting, on 11 December 1975, the General Assembly,
on the proposal of the Chairman of the. Fourth Committee, 88 took note of the
report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 24 October 1974 to
29 August 197589 and the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.90
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
(Item 23)

At its 2431st plenary meeting, on 8 December 1975, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,91 adopted the following text
as representing the consensus of the members of the Assembly on the question
of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
"The General Assembly, having examined the relevant chapter of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples92 and having heard the statement of the administering
Power98 on the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, with regard to the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, notes
with appreciation the clo8e co-operation of Australia, as the administering
Power concerned, in the relevant work of the Special Committee, and its
continued preparedness to receive a further visiting mission to the Territory,
at an appropriate time. Bearing in mind the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions as will enable the people of the Territory
to determine fully their future political status, the General Assembly notes
• with interest the administrative and legislative steps taken and the further
measures envisaged by the Government of Australia in the light of the conclusions and recommendations of the 1974 Visiting Mission to the TerritoryK
with a view to enabling the people of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands to exercise
their right to self-determination in accordance w!th the principies of the
Charter and the Declaration. The General Assembly requests the Special
Committee, in continued co-operation with the administering Power, to seek
the best ways and means of implementing the Declaration with respect to
the Territory and to report thereon to the Assembly at its thirty-first session."
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the
Fourth Committee,91 adopted the following text as representing the consensus of
the members of the Assembly on the question of St. Helena:
"The General Assembly, having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power,116 and having examined the relevant chapter of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
88 Jbld., Thlrtieth Session, A.nnexes, agenda item 13, document A/10425.
• Ibid., Thwtüth Smi01J, Su¡,pl1tMnt No. 4 (A/10004).
to lbld., Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XI.
91 Ibid., Thirtieth Sesslon, A.nnexes, agenda item 23, document A/10427, _para. 73.
9'J[bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XVII.
98 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
"Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chap. XX, annex,
paras. 200-217.
91 Ibid., Thlrtieth Session, Fourth Commlttee, 2166th meeting.
