72

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

1. Recognizes that the scope of the problem mentioned in paragraph 1 (d) of General Assembly resolution 2450 (XXIII) and Commission on Human
Rights resolution 10 (XXVII) is of such a comprehensive nature as to cover every aspect of this question;
2. Recognizes further the need to make a distinction between this subject-matter and other related
matters so as to avoid duplication of work in the United
Nations system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the specialized agencies concerned, particularly the International Labour Organisation, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to accelerate and complete preparation of
relevant reports on this subject, to be submitted at the
earliest possible date, paying more attention to the
problems of an equitable and just distribution of incomes, the protection of the right to work and to
health, the preparation and retraining of personnel, the
raising of standards of living and the educational and
cultural level of people in the light of scientific and
technological developments;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
proceed with and accelerate its work, making full use
of the reports of the Secretary-General, the report of
the above-mentioned seminar and of any future seminars on the same subject, and any relevant reports
by other institutions, with a view, in particular, to
examining the possibility of preparing draft instruments
designed to strengthen respect for human rights proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in the light of developments in science and technology;
5. Decides to continue consideration of this item
at its forthcoming sessions with a view to arriving at
conclusions on the item as early as possible.

2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3027 (XXVII). Elimination of all forms of
religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 ( XVII) of 7 December 1962, 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965 and
2295 (XXII) of 11 December 1967,
Affirming the equal importance of both a declaration and an international convention on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance,
Convinced of the need to give new momentum to
this work by initially concentrating on the completion
of one of these instruments,
Noting that the consideration of this item has been
deferred at each session of the General Assembly
without proper discussion since the twenty-second
session,
1. Decides to accord priority to the completion of
the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Religious Intolerance before resuming consideration of
the International Convention on this subject;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
States Members of the United Nations or members of
specialized agencies:

(a) The preliminary draft of a United Nations
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance prepared by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities ;62
(b) The report of the Working Group set up by the
Commission on Human Rights at its twentieth session
to prepare a draft Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Religious Intolerance;53
3. Invites Governments to transmit to the Secretary-General their observations on the abovementioned documents;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
observations received, together with an analytical presentation, to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session;
5. Decides to give priority at its twenty-eighth session to the elaboration of a Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance with a view
to the adoption, if possible, of such a Declaration as
part of the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December I 972
3028 (XXVII). United Nations conference for an
international convention on adoption law

The General Assembly,
RecaJling the historical concern of the United
Nations for the problems of minors, as expressed in the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child,"~
Realizing that children, in particular, suffer the most
in national disasters, wars and social disruption,
Considering that, owing to both the lack of legislation and the contrasts between the laws of various
countries, ever-increasing juridical and legal problems
arise which may affect the interests of minors or other
persons to be adopted,
Considering further the multiple causes which, in
our modern world, provoke the massive institutionalization of children, thus depriving millions of children
all over the world of the family atmosphere which is
indispensable for their development, and emphasizing
the very grave consequences, often irreparable, that
this implies for their physical, psychological and intellectual development and for their active social integratioo,
Mindful that children constitute the future human
resource for each and every nation of the world and
must, therefore, be nurtured and protected,
Regretting that it has been unable at its current
session, owing to the heavy programme of work, to
examine the question of a United Nations conference
for an international convention on adoption law,
Commending the World Conference on Adoption
and Foster Placement 65 for calling attention to the
02 A/8330, annex I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 294.
53 Ibid., annex II. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 8 (E/3873), para. 296.
114 Resolution 1386 (XIV).
55 Held at Milan, Italy, from 16 to 19 September 1971.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) Policies, programmes and comparative law concerning the protection of children for adoption and
foster placement;
(b) Comments on the question of sponsoring an
international conference for the purpose of elaborating
an international convention on adoption law.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

grave problems relating to adoption and foster placement,

Requests the Commission on Social Development
at its twenty-third session to consider this question and
to make recommendations, within the approved work
programme of the Social Development Division, for
the preparation of a report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session, which would include:
*

*

*

Other decisions
Protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions
in areas of armed conflict

(Item 49 (b))

At its 2107th plenary meeting, on 12 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Third Committee,56 decided to include the item
entitled "Human rights in armed conflicts: protection of journalists engaged in
dangerous missions in areas of armed conflict" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session and to consider it as a matter of high priority. 57
Freedom of information

(Item 57)

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Third Committee, 58 decided to include the
item entitled "Freedom of information" in the provisional agenda of its twentyeighth session.
116 Official Records of

73

the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Sestion, Annexes, agenda

item 49, document A/8917, para. 16.
41 /bid., document A/L.689.

58 Ibid., agenda item 57, document A/8943, para. 4.
