A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/22
16 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 40
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.38 and Add.1 and A/52/L.39)]
52/22.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/5 of 13 October 1993 on observer status for the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the framework for cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe1 signed on 26 May 1993, as well as its resolutions
50/87 of 18 December 1995 and 51/57 of 12 December 1996 on cooperation between the two organizations,
Recalling also the declaration at the 1992 Helsinki Summit by the heads of State or Government of the
participating States of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe of their understanding that the
Conference is a regional arrangement in the sense of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
as such provides an important link between European and global security,2
Acknowledging the increasing contribution of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security in its region through activities in
early warning and preventive diplomacy, including through the activities of the High Commissioner on
National Minorities, crisis management, arms control and disarmament, post-crisis stabilization and
rehabilitation measures, and its efforts in supporting the economic dimension, as well as its crucial role in
the human dimension,

1

See A/48/185, annex II.

2

See A/47/361-S/24370, annex. For the final text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-seventh
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1992, document S/24370.
98-76057

/...

A/RES/52/22
Page 2

Recalling the special ties between the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Mediterranean Partners for Cooperation,
Underlining the continued importance of enhanced coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;3

2. Also welcomes the further improvement of cooperation and coordination in the past year, as well
as progress in common work in the field between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe;
3. Further welcomes the Summit Declaration and the decisions adopted by the heads of State or
Government of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe on 3 December 1996 at Lisbon, in
particular the Lisbon Declaration on a Common and Comprehensive Security Model for Europe for the
Twenty-first Century, including the decision to define in a platform for cooperative security modalities for
cooperation between the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other security
organizations, and the ongoing work within the framework of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, as well as the commitment of participating States to consider developing a charter on European
security on the basis of the Lisbon Declaration;
4. Notes with appreciation decision 193 of 5 November 1997 of the Permanent Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to establish, under the aegis of the Permanent Council,
a representative on freedom of the media of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
5. Also notes with appreciation decision 194 of 5 November 1997 of the Permanent Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to establish within the secretariat of that organization
the position of a coordinator of economic and environmental activities, which, inter alia, will enhance
interaction by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe with relevant international economic
organizations, financial institutions and organizations active in the environmental field;
6. Commends the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for the fulfilment, in
cooperation with the United Nations, of the role assigned to it by the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto4 (collectively the "Peace Agreement"), in particular
for:
(a) The successful supervision of the preparation and the conduct of the municipal elections on 13 and
14 September 1997;
(b) The monitoring, together with other international organizations, of the development of human rights
standards;
(c) The agreements concluded under its auspices on confidence-building and security-building measures,
as well as on subregional arms control;

3

A/52/450.

4

A/50/790-S/1995/999. For the final text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Fiftieth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1995, document S/1995/999.
/...

A/RES/52/22
Page 3

(d) The efforts to contribute to the building of democratic structures and to the fostering of civil society,
including the promotion of human rights standards, and welcomes in this context further cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
7. Welcomes the readiness of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to continue to
contribute to a peaceful settlement in and around Bosnia and Herzegovina;
8. Welcomes also decision 190 of 26 September 1997 of the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to supervise the preparation and conduct of elections in Republika
Srpska;
9. Underlines the responsibility of the parties to speedy and full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto;
10. Underlines also the responsibility of the relevant authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
implement fully the results of the municipal elections on 13 and 14 September 1997;
11. Welcomes the close cooperation between the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium,
especially as regards confidence-building and reconciliation, as well as the strengthening of democratic
institutions, processes and mechanisms at the municipal and district or county levels with the aim of
achieving a peaceful reintegration and a safe return of refugees and displaced persons in the region, and notes
that a continued high-quality police monitoring presence would make an important contribution to the success
of the international efforts in that regard;
12. Welcomes also decision 176 of 26 June 1997 of the Permanent Council of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, to extend the mandate of the reinforced Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Mission in Croatia until 31 December 1998;
13. Commends the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for the fulfilment of the role
assigned to it in Albania in decision 160 of 27 March 1997 of the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe within the security environment provided by the multinational
protection force, authorized by the Security Council in its resolutions 1101 (1997) of 28 March 1997 and
1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997, in particular for:
(a) The establishment of a coordinating framework for the international efforts in Albania;
(b) The provision, in cooperation with other international organizations, of advice and assistance within
its field of experience;
(c) The success of its assistance in the preparation and the conduct, as well as the monitoring, of the
elections on 29 June and 6 July 1997;
14. Takes note of decision 185 of 18 September 1997 of the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to establish an Advisory and Monitoring Group of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in Belarus;
15. Welcomes the cooperation between the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the United Nations in the peace process in Georgia, including through the Human Rights Office in Sukhumi;

/...

A/RES/52/22
Page 4

16. Fully supports the activities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to achieve
a peaceful solution to the conflict in and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, and welcomes
cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in this
regard;
17. Welcomes the continued close cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Tajikistan, as well as the signing on 27 June 1997 of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan,5 and calls upon the parties to
implement fully the General Agreement;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue exploring with the Chairman-in-Office and the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe possibilities for further enhancement of
cooperation, information exchange and coordination between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and on the basis of the framework for cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,1 signed on 26 May 1993, avoiding as much as possible
duplication and overlapping in those areas where both organizations have their own respective roles to play;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe", and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session a report on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in implementation of the
present resolution.
55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997

5

See A/52/219-S/1997/510, annex I. For the final text, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Fifty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1997, document S/1997/510.
