A/RES/67/295

United Nations

Distr.: General
13 September 2013

General Assembly
Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 August 2013
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/67/L.76 and Add.1)]

67/295. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/262 of 29 May 2012 and all its previous relevant
resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential if a society in armed conflict or
recovering from armed conflict is to come to terms with past crimes committed and
to prevent such crimes in the future,
Acknowledging the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved
considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and judicial proceedings in
various situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to the Rome
Statute and by the Security Council, and which the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court has initiated proprio motu, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remain essential for the International Criminal Court to carry
out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court, 2

_______________
1
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
Ibid., vol. 2283, No. 1272.

12-49630

*1249630*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/295

Report of the International Criminal Court

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution, with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which enables, inter alia, facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
Noting the need for funding of expenses related to investigations or
prosecutions of the International Criminal Court, including in connection with
situations referred to the Court by the Security Council,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2011/12; 4

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States in all regions
of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying or
acceding to it without delay;
3.
Welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome
Statute that have become parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4.
Notes the recent ratifications of the amendments adopted at the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala, from 31 May to 11 June 2010;
5.
Underlines, bearing in mind that in accordance with the Rome Statute the
International Criminal Court is complementary to national criminal jurisdictions,
that States need to adopt appropriate measures within their national legal systems
for those crimes for which they are required under international law to exercise their
responsibility to investigate and prosecute;
6.
Encourages further efforts by the United Nations, other international and
regional organizations and States, as well as civil society, to appropriately assist
States, upon their request, to strengthen their domestic capacity to investigate and
prosecute crimes;
7.
Emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and judicial
assistance in conducting effective investigations and prosecutions;
8.
Recognizes the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights, achieve sustainable peace and further the development of
nations, in accordance with international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations;
_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
See A/67/308.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2/5

Report of the International Criminal Court

A/RES/67/295

9.
Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its
functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this
respect;
10. Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
11. Recalls article 3 of the Relationship Agreement 2 according to which, with
a view to facilitating the effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court shall cooperate closely,
whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual
interest pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity
with the respective provisions of the Charter and the Rome Statute, and shall respect
each other’s status and mandate, 6 and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include information relevant to the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship
Agreement in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session;
12. Takes note of the latest guidance issued by the Secretary-General on
contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest warrants or summonses issued by
the International Criminal Court; 7
13. Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute;
14. Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
agreements with the International Criminal Court;
15. Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if
the acceptance of a State which is not a party to the Rome Statute is required under
article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by declaration lodged
with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Court with respect to the crime in question;
16. Urges all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance and
mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant matters are
being discussed in the United Nations, and invites all other States to consider doing
the same, as appropriate;
17. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of all aspects of
the Relationship Agreement, which forms a framework for close cooperation
between the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest
pursuant to the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective
provisions of the Charter and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the
Secretary-General to continue to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth

_______________
6
7

Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Relationship Agreement.
A/67/828-S/2013/210, annex.

3/5

A/RES/67/295

Report of the International Criminal Court

session of the expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations
in connection with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
18. Encourages further dialogue between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court, and welcomes in this regard the increased interaction
of the Security Council with the Court under various formats, including the holding
of an open debate on peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of the Court;
19. Welcomes the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 February 2013 8 in which the Council reiterated its previous call regarding the
importance of State cooperation with the International Criminal Court in accordance
with the respective obligations of States, and expressed its commitment to effective
follow-up of Council decisions in this regard;
20. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
21. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
22. Recalls that, at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which was convened and opened by the SecretaryGeneral, States parties reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome Statute and its full
implementation, as well as its universality and integrity, and that the Review
Conference undertook a stocktaking exercise of international criminal justice,
considering the impact of the Rome Statute on victims and affected communities,
peace and justice, complementarity and cooperation, called for the strengthening of
the enforcement of sentences, adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to expand
the jurisdiction of the Court to cover three additional war crimes when committed in
armed conflicts not of an international character, adopted amendments to the Rome
Statute to define the crime of aggression and to establish conditions under which the
Court could exercise jurisdiction with respect to that crime, and decided to retain
article 124 of the Rome Statute;
23. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, 9 in which it was stated that the United Nations continued to promote
accountability for international crimes and advocate for further ratification of the
Rome Statute and that the first judgement of the International Criminal Court, in the
Lubanga case, constituted an important step in ensuring the accountability of those
responsible for international crimes;
24. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court at its eleventh session, while recalling
that, according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of
States Parties shall meet at the seat of the Court or at United Nations Headquarters,
to hold its twelfth session in The Hague, looks forward to the twelfth session, which
is to be held from 20 to 28 November 2013, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship
Agreement and resolution 58/318;
_______________
8
9

4/5

S/PRST/2013/2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/67/1).

Report of the International Criminal Court

A/RES/67/295

25. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of
States Parties, invites States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation of
least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation contributions made
to that Trust Fund thus far;
26. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2012/13, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
95th plenary meeting
22 August 2013

5/5
