United Nations

A/RES/60/24

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 153

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 November 2005
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/520)]

60/24.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 2 the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations 3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and
advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of
the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating
the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
1.
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 72 of its report;1
2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal
work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations and the
observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue of great
importance, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and
requests the host country to continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that
might arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the
functioning of missions;

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/60/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
3
See resolution 169 (II).
2

05-48898

A/RES/60/24

3.
Notes that the Committee will continue to review the implementation of
the Parking Programme for Diplomatic Vehicles, 4 with a view to addressing the
problems experienced by some permanent missions in that respect and continuously
ensuring its proper implementation in a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory,
effective and therefore consistent with international law and that it shall remain
seized of the matter;
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and
4.
hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be
resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
Notes that during the reporting period some travel restrictions previously
5.
imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities were removed, and requests the host country to
consider removing the remaining travel restrictions, and in this regard notes the
positions of affected States, as reflected in the report of the Committee, and the
positions of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
Notes also that the Committee anticipates that the host country will
6.
enhance its efforts to ensure the issuance, in a timely manner, of entry visas to
representatives of Member States, pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations,3 for travel to New York on United Nations
business, and notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will
enhance efforts, including visa issuance, to facilitate the participation of
representatives of Member States in other United Nations meetings as appropriate;
Notes further that a number of delegations have requested a shortening of
7.
the time frame applied by the host country for the issuance of entry visas to
representatives of Member States, since the time frame poses difficulties for the
full-fledged participation of Member States in United Nations meetings;
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects
8.
of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
9.
Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI);
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
53rd plenary meeting
23 November 2005

_______________
4

2

A/AC.154/355, annex.
