UNITED NATIONS
‘\

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1832””

MEETING:

wp&
(&&$--J~QR~

21 JULY

1975

/h

NEW YORK
.

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1832)

.....................................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ............................

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency Force
(S/11758) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1832

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1832nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Eugenio

PLAJA

(Italy).

Nations Emergency Force (UNEF), which covers the
period 13 April to 15 July 1975, was distributed on
16 July. I should also like to draw the attention of
members of the Council to two other relevant documents: the note by the Secretary-General
of 15 July
[S/117.57] which contains the text of the letter addressed
to the Secretary-General
on 14 July by the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, and the letter of 16 July
addressed to the President of the Council by the representative of Israel [S/Z 17.591.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Prqvisionai

agenda (S/Agenda/l832)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/ 11758)
The meeting
Expression

of the agenda

3. That said, I would now like to refer to the consultations already held by the Council on the question of
extending the mandate of UNEF in the Middle East.
During those consultations,
the text of an appeal
addressed to the President of Egypt by the President
of the Security Council on behalf of the Council was
drafted, and I shall now read it out:

was called to order at 10.30 p.m.
of thanks

to the retiring

President

“Based on discussions I have held with the
Secretary-General
of the United
Nations
and
members of the Security Council, and taking account
of the gravity of the situation in the Middle East,
I believe a further extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Emergency Force would make in the
present circumstances a significant contribution
to
creating an atmosphere
conducive
to progress
towards agreement on a just and lasting peace in the
area. Therefore, on behalf of the Security Council,
I appeal to you to reconsider the attitude of Egypt
on the situation. I assure you that the Council,
appreciative of the constructive measures already
taken towards peace, follows the situation very
closely and emphasizes the importance of achieving
further progress towards a just and lasting peace
and preventing a stalemate in the Middle East.“’

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
It is with gratitude and admiration that, in my capacity
as President of the Security Council for this month,
I express the satisfaction felt, I am sure, by all members
of the Council at the way in which the representative
of Iraq, Mr. Al-Shaikhly,
presided over the work of
the Council during the month of June. You will recall
that during that month the Council held eight meetings
devoted to two important
questions, namely, the
situation in Namibia and the situation in Cyprus. As
you also know, during that month there were numerous
informal meetings and consultations among members.
In presiding over both the official and informal
activities, the representative
of Iraq performed his
duties admirably and demonstrated
his well-known
wisdom and patience. May I, on behalf of all my
colleagues, ask the representative
of Iraq present
here to convey to him our appreciation of the personal
and professional qualities which he displayed.
Adoption

In accordance with the procedure agreed upon among
the members in the course of those consultations, the
text of the appeal I have just read out will be put to
the vote. First, however, I shall call on the representative of China, who wishes to explain his vote
before the vote.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (translation from Chinese):With regard to the appeal to be addressed by the
President of the Security Council on the renewal of
the mandate of UNEF, the Chinese delegation wishes
to reatlirm here the Chinese Government’s
principled
position of sympathy and support for the just struggle
of Arab countries and to condemn the Israeli aggressors

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Emergency Force (S/11758)

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The report of the Secretary-General

21 July 1975, at 10 p.m.

from French):
on the United
1

and their supporters. On the question of UNEF, the
Chinese Government has always held its own stand.
Accordingly, China dissociates itself from this matter.
In view of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation will
not participate in the voting on the draft appeal of
the President of the Council.

in the occupied Arab territories was meant to be a
temporary measure to serve towards and be instrumental in effecting the withdrawal of all the forces of
the aggressor party. But the experience of the past
couple of years has revealed the tendency on the part
of Israel to abuse the presence of UNEF by freezing
the situation once more into a state of no-war, nopeace, meanwhile perpetuating
and consolidating
its
occupation by creating new realities, in the nature of
more Zionist
settlements
in the occupied Arab
territories and by the further expulsion of ‘the Arab
population.
Accordingly,
Iraq will not participate in
the voting.

5. Mr. AL-ATIYYAH
(Iraq): Allow me first, Sir,
to express our most sincere congratulations
to you on
your assumption of the presidency. The present issue,
with all the intensive negotiations that lie behind it, is
an indication
of your diplomatic
skill and wisdom,
from which we are sure the Security Council will
continue to benefit. I should like, on behalf of Mr. AlShaikhly, to express our thanks for the kind sentiments
you have expressed about him. I shall certainly convey
them to him. I should like to express our sincere
appreciation
also to Mr. Cavaglieri
for his most
beneficial role in conducting the Council’s business
during the informal consultations.

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I shall therefore now put to the vote the text of the
appeal for the approval of the Council.
.! ,
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft appeal was approved by 13 votes to none.

6. Iraq’s position regarding UNEF has been clearly
stated on several occasions, particularly in the Security
Council. We have dissociated ourselves and still
dissociate ourselves from all Council resolutions
concerning UNEF.
I should like, however, to reemphasize the following points.

Two members
in the voting.

(China and Iraq) did not participate

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Since the text of the appeal has been approved by the
Council it is my intention to communicate it to President Anwar El-Sadat as soon as possible.

7. IraG strongly supports the just struggle of Egypt
and alI ‘other’ Arab countries whose land is under
Israeli oc&rpation.kraq
vehemently upholds the just
struggle o’ the Palestinian
people to regain their
national rig6 ts, including their right of self-determination on their land. .We feel that the presence of UNEF
a

The meeting

rose at 10.45 p.m.
Notes

* Subsequently

circulated

as document

S/11771.

2
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00150

82-6 L202-November

1983-2,200
