Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the First Conunittee

6. Endorses the recommendation of the C0mmittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Secretary-General should be requested to prepare for the
consideration of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee the further studies on organizational and financia! matters relating to remote sensing activities from
space mentioned in paragraph 32 of the report of the
Committee;
7. Further endorses the recommendation that the
Secretary-General should explore the feasibility of utilizing existing facilities and expertise to establish, on
an experimental basis, an international centre for the
training of personnel from developing countries in the
effective use of remote sensing infonnation and take
other possible steps, as set out in paragraph 33 (a) of
the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, as well as undertake an appropriate
users' survey to obtain a clearer understanding of the
real needs of the users and their stage of preparedness
in this area of activity;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
increased burden of activity placed upon the Secretariat
in respond;ng to requests for studies, reports, surveys
and experimental practica! programmes, as well as
the increased role in ensuring more effective interagency co-ordination, to take measures, if possible
within his present resources, for the strengthening of
the Outer Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat;
9. Notes with satisfaction that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee has pursued its work, inter
alia,on:
(a) The United Nations programme on space applications;
( b) The question of a possible international conference on outer space matters;
10. Requests the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee at its thirteenth session to undertake further detailed work on these and other matters in accordance
with the recommendations of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as set out in paragraph 53
of its report;
11. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications as referred to in paragraph 36 of
the rcport of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space;
12. Recommends the continuing review of the space
applications programme, so as to enable it to respond
more effectively to the needs of the developing countries for assistance in the practica! applications of
space technology;
13. Afjirms the importance of ·ensuring effective interagcncy co-ordination in the area of space applications;
14. Requests the specialized agencies to provide
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
with progress reports on their work, including particular problems in the fields within their competence relating to the peaceful uses of outer space;
15. Reiterates its request to the World Meteorological Organization to pursue actively the implementation of its tropical cyclone project, while continuing
and intensifying its other related action programmes,
including the World Weather Watch and, especially, the
efforts being undertaken towards obtaining basic
meteorological data and discovering ways and means
to mitigate the harmful effects of tropical stonns and
to remove or minimize their destructive potential, and

15

looks forward to its report thereon in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 2914 (XXVII) of 9 November 1972, 3182 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973
and 3234 (XXIX) of 12 November 1974;
16. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station in India and the CELP A Mar del Plata Station
in Argentina and expresses its satisfaction at the work
being carried out at those ranges in the peaceful and
scientific exploration of outer space;
17. Notes the suggestion made by the Chairman of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space 7
conceming a potential future role of the Committee in
view of the prospective significance of the collection
and transmission of solar energy through space technology;
18. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present and previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-first
session.
2409th plenary meeting
18 November 1975
3389 (XXX). Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the itero entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening of Intemational Security, 8 and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the implementation of the Declaration,
W elr:oming the fact that for thirty years after the
victory of the United Nations in the Second World War
mankind has been saved from another world war, although local wars and conflicts have persisted in various regions of the world,
W elcoming new achievements and trends in international relations, such as the progress in decolonization,
the liquidation of the hotbed of war in Indo-China, the
successful outcome of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe 1' and other cfforts contributing
to the strengthening of intemational security and the
promoting of peaceful coexistence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming also, in that context, the successful outc~me of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to
30 August 1975, 10 which represents a further contribution to the strengthening of international security,
Noting with grave concern, however, the continuing existence of focal points of crises and tensions in
various regions endangering intemational peace and
security, the continuation of the anns race as well as
acts of aggression, the threat or use of force, foreign
occupation and alien domination, and the existence of
colonialism. neo-colonialism, racial discrimination and
7 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/10020), annex.
8 Resolution 2734 (XXV).
9
The Final Act of the Conference was signed at Helsinki
on 1 August 1975.
1º Far the text of the Lima Programme far Mutua,! Assistance a nd Solidarity, see A/ 1021 7 and Corr. l, annex.

16

General Auembly-Thirtieth SeNion

apartheid, which remain the main obstacles to the
strengthening of international peace and security,
Reaffirming the clase link existing between the
strengthening of international security, disarmament,
decolonization, development and the need for a more
intensive intemational effort to narrow the widening gap
between the developed and the developing countries,
and also stressing, in this connexion, the importance of
the early implementation of the decisions adopted at
its seventh special session,
Emphasizing the need constantly to strengthen the
peace-keeping and peace-making role of the United
Nations, as well as its role in promoting development
through co-operation,
l. Solemnly calls upon all States to seek strict and
consistent implementation of the purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations and of all
the provisions of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of Intemational Security as a basis for relations among
States, irrespective of their size, leve! of development
and socio-economic system;
2. Also calls upon all States to extend the process
of détente to all regions of the world, with the equal
participation of all States, in order to bring about just
and lasting solutions to international problems so that
peace and security will be based on effective respect
far the sovereignty and independence of all States and
the inalienable rights of each people to determine its
own destiny freely and without outside interference, coercion or pressure;
3. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples under alien domination to achieve self-determ.ination and independence and appeals to ali States to
implement the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples11 and
the other resolutions of the United Nations on the total
elimination of colonialism, racism and apartheid;
4. Reaffirms that any measure or pressure directed
against any State while exercising its sovereign right
freely to dispose of its natural resources constitutes a
ftagrant violation of the right of self-determination of
peoples and the principie of non-intervention, as set
forth in the Charter, which, if pursut!Cl, could constitute a threat to intemational peace and security;
5. Reaffirms its opposition to any threats of use of
force, intervention, aggression, foreign occupation and
measures of political and economic coercion which attempt to violate the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence and security of States,
6. Recommends urgent measures to stop the arms
race and promote disarrnament, including the convening of the World Disarrnament Conference, the dismantling of foreign military bases, the creation of zones
of peace and the encouragement of general and complete disarmament and · strengthening of the United
N ations, in arder to eliminate the causes of intemational tensions and ensure intemational peace, security
and co-operation;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 12 requests him to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session a report on the implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of lntemational Security and decides to include in the provisional
11 Resolution 1514 (XV).
12 A/10205 and Add.1.

agenda of its thirty-first session the itero entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of Intemational Security".
2409th plenary meeting
18 November 1975
3390 (XXX).

Question of Korea

A

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the hope expressed by it in resolution 3333
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Desiring that progress be made towards the attainment of the goal of peaceful reun.ification of Korea on
the basis of the freely expressed will of the Korean
people,
Recalling its satisfaction with the issuance of the
joint communiqué at Seoul and Pyongyang on 4 July
1972 and the declared intention of both the South and
the North of Korea to continue the dialogue between
them,
Further recalling that, by its resolution 711 A (VII)
of 28 August 1953, the General Assembly noted with
approval the Armistice Agreement of 27 July 1953, 13
and that, in its resolution 811 {IX) of 11 December
1954, it expressly took note of the provision of the
Armistice Agreement which requires that the Agreement ~hall remain in effect until expressly superseded
either by mutually acceptable amendments and additions or by provisions in an appropriate agreement for
a peaceful settlement at a political level between both
sides,
Aware, however, that tension in Korea has not been
totally eliminated and that the Armistice Agreement
remains indispensable to the maíntenance of peace and
security in the area,
Noting the letter of 27 June 1975,14 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Govemment of
the United States of America, affirming that it is prepared to termínate the United Nations Command on
1 January 1976, provided that the other parties directly concerned reach agreement on altemative arrangements mutually acceptable to them for maintaining
the Armistice Agreement,
Noting the statement of 27 June 1975 by the Government of the Republic of Korea affirming its willingness to enter into arrangements for maintaining the
Armistice Agreement,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the purposes
and principies of the Charter of the United Nations regarding the maintenance of intemational peace and security, the United Nations has a continuing responsibility to ensure the attainment of this goal on the
Korean península,
l. Reaffirms the wishes of its members, as expressed in the consensos statement adopted by the General Assembly on 28 November 1973, 16 and urges both
the South and the North of Korea to continue their
dialogue to expedite the peaceful reunification of Korea;
13 See Offecial Records of the Securlty Council, Eighth Year,
Supplement for luly, August and September 1953, document
S/3079; transmitted to the members of the General Assembly
by a note of the Secretary-General (A/2451).
14]bld., Thirtieth Year, Supplement for Aprll, May and
/une 1975, docurnent S/11737.
16 Offecial Records of the General As,embly, Twenty-eighth
Seuion, Supplement No. 30 (A/9030), p. 24, ítem 41.
