S/PV.7845

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7845th meeting

Monday, 19 December 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Klein
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44825 (E)
*1644825*

S/PV.7845

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council according to the
year of adoption of the related Council resolutions:
Ambassador Rafael Ramírez Carreño, Permanent
Representative of Venezuela and Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)concerning the
Sudan; Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand and Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011);
Ambassador Ismael Abraáo Gaspar Martins, Permanent
Representative of Angola and Chair of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa; Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict; and myself, in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of Spain and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).
Before giving the floor to Ambassador Ramírez
Carreño, on behalf of all members of the Security
Council, I would like to express our deepest condolences
for the passing today of the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation in Ankara. .
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ramírez Carreño.
2/11

19/12/2016

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We associate ourselves
with your words of condolences, Mr. President, and we
would like to reiterate our deep dismay over the killing
of Ambassador Andrey Karlov. We would also like to
express all of our solidarity and support to the Russian
Federation, its people, its Mission and Government. I
would like to draw attention the danger of instigating
campaigns of hatred against countries, as was the case
with the campaign promoted for political reasons against
the Russian Federation. It is a warning to understand
that everything that is said and done in relation to a
situation so fraught with extremist thinking, such as
the situation in Syria, has unfortunate consequences.
Therefore, we express our solidarity and will take
part in the Security Council initiative to condemn that
horrendous assassination.
I thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the floor
at the end of our term as a Council members and of our
responsibilities in the sanctions committees.
On behalf of our team, I would like to begin
my briefing by thanking Mr. Kelvin Ong, Chief of
the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch;
Ms. Snjezana Gillingham, Secretary of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea; and
Ms. Sana Khan, Secretary of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan. We also thank their
respective teams for their support over these two
years and for their extraordinary work in facilitating
our work.
During the period 1991 to 1998, between 500,000
and 2 million people in Iraq were affected by the
sanctions regime imposed under the guardianship of
a few permanent members of the Security Council.
Fortunately, much has changed after the devastating
consequences of that sanctions regime. In many
respects, the Security Council has learned its lesson, and
today the impact of coercive measures on populations is
undoubtedly lesser. However, the Council still does not
seem to have grasped the notion that the sole objective
of sanctions regimes is to contribute to the political
solution of a conflict and achieve lasting peace, not to
punish a country, whether for revenge or for the specific
geostrategic reasons of one of its permanent members.
Our experience as Chair of two sanctions
committees has shown us that, despite repeated calls
16-44825

19/12/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and questions about the real nature of this instrument,
sanctions are still seen as an end in themselves and not
a tool to solve political problems and achieve lasting
peace. In many cases, the notion prevails that for some
permanent members, sanctions are a mere extension of
their foreign policy and national interests.
In the final report I presented as Chair of the
Sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, it was
clear that the Committee’s Monitoring Group had
concluded, for the third consecutive year, that there
was no indication that Eritrea was collaborating
with or supporting Al-Shabaab. On the other hand, it
acknowledged, as set out in the Group’s final report
(S/2016/920), that the cooperation of the State of
Qatar in mediating between Djibouti and Eritrea with
a view to both resolving the border issue — which
is in a signed agreement between the parties — and
obtaining the release of a number of prisoners of war.
We welcome these advances, which were recognized as
a positive element in the operation of the Committee. I
understand that Qatar will continue its effective, direct
and steady mediation until the resolution of the matter
between the two countries.
In any normal situation, those elements would
have been enough — perhaps not to lift the sanctions
immediately, as that would require more time, but to at
least establish a road map for their future lifting. Yet
even that could not be achieved. Why? Because the
establishment of a road map was obviously inconvenient
to the national interests of certain permanent members
of the Security Council. Little does it seem to matter in
the decisions of the Security Council what Eritrea does,
the positive steps it takes or what is contained in the
report of the Monitoring Group. I ask, therefore, what
is the point of all the meetings and deliberations held by
the Committee, if the decision ultimately depends on
one or two permanent members? That is an issue that
needs to be reviewed.
Regarding the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan ,
the Chair of that subsidiary body sought to maintain
smooth communication with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Mission in Darfur throughout the two
years of our mandate. Special Representative and
joint Chief Mediator Martin lhoeghian Uhomoibhi
kept the Committee up to date on the situation on the
ground, particularly as it concerned the mandate of that
subsidiary body. including with regard to the evolution
of the political process in Darfur.

S/PV.7845

On the other hand, it is worth emphasizing that
a fundamental aspect for our delegation has been the
improvement of the working methods and transparency
of that body. Therefore, at the end of our Sanctions
Committee meetings we chose either to issue a press
release or to distribute a note verbale to all States
Members of the Organization with a brief summary
of the meeting. That practice is in accordance with
the provisions of the Note by the President S/2016/170,
issued on 22 February 2016 under our country’s
presidency of the Security Council.
Despite these advances, much remains to be done
to strengthen the role of the 1591 Sanctions Committee,
a subsidiary body which, due to its own dynamics,
is often handcuffed and ineffective owing to its
politicization, inter alia, by abuse in the use of the rule
of consensus. Such abuses during the past 24 months
led to the Committee being prevented from submitting
its quarterly report in an open format, in this very
Chamber, to the entire membership of the Organization.
Similarly, the Committee was unfortunately affected
by relative inactivity for approximately six months due
to an inability to reach consensus on the membership of
the Panel of Experts. The same occurred in the delay in
the issuance of the final report of the Panel of Experts,
available since December 2015 but only published in
September this year.
During this period, the Committee did not have the
opportunity to receive information on the situation on
the ground. While the Committee should not always
agree with the Panel’s evaluations, the information it
provides is certainly very useful for its deliberations.
In that connection, we emphasize that the Panel of
Experts is an independent entity in its work and must
operate strictly under the principles of impartiality
and objectivity. In short, the information provided
by the Panel of Experts to the Committee should be
purely technical so that the latter may do the political
evaluation and the respective decision-making as it
considers necessary.
We once again express our solidarity with our
African brothers, who are the targets of more than
70 per cent of the sanctions regimes of the Security
Council. That is disconcerting and has no reason to be,
especially when the sponsors and drafters of resolutions
are precisely those who were the ones to colonize these
countries. This is a subject matter for reflection and
open debate. Those of us from Latin America and the
Caribbean will continue to work to the best of our

16-448253/11

S/PV.7845

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

ability to promote political solutions, motivated and
grounded in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, to all of these terrible conflicts
that affect our sister countries.

19/12/2016

It is curious, however, that those who stand as strong
human rights defenders use sanctions regimes to punish
the peoples and Governments who are the objects of
such coercive measures. These sanctions regimes
infringe on elementary human rights by depriving
their citizens of basic health and food needs. Likewise,
those in favour of sanctions apply restrictive policies on
migration to prevent citizens who are victims of armed
conflict and extreme poverty from crossing borders in
search of a better life.

a conflict situation. Furthermore, we recommend
that the Security Council end its dangerous trend of
controlling the management of natural resources of
sanctioned countries. That also applies to aspects
related to finances, budgets and all other decisions of
countries concerned. We also suggest that the Council
continuously consult with countries of the region,
neighbours of the States under a sanctions regime, as
they can play a positive role in achieving a solution,
bearing in mind that at the same time, those countries
are also affected by the adverse consequences resulting
from sanctions. The experience in these committees has
highlighted the need to address those matters in public
meetings of the Security Council, with the participation
of the States concerned.

How do we explain the fact that nations of the
developed world that are members of the Council have
refused to welcome more than 1,500 Syrian refugees?
Meanwhile, Lebanon, a country of 4.5 million people,
is sheltering more than 1.7 million Syrian refugees,
equivalent to 28 per cent of the country’s total population.
That does not include the 300,000 Palestinian refugees
who have been living in Lebanon for decades. We
wonder why those countries are reluctant to respond
to the legitimate causes of self-determination of the
Palestinian and Saharawi peoples. Why does their
suffering not deserve the same attention? What about
the massacre of the Yemeni people and the invasion of
Iraq and Libya and their devastating consequences?

Of equal relevance is the establishment of specified
limits for the duration of the work of the committee,
considering that we cannot place a country under a
sanctions regime indefinitely, without taking into
account the cooperation of that State and the opinions
of the groups of experts. In that regard, we should
avoid the biased use of the assessments of the groups
of experts by some permanent members that sometimes
accept or reject, as convenient, the points of view
and guidelines of the panels of experts that assist the
committees. What is required in sanctions cases is
constant review to help the country to achieve an end
to the conflict, and not to supervise the country or to
administer it under a permanent sanctions regime.

The deaths of millions of innocent people, including
hundreds of thousands of children and women; the
unprecedented expansion of terrorism; violence and
organized crime in the Middle East and North Africa;
and one of the greatest waves of forced migration in
the history of mankind are being ignored. Where are
the sanctions regimes imposed on the States — on
all States, without double standards — that commit
flagrant violations of international law? In light of our
consideration of the role of sanctions committees, and
bearing in mind the similar assessments of them by
other chairs of subsidiary bodies, it would be advisable
for the Council to consider giving the chairs greater
freedom in the preparation and issuance of reports to
prevent their possible blocking through the abusive
application of the consensus rule.

From the very outset, Venezuela took on the
intensive work in the framework of the Council’s agenda
with a sense of utmost responsibility and a constructive
attitude. That led us to take positions on matters of
vital importance for today’s world, matters that require
the international community’s urgent attention with a
view to peacefully resolving the armed conflicts and
the situations of poverty and fear of millions of people
around the world. We were, and are, always ready to
condemn the structural causes of conflicts, such as
poverty and social exclusion, to help achieve real and
sustainable solutions to such problems.

We also propose the establishment of the post
of ombudsman to examine with greater justice and
due process the inclusion on or exclusion from the
sanctions list of persons or entities that are linked to
4/11

Respect for the sovereignty and self-determination
of peoples as a principle, denouncing the real causes
of the crisis of refugees and migrants, the growing
expansion of terrorism and its promoters, induced
wars, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding in
post-conflict areas, the role of regional organizations,
disarmament, the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to their free self-determination, the Saharawi
16-44825

19/12/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

cause, the war against the Syrian people: among many
current affairs of crucial importance, these were the
pillars of our actions during the last two years, both
in public positions and in negotiations. Throughout,
we embraced the principles of the Bolivarian foreign
policy that was promoted by President Chavez, such as
solidarity, integration and the vision of the countries
of the South. I am proud to say today that the work has
been completed, also thanks to the tireless efforts and
professionalism of a committed working team that,
with the support of those present, was able to complete
the ambitious task.
We speak out on important global problems that
many others, with significant power and influence,
ignore. At the same time, we contribute in a modest
and dignified fashion from our position, reaffirming
the importance of promoting a more just and inclusive
world, a more democratic United Nations and a
Security Council that can, many times, truly fulfil its
role in peacefully resolving conflicts that compromise
international peace and security.
The United Nations is entering a crucial stage next
year, both for the importance of making real progress in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the very serious humanitarian
and security crises that are unfolding. At the same
time, with António Guterres assuming the position of
Secretary-General — and we wish him the best of luck
in the upcoming years — we hope that there will be an
effective improvement in the working methods of this
Organization, in particular of the Security Council, for
the sake of greater transparency and democratization. In
that connection, a thorough review of the performance
of the sanctions committees, as soon as possible, is
needed.
Very briefly, I would like to mention a few pending
tasks of the Security Council. Complying with the
responsibility of this organ to maintain international
peace and security means that we must draw attention
to those unresolved cases that require decisive and
urgent action by the Council.
The Palestinian issue and the colonial situation of
Western Sahara must no longer be silenced conflicts in
the Council, products of the policy of double standards.
It is necessary for the Council to speak out once and for
all through a resolution on ending the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory and its related policies with
a view to this body complying with its mandate of

S/PV.7845

effectively contribute to the achievement of the twoState solution, where Palestine and Israel can live side
by side in peace, within the pre-1967 internationally
safe and recognized borders.
In the case of Western Sahara, the last colony
in Africa, there must be an end to the practice that
prevents the consideration of that important matter in
a public meeting, with a view to promoting a broad
discussion — which happens with other issues — that
would push the Council to move towards a referendum
on self-determination, as established by resolution 690
(1991), with the support of the United Nations and the
African Union, to enable the Saharawi people to freely
choose their future.
On another line of thought, we call on the Council
to avoid the harmful trend of dealing with items that fall
outside of its purview and correspond to other bodies,
in particular to the General Assembly.
The Security Council must stay vigilant, given the
very serious conflicts that are impacting the regions
of North Africa and the Middle East. It must promot
political and peaceful solutions to the armed conflicts
in Syria, Yemen, Iraq and Libya. Such conflicts stem
from interventism and military aggression that provoke
destabilization through the proliferation of terrorist
groups that are used to overthrow Governments. All of
that is to the detriment of the human rights of the people
of those countries — the men, women, young people
and children who are suffering the consequences of
those terrible conflicts and awaiting proper action from
this Council, in keeping with its mandate, and who
want to be taken into account.
To conclude, we would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his tireless efforts in
promoting the objectives of the Organization in the
sphere of international peace and security and the
development of human rights. We would also like to
thank the representatives of the members of the Security
Council and their respective teams for the working
relationship that we have built over the last two years.
Despite our diverging, and sometimes even conflicting,
points of view, respect prevailed for the people and the
countries they represent.
Lastly, we extend our acknowledgement to all the
Member States that accompanied us without fail and
in the spirit of solidarity, the Secretariat staff and the
support staff of the Security Council, with whom we
developed a very fluid and constructive cooperation.

16-448255/11

S/PV.7845

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

We thank the Organization and the membership from
here forward, keeping open the doors to our country
and to our Permanent Mission and giving our enduring
support as we enter into a new agenda of commitments
in favour of social struggles, the fight against poverty
and the true democratization of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ramírez Carreño for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Van Bohemen.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome
the opportunity to discuss this important and often
overlooked aspect of the Council’s work: the work of
our subsidiary bodies.
As an elected member for the past two years, New
Zealand has been an active participant in the subsidiary
bodies of the Council, including as Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). I have been honoured to chair
those sanctions committees. I have been frank about
my experiences as Chair, and I will continue in that
spirit today, focusing on two working methods areas:
the effectiveness of our sanctions committees, and the
preparation of and process for appointing Chairs.
But as a first order of business, I record my thanks
and appreciation to the Committee’s Monitoring Team,
the Ombudsperson and the Secretariat staff for their
hard work and support.

19/12/2016

where there is also a sanctions regime, the two would
be reinforcing and we should discuss them as such.
It would also seem reasonable that when the Council
discusses items like the threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, we could have the coordinator
of the Monitoring Team in the room to brief us and
field questions. Yet, making any suggestions for
improvement in that area very often encounters active
resistance, usually from a permanent member.
Secondly, we have allowed the process of those
Committees to get in the way of their outcomes. Process
is important, but it should not obstruct our primary goal
as a Council or the discharge of our obligations under
Chapter VII resolutions. That is most clearly illustrated
by the requirement — I hesitate to call it a rule because
it has no basis in the Charter — that any Committee
decision, no matter how minor, must be taken by
consensus. My colleague Ambassador Ramírez Carreño
also referred to that point in his remarks.
What we have done, in fact, has been to confer
the right of veto on all Council members, and that
right extends to all decisions — procedural and
substantive — no matter how minor. In my opinion,
that is the single biggest inhibitor to Committee
effectiveness. Around this table, we can share endless
examples of that, but I will highlight just a few that
have arisen in the Committees that I have chaired,
where the consensus rule has prevented what I consider
to be obviously sensible decisions.

On effectiveness, one thing that has struck me
is how little consideration or priority the Council
gives to ensuring that its sanctions committees are
effective. Sanctions are one of the few tools we have,
short of force, to respond to situations that threaten
international peace and security. Yet the way these
committees are established and the procedures under
which they operate mean they struggle to discharge
their mandates effectively.

First, we have been unable to update the details of
the deceased former Taliban leader on our sanctions list
so that we can stop his considerable assets ending up in
the hands of the Taliban. Today, I am deeply concerned
after learning that the compromise proposal we have
worked on for so many weeks has not been accepted.
We have been unable to take practical steps to put the
Office of the Ombudsperson on a more secure and
independent footing, despite the clear directions in
resolution 2253 (2015), adopted last year. So far, we
have been unable to update our Committee’s guidelines
to help serve our effective functioning.

First, we silo those bodies away from the Council’s
work and from each other. It would seem logical that
when there is a country-specific item in our programme
of work regarding a country where there is also a
sanctions regime, we should discuss the two together,
and indeed we did that this morning. It would seem
sensible that where there is a field mission operating

In the course of the past year, we have seen attempts
to extend the no-objection procedure — in other words,
the 15-country veto — to even more minor matters
including, incredibly, my ability as Chair to invite
Committee members to an informal meeting in my own
Mission. I am yet to hear any convincing reason for
the Council’s subsidiary bodies operating under a far

6/11

16-44825

19/12/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

more restrictive set of rules than those that apply to the
Council itself under the Charter or under its provisional
rules of procedure. That is particularly true in view
of the reality that it is almost invariably a permanent
member that uses the no-objection procedure to block
a decision.
I am not cavilling because New Zealand is an elected
member, while others are permanent. My objection
is that that procedure allows members — usually
permanent members — to play politics, either on
their own account or on behalf of others, to obstruct
the effective functioning of a regime that all United
Nations Members are required to comply with. That
erodes confidence in the sanctions regime and in the
Council itself.
On how the Council appoints its chairs, I am
pleased that the elected members have worked together
to secure improvements to the process this year. No
longer is that an intra-permanent five decision; it is now
a process facilitated by two Council members, including
an elected member. No longer will elected members be
told which Committee they can chair just a few days
before they start their Council term. They will now
have time to prepare for the significant responsibilities
of being a subsidiary body Chair. That said, there is
still room for further improvement in our view. In
closing, I would like to offer five recommendations to
the Council:
First, I would urge Council members to think about
how we do our business and the small, practical steps
we can take to be more efficient, avoid duplication
and maximize the tools we have. That includes more
coherent scheduling of our Council programmes of
work and requesting that the Secretary-General report
on sanctions in his reports, where applicable.
Secondly, when Chairs do brief in closed
consultations, we should reconsider the use of formulaic
statements approved by the Committee. The substance
and utility of our conversations would improve vastly if
Chairs were instead able to come with a couple of points
for discussion that they had formulated themselves.
Thirdly, we must have a serious conversation about
the decision-making of our Committees, with a view to
reform.
Fourthly, the burden of chairing subsidiary bodies
should be spread to all Council members. We are a

S/PV.7845

Council not of 5 or 10, but of 15, and chairing should
reflect that.
Fifthly, the elected members must continue to
support each other as Chairs. New Zealand established
an informal group of chairing experts that meets
semi-regularly, and last week we hosted a workshop on
the practicalities of chairing for incoming members. We
hope elected members will keep those alive next year.
None of these recommendations require a new
resolution or presidential statement; they require
courage and behavioural change, and I believe that the
whole Council would be better for it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Van Bohemen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Martins.
Mr. Martins (Angola): Let me also join you,
Mr. President, in reiterating the condolences of the
Council over the occurrence in Ankara this afternoon,
which caused the death of the Russian Ambassador to
Turkey.
We thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa. I would also
like to acknowledge the strong support that we have
received from the Secretariat regarding the work of the
Committee, especially the participation of Mr. James
Sutterlin, who has been Secretary for the Working
Group.
As decided by the Council, the Ad Hoc Working
Group has served as the forum through which the
Security Council has prepared the joint session of the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. The Working Group discussed the
programme, the draft agenda and the joint communiqué
issued after the informal meeting of the joint session,
which took place on 23 May.
The Group was to address two points on its agenda.
Unfortunately, we could not agree on the inclusion
of specific points raised by the African Union, in
particular the inclusion of the question of the situation
of Western Sahara. During the informal consultations,
the Peace and Security Council expressed its concern
for the rejection of the proposal of items of the African
Union in the agenda. That affected the good work of
the joint session, especially considering that conflicts

16-448257/11

S/PV.7845

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

19/12/2016

in Africa are very much on the agenda of the Security
Council.

of the Chair. We also convey our best wishes to our
successor in the chairmanship of the Working Group .

Unfortunately, despite our best efforts, the African
Union Peace and Security Council did not until recently
respond to our repeated communications regarding
the latest version of the draft joint communiqué
discussed in New York on 23 May, which contained
several outstanding issues. These developments are
worrying signs for the future of the Security Council’s
engagement with the Peace and Security Council,
which is its main partner in matters related to peace and
security in Africa. As our successor now takes over and
prepares for the eleventh joint session, which will take
place in Addis Ababa, those matters should be carefully
addressed.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Gaspar Martins for his briefing.

The second focus of activity this year was a
meeting on improving the cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
in sustaining peace in Africa. This meeting was based
upon the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016), in which
the Council expressed an intent to regularly request,
deliberate and draw upon the specific strategic and
targeted advice of the Peacebuilding Commission. This
was a remarkable development, as it will definitely
make the Peacebuilding Commission a very important
body in the work of the Council.
The discussion afforded the members of the
Working Group an opportunity to evaluate how we can
enhance the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, assess how the
Peacebuilding Commission can be more relevant to the
work of the Security Council, taking into account its
bridging role, and contribute to overcoming a problem
that has been detected — the lack of synchronization
or the existence of the silo mentality — which has been
identified as one of the problems affecting the work of
the United Nations.
We recommend that the annual programme of the
Ad Hoc Working Group include peacebuilding and
sustaining peace thematics. We further recommend
that the choice of the thematics be proposed by the
Chair following consultations with relevant structures
of the Secretariat. This is also in line with resolution
2282 (2016).
To conclude, we would like to thank the members
of the Ad Hoc Working Group and the Secretariat for
their invaluable contributions in supporting the work
8/11

I shall now make a statement as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006).
In the exercise of the chairmanship of three
committees on non-proliferation, Spain had always
made clear that its main role was to search for
consensus. As the main drivers in this task, we have
acted responsibly and, above all, transparently. For that,
we always counted on the cooperation of the members
of the Council. I thank them for their support and the
manner in which they helped us to solve problems.
Now, there are three ideas that, in my opinion,
would contribute to improving the effectiveness of the
Committees.
The first is relevance. I believe that formalisms
should be avoided in Security Council meetings, where
there should be greater focus on discussion and analysis
of relevant issues. I believe that briefings to the Council
by the President should avoid the mechanical reading
of a previously circulated text that is sometimes
incomprehensible, not just for non-experts but also
for the Chairs of the Committees themselves. The
briefings should therefore be simple and allow for a
substantive debate.
The second is transparency. Transparency is
essential in the actions of the Committees and in
reflecting their decisions, particularly in the area of​​
sanctions. States should be able to understand, with
simple and complete clarity, the obligations they must
fulfil. I therefore welcome the progress made by the
Secretariat in the management of the Committees’
websites.
The third is unity. The Council must act united in
both the adoption and implementation of the resolutions.
Ambiguous clauses should be avoided, which create
uncertainties and make implementation difficult.
To those three I would add a fourth. I fully endorse
the five proposals that the Ambassador of New Zealand
put forward and which seem to me to be perfect, and of
the five, I would emphasize one in particular: the way in
16-44825

19/12/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

which the need to get 15 votes in favour, which in the end
turns the Committees into gatherings of 15 delegations
each with a right of veto, makes decision-making in the
Committees difficult.
I shall now briefly refer to specific issues in the
three Committees I have chaired: the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), the 1718 Committee and the 1540 Committee.
With respect to the 1737 Committee, my greatest
joy was to see it disappear in January. The signing of
the nuclear agreement in 2015, thanks to the efforts of
many, made it possible for diplomacy to triumph. I am
confident that the full implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) will allow this matter to be definitively resolved.
With respect to the 1718 Committee, it was always
clear that the sanctions are directed exclusively against
the military nuclear programme and ballistic missiles,
not against the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It was this that led to the Council
adopting resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016), and
we have always made sure that we do not affect the
humanitarian situation.
In the coming months, there remains much to do, and
I am sure that the Italian presidency will do it brilliantly.
For example, if I might make a recommendation, it
would be useful to have an open briefing on resolution
2321 (2016). It is necessary for the various aspects
of the implementation of a resolution as complex as
resolution 2321 (2016) to be explained to the members
of the United Nations.
Obviously, I have failed in my efforts to see the
1718 Committee disappear, but I do not lose hope that
this will happen in the near future. It is in the hands
of Pyongyang to return to international legality and
bring about an end to the sanctions. As always, I have
confidence in the way of diplomacy and in dialogue.
With respect to the 1540 Committee, little needs
to be added. The activities over the last two years have
been intense. We worked hard on the global review
and a few days ago we adopted, under the presidency
of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, resolution 2325
(2016), which updates resolution 1540 (2004), while
maintaining its cooperative and preventive approach.
I would like to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their help in this effort.
Finally, I offer a word of final thanks, making
special mention of those who have been our “family”

S/PV.7845

in the management of the Committees: the Security
Council Affairs Division, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the 1540 Committee Panel
of Experts and the 1718 Committee Panel of Experts.
Without them, from their Directors or Coordinators, to
the officials who took care of the correspondence or
the web page, we would not have been able to carry
out our task. They were our eyes and our ears. With
professional rigour and patience, they were able to
advise, inform or support us. We will miss them all,
as we will miss our colleagues in the Security Council.
And we will support all of them from the other side of
this table.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for providing this opportunity for the
outgoing Security Council members to reflect on our
work in leading the Council’s subsidiary bodies over
the past two years. Malaysia has had the honour of
chairing the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict as well as the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya. I would like to share
some observations gathered in the course of our tenure,
beginning with the Working Group.
The magnitude of the Council’s responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security is never more
deeply felt than when we consider the devastating
impact of armed conflict on children. The past two
years have unfortunately seen a grave deterioration
in the situation of children in many countries affected
by conflict, as well as unprecedented trends and
challenges related to ensuring their protection. In
undertaking the responsibility of chairing the Working
Group and tackling its challenges, Malaysia has
focused on strengthening the normative framework of
the Council’s agenda on children and armed conflict,
as well as mainstreaming the issue of child protection
into its wider work. Where possible, we have also
continued the tradition of innovative approaches that
characterized the spirit of the Working Group when it
was first created.
During our presidency in June 2015, with regard
to strengthening the agenda’s normative framework,
the Council adopted resolution 2225 (2015), which
introduced child abduction as a fifth trigger for listing in
the annex to the Secretary-General’s report, along with

16-448259/11

S/PV.7845

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

children’s recruitment and use; killing or maiming; rape
and other forms of sexual violence against children; and
attacks on schools and hospitals. It therefore expanded
the tools available to enable the Security Council and
the United Nations to address grave violations against
children, including those committed by non-State
armed groups.
During Malaysia’s two years at the helm of the
Working Group, we adopted conclusions on the
situation of children in armed conflicts in South Sudan,
Afghanistan, Iraq and the Central African Republic,
in accordance with the Working Group’s mandate, as
established in resolution 1612 (2005). In coming up
with recommendations for parties to conflicts and child
protection actors for each specific country situation,
we were cognizant of the lack of a mechanism for
regular follow-up on the implementation of conclusions
documents. As a result, all of the Working Group’s
conclusions incorporate provisions that encourage
sustained engagement in child protection efforts with
concerned Member States and international actors,
including the donor community. While we did not have
the chance to conduct follow-up engagement during
our term, we hope that this will create a foothold for
future Chairs to build on in ensuring the effective
implementation of Working Group conclusions.
We also strove to continue the efforts of our
predecessors to ensure that child protection concerns
are sufficiently mainstreamed into the wider work of
the Council, including in the establishment and renewal
of United Nations peace operations mandates. The
establishment of child protection capacity in United
Nations missions through the appointment of advisers
has been a critical development in strengthening the
implementation of the agenda on children and armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that child protection
advisers continue to be given an effective mandate and
allocated the resources they need to carry out their
crucial work in the field.
Similarly, we emphasized the important role of
the relevant Sanctions Committees in using sanctions
designations to hold accountable those responsible for
violations and abuses against children, including the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. In
that regard, we have continued to support the sharing
of information with relevant Sanctions Committees,
including through periodic briefings, by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
10/11

19/12/2016

We further pioneered the practice of inviting
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to provide joint briefings to the Working
Group and the relevant Sanctions Committees as part
of efforts to promote understanding and collaboration
on the complementary work of the subsidiary bodies.
We believe that this platform for cross-fertilization
between subsidiary bodies on the issue of child
protection can be further explored. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and her Office, and to
UNICEF, for their tireless dedication and commitment
to upholding the protection and rights of children. I
would also like to pay tribute to all the United Nations
child protection advisers and the other United Nations
officials and personnel who implement its agenda on
children and armed conflict on the ground, as well as to
civil society actors. Although our term in the Council
has come to an end, our solidarity with and commitment
to this important agenda will continue.
I now turn to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. Since
I briefed the Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Committee just two weeks ago (see S/PV.7827), I do not
intend to elaborate too much on the details of its work.
In the past two years, during Malaysia’s
chairmanship of the Committee, Libya has been through
very challenging times. The political scene has been
split, and most of the first half of our tenure as Chair
of the Committee saw the parties working to negotiate
the Libyan Political Agreement. Even after the adoption
a year ago of the Political Agreement, and since the
Presidency Council’s arrival in Tripoli, the process of
establishing a Government of National Accord is still
not complete. The work of the Committee over this
period has therefore had to be balanced carefully and
delicately in order to ensure that in 2015 the sanctions
regime did not interfere with the political process,
and in 2016 that it supported the establishment of a
Government of National Accord.
Accordingly, while the issues before the
Committee during 2015 were evenly distributed, there
was a significant increase in the second half of 2016,
mostly in requests for guidance on the measures’
scope. In that regard, the Committee issued one
additional Implementation Assistance Notice, and
also incorporated updates to such notices twice in
2016. They are aimed at providing greater clarity for
16-44825

19/12/2016

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the relevant sanctions measures, as well as at assisting
Member States in discharging their obligations to
implement Security Council resolutions on Libya.
Over the course of 2015 and 2016, the Committee has
kept a close eye on the arms embargo and particularly
on movements of arms and military materiel into
Libya, as well as the risk of diversions. One of the most
notable changes to the sanctions regime has been the
authorization permitting Member States to interdict
vessels on the high seas believed to be violating the arms
embargo. Despite the Committee’s efforts, the embargo
continues to be violated, with reports of increases in
the flow of arms and military materiel and the presence
of mercenaries and foreign military forces in Libya, as
well as foreign air strikes.
Another key aspect of the Committee’s work was
the assets-freeze measures, aimed at protecting Libya’s
public assets in order to ultimately make them available
to the Libyan people. Similarly, the Committee
remains committed to the protection of Libya’s natural
resources in the same cause. In that regard, the listing
and subsequent delisting of the vessel Distya Ameya
was a success story that demonstrated the Committee’s
resolve to support the Government of National Accord
and ensure that Libya’s natural resources are used
for the Libyan people. Here I would like to highlight
the tremendous contribution and relentless efforts of
the Committee’s Panel of Experts. It has been a vital
component of the Committee’s work, particularly in
monitoring and enhancing the implementation of the
relevant sanctions measures. As a result, the Committee
has consistently taken action to follow up on the Panel’s
recommendations. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation and gratitude to the Panel of
Experts for their excellent work in that regard.
Moving forward, we would like to encourage
the new Chair to continue pursuing the possibility

S/PV.7845

of organizing a visit to Libya, given the appropriate
timing and conditions. It is unfortunate that none of
the Chairs of the Committee, including me, have been
able to undertake such a visit since the Committee was
established in 2011. At the same time, engagements
with regional partners and the international community
should continue to be strengthened. In supporting
the Libyan-led transition, regional partners and the
international community must work hand in hand
and live up to their responsibilities and obligations
by respecting and implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Regional partners and the
international community should also assist and
cooperate with the Libyan authorities, particularly in
the current climate in which the Libyans lack the means
to do so.
Finally, I wish to express our heartfelt appreciation
to all of the members of the Committee for their
cooperation, the Panel of Experts for their contributions
and especially to the Subsidiary Organs Branch for
their invaluable assistance and depth of knowledge. I
also thank the wider United Nations membership for
the support and cooperation during the two years of my
country’s chairmanship.
To conclude, I should like to assure the delegation of
Sweden, which will succeed Malaysia as Chair of both
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, of our full
cooperation and best wishes for success in 2017.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I sincerely thank
the outgoing Chairs for their briefings, in particular
those who made a valiant effort to adhere to the
five-minute time limit.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

16-4482511/11
