S/PV,2416th Meeting
Joe Akakpo-Martin

CIRCLE01
Proof 01
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
06/09/90
Due 00/O/90

AM VERYTYPER
FILE A
DISK

UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

22 FEBRUARY

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2416)
of the agenda

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...*.......*...*..I*

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I........................

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of thesecurity
Council (S/15615) . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . , , *. , , . . . . . , , , , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . ,

WPV.2416

1

SYSTEM
033/34

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Offlciaal Records ofthe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

S/PV.2416th Meeting
Joe Akakpo-Martin

CIRCLE 01 Proof 01
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition 90-60397
06/09/90 Due 00/O/90

AM

VARITY

FILE A

PER

DISK

SY S’l’kM

033/34

2416th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,

22 February

1983, at 4 p.m.

just received a letter, dated 22 February, from the representative of Benin addressed to the Secretary-General.
The text of the letter will be circulated during the course
of this meeting in document S/15618.

President: Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich

TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The first speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4.

Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The American people, who yesterday 1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2416)

celebrated the birthday of their first President, George
Washington, a man who, in the not so distant past,
embodied the aspirations of the American people for the
liquidation of colonialism in their own land, are witnessing new and wide-scale American military movements
designed to undermine the territorial integrity of an Arab
State with a view to enhancing American hegemony and
expanding its sphere of influence in Africa, Asia and
other parts of the world.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15615)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.

5. How ironic! While the American people celebrate
the values and principles advocated by George Washington in favour of independence, liberation and selfdetermination, they once more witness their Government
pursuing a policy in contravention of those principles
and seeking through intimidation,
the threat of force,
and direct and indirect aggression, to contravene the sovereignty of States and the rights of their peoples. It is
certain that the American people today see the chasm
between the principles advocated by George Washington
and the reality that prevails. The American people have,
in our view, begun to realize the danger their Government’s policy poses to their interests, on the one hand,
and to international peace and security, on the other.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamabiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15615)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at the
previous meeting [2415th meeting], I invite the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at
the Council table; I invite the representatives of Benin,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ghana, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,

6. The Council is meeting for the second time in a
month to hear peoples and Governments yearning for
genuine independence and freedom registering their condemnation of the American policies which stem from a
strategy aimed against the Arab people throughout its
homeland.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Soglo (Benin), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Hayford (Ghana), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abdalla
(Sudan)andMr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the
places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7, After the aggression carried out against Lebanon
and its occupation by proxy at the hands of the most
vicious enemy of the Arabs, that is, the Zionists, we see
American hands now extending to a young Arab State
known for its glorious struggle against Fascist settler
colonialism for half a century, since that colonialism
resorted to all means to liquidate the Libyan Arab people
physically. Then, following the Second World War, the
imperialists attempted to undermine the unity of Libya,

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
1

WPV.2416th

Meeting

Joe Akakpo-Martin

CIRCLE 01 Page02 Proof 01
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

to dismemberits people and to distribute its natural
resourcesamongthe old and the neo-colonialists.Libya
and its Arab neighbourssufferedthe presenceof foreign
military baseson the land of Arab Libya, but eventually
the Libyan peoplerejectedthis formal independenceand
thus the people’srevolution broke out and did away with
those bases,But the imperialists considered Libya’s
genuineindependence,which stemmedfrom the revolution of 1 Septemberand the solidarity of that revolution
with all peoplesin Africa, Asia and Latin America, to be
a threat to their interests.Thus, the American imperialists beganto fight against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
by all means.
8. We have to take into account that the modern history of Libya is in fact a continuous strugglebetweenthe
exploiting forces alien to the area and the African and
Arab nationalistforces which feel that their interestsare
linked to those of the struggling peoples of the third
world. Hence,world imperialismand its Zionist ally have
plotted to frustrate the nationalist and liberation aspirations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In order to camouflage this frenzied offensive, American imperialistcircles
have beenwagingblatant, misleadingeconomic,political
and mediacampaigns.Thus, Libya’s legitimatesupport
for national liberation movements in Africa and etsewhere is labelledassupport for international terrorism,
while the bloody Israeli aggressionhasbeenupgradedby
American imperialismand those samecirclesto the highest level of international legitimacy.
9. We are participating in this discussionbecausewe
are convincedthat the United Statesis now putting the
final toucheson the implementationof its schemes
embodied in strategicalliances,whoseimplementationwould
be facilitated by striking at the aspirationsof the Libyan
people, its revolutionary institutions and progressive
positions.
10. TheseAmerican provocations and acts of aggression against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which have
tendedto multiply in the past two years, have drawn our
attention to the following. First, they coincide with
Washington’svicious military and economic offensives
to reimposeits hegemony on the region as a whole
through its naval fleetsand air and land forceswithin the
concept of strategic co-ordination among Washington,
Tel Aviv and the Pretoria rtgime. Secondly, thesedirect
American provocationsby seaand air cameon the heels
of the Israelioccupation of Lebanon and the aggression
against the Arab deterrence forces, which proves that
these provocations fall within the context of Camp
David and of a strategic alliance establishedto implement all the economic,geographicaland political dimensions of Camp David. Thirdly, theseprovocations fall
within the world-wideAmerican policy aimedat creating
tension at the international, regional, national and
domesticlevelswithin a geographicalbelt extendingfrom
Latin America to Asia. By way of example,it sufficesto
cite the plots hatchedagainst Nicaragua, Cubaand other
Latin American countries, the intensified aggression
againstthe peoplesof southern Africa and the imperialist

Internal Composition
06/09/90 Due 00/O/90

AM VARITYPER
FILE B
DISK

SYSTEM

03304

onslaught againstAsia and the Middle East,whereIsrael
wreaks havoc in co-operationwith Washington.
11. The Syrian Arab Republic is not afraid of American manoeuvres,bethey in the form of rapid deployment
forces or those that stem from the concept of the
American-Israeli strategic alliance, becausethe Syrian
Arab Republic, together with the other States of the
Arab Front of Steadfastnessand Confrontation, is
resolved to defend Arab rights whenever,whereverand
however they may be threatened.
12. The Syrian Arab Republicis certain that this latest
threat to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya isbut anotherdesperate attempt to subjugate the Arabs to the Camp
David logic. As part of the Arab people,we have takenit
upon ourselvesto foil thesethreats regardless
of the cost.
13. Finally, we urge the Council to considerthe complaint by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with much concern and seriousness,
sinceescalatingAmerican threats
and the accompanyingmilitary manoeuvres,which are
condemnedby the Arab nations from the Gulf to the
Ocean, carry within them the seedsof explosionsjeopardizing world peaceand security.
14. Today we hearda statementby the United States
representative [ibid.] who affirmed once more that the
United Stateswill persistin the samepolicy: to lay siege
to Libya, deprive it of the ability to defenditself and biro
it into a battle in interestsof a super-Power,the United
States. Acknowledgementof this policy by United States
officials is simply more evidencethat the logic of force
and the threat of force govern American policy, which,
as the Council knows, must be confronted here in the
Council. The Council must assumeits full responsibilities, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to deterthe aggressorandput an end to
the threat menacingthe Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
entire region.
15. We call upon the Council to warn the parties to
Camp David and their alliesthat their actions, liesand
resort to Washingtonto protect them from the wrath of
the Arab people,andthe problemsthey havecreated for
that people as a resultof their compromisingArab and
Palestinian rights and their squanderingof those rights
by departing from Arab consensus,will lead to their
bearing the sameresponsibility already borne by the
United States Governmentif they persistin implementing thesesuspectdesignsunder the American umbrella.
16. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua)(interprela2ionfrom Spanish):Mr. President,in conveyingour greetings to you we would also like to welcome the new
representative of Jordan and assurehim of the cooperation and friendshipof the Nicaraguandelegationco-operation and friendshipwhich characterizerelations
between our peoples.
17. We have met hereto considerthe complaint of the
Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya regarding

Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 03 Proof
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988
S/PV.2416th

01

Internal Composition
07/09/90
Due 00/O/90

the latest threat levelled against that country by the
United States of America.

AM VARITYPER
FILE C
DISK

SYSTEM
033/34

23. This history of slanderand hostility againstLibya is
today taking on a specialcharacter becauseeven the
United States press has assumedthe task of casting
doubt on the validity of the reasonsunderlying the
United Statesmilitary mobilization. The facts show that
there hasbeenno threat to the Sudan. No United States
official has brought forward concrete facts which prove
such a cIaim. High-ranking Egyptian military officers,
according to the international press,have denied being
awareof any suchthreats,and someofficials of the same
Government have goneso far asto reject the existenceof
such a threat.

18. The Libyan representative,in his letter dated 19
February, urgently calledfor this meetingand drew our
attention to
“the provocative military actionsof the United States
Administration by moving its aircraft-carrier Nimitz
with somenaval vesselscloseto the Libyan coastand
sendingfour AWACS aircraft to one of the neighbouring countriesof the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
spy and work against Libya”.

24. How, then, can we explain this deployment of military forces?How can we explain this political attitude?

19. The attitudesadoptedby the United StatesGovernmentagainstthe peopleand Government of Libya have
becomea part of contemporary history. The actions
taken againstthat peoplehave assumeda wide rangeof
manifestations:abrasiveand derogatory rhetoric against
Libyan leaders,destabilizationplans,zealousand interminableinternational propagandacampaigns,attempts
at economicblockadesand technology boycotts, and
threatsand acts of military aggression.

25. In view of this latest incident, and at the risk of
seemingpolitically ingenuous,one might conclude that
there wasa hasty over-reaction on the part of the United
StatesAdministration asa result of distorted and unconfirmed intelligencereports. But sucha conclusionentails
great dangerwhen we recall that thosewho are resorting
to the use of force in an irrational fashion and without
taking the slightestcare to verify their facts representa
great Power with an atomic potential capableof destroying mankind. We can only hope that the samehastewill
not prevail, or will not be demonstrated,in those areas
where the use of nuclear weaponsis decided upon.

20. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries,in an extraordinary meetingheld in New York
on 28 August 1981, declared, in regard to the events
which were taking place at that time:

26. But if we want to seemlessingenuousand to seek
an explanation for the history and the presentstate of the
animosity of the United StatesAdministration towards
the Libyan Government and people, we should recall
that the refurbishingand strengtheningof the American
“Old Right” is reachingits heyday thesedays under the
policy of the presentUnited StatesAdministration. Santa
Fe, the Heritage Foundation and the like look on with
pleasureas they seethe implementation of their foreign
policy schemes.Terrible doctrinesare being turned into
reality: military supremacy,respectfor imperial power,
decisionsto try out one’sstrength in areaswhereit seems
appropriate, and obsessionwith military confrontation
with the peoplesof the third world who are struggling to
achieve or to preservetheir political independence.

“This action by the United States against Libya,
which resulted in two Libyan surveillance aircraft
beingshot down by United Statesnaval forces,representsa new event in a seriesof threats and provocations by the authorities of the United States which
have beenbroadly covered by the press.”
21. Similarly, in view of these events, the Group of
Arab Statesadopteda declarationof support which was
circulated as an official document of the Council
[S/14638/Rev,l]; the relevant part reads as follows:
“The Group of Arab States. , , in declaringits total
solidaritywith Libya, callson all international groups,
especiallythe Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
to standfast in the face of the provocations and challengesthat constitute a most dangerousprecedentin
internationalrelations,particularly when sucha challengeis issuedby a major Power which, as a permanentmemberof the Security Council, carriesa special
and definitive responsibilityto maintain international
peaceand security.”

27. This motley array of concepts and policies being
applied by the United Statesin its foreign policy is what
in recentdays hasmademilitary manoeuvresthroughout
the world the focus and the keystoneof that policy. It is
not that we are only now discovering gunboat diplomacy: what is occurring is that today’s gunboatsare aircraft carriers and are often carrying nuclear weapons.

22. History is once againrepeatingitself. Fortunately,
SO far the consequences
have been lessgrave. What is
disquieting,however, is the repetition of the aggressive
attitude which seemsto ignore or disregardthe fundamentalprinciple embodiedin Article 2, paragraph4, of
the Charter of the United Nations Charter, which, inter
ah, callsupon us to “refrain . , , from the threat or use
of force againstthe territorial integrity or political independenceof any State”.
3

28. This is why we are witnessingfantastic war games
being conducted against other non-aligned peoples;
againstthe Democratic People’sRepublic of Korea the
“Team Spirit ‘83” manoeuvreshave taken on scandalous
proportions and are beingconducted in a region which is
militarily and politically highly sensitive.
29. On a more modestscale,but also appropriate for
intimidation accordingto United Statesmilitary calcula-

WPV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 03 Proof 01
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988
Joe Akakpo-Martin

Internal Composition
07/09/90 Due 00/O/90

tions, are manoeuvres such as “Halcon Vista” or “Pino
Grande”, which are also being conducted in other politically and militarily sensitive areas such as the territory of
Honduras neighbouring the Nicaraguan frontier where
the counter-revolutionary bands financed by the United
States are operating.

many of their allies have openly recognized our role far
peace in the Mediterranean-in
the case of the Soviet
Union through a formal agreement with us, signed in
October 198 1, and in the case of the United States in the
words of President Reagan in September 1981, reiterated
by Secretary of State Shultz to our Foreign Minister during their meeting last week. This recognition strengthens
us in our conviction that, together with other countries in
our region, we have a major responsibility to meet the
challenges posed by the tensions and conflicts which arise
in our midst and to play a positive role in seeking means
for their peaceful resolution.

30. But the peoples of the third world are on the alert
and are mobilizing firmly and resolutely to defend their
independence and territorial integrity, Mobilization of
the organized and aware masses has occurred in the
same manner in Libya, Korea and Nicaragua, in Africa,
Asia and Latin America, the areas where imperialism
carries on its acts of depredation.

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
DISK
FILE D
03304

39. The complaint brought to the Council by Libya
constitutes such a challenge.The facts of which we have
been apprisedraisevery seriouspreoccupationsfor my
Government. Thesego beyond the obvious concernthat
any Government feelsin the face of a dispute between
two friendly countries, one of them a neighbour with
which it harbours close ties of co-operation. Malta is
particularly worried by the active deployment, in close
proximity to its territory, of warshipsand other military
equipment whosepotential for destruction, even in the
caseof accident, is incalculable.We are even more worried and concernedby the implicationsfor regional security in general, andMediterraneansecurity in particular.
which arise out of the incidentswhich have just been
reported to us.

3 1. Our peoples are also expecting the United Nations
and the Security Council to play their role.
32. The lofty and fundamental mission of this body to
preserve peace places on our shoulders the heavy responsibility of responding ditigently to these expectations of
our peoples.
33. Mr. BORG (Malta): Yet again, after just a few days
have passed, this body is seized of another issue which
has a direct influence on the peace and security of the
region I come from, the Mediterranean.
34. Malta’s commitment to peace and security in the
Mediterranean forms a fundamental element of its foreign policy. It is this commitment which has prompted
my Government on frequent occasions to bring forcefully to the attention of the world at large the tensions
and conflicts which harass our region.

40. These implicationsgo to the heart of the whole
question of regional security.We are led to ask: who in
the first place hasthe prime responsibility for defining
the security issuesin any given region?Upon whom falls
the major obligation to safeguardthis security?And whCp
has the ultimate responsibility of determining which
course of action is most likely to reduce tension and
remove the threat of the useof force which may arise011
any given moment?

35. It is this commitment which has inspired Malta’s
many, and continuing, initiatives on the bilateral,
regional and international levels, in the United Nations,
in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and at the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, to
promote and enhance the prospects for peace and cooperation among Mediterranean countries. Our latest
initiative in this respect has been our proposal at the
Madrid meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe for the convening in Malta later this
year of a meeting of experts to discuss questions relating
to security in the Mediterranean as embodied in the Helsinki Final Act. We expect that all participating countries
will support this initiative.

41. For Malta, and we believe for the majority of the
membersof the internationalcommunity, the answerstea
these questionsare clear: it is the regional States themselveswhich bear the main responsibility for safeguarding the peaceand securityof their region. We say this n0t
out of any senseof antagonismto any party in a specific
dispute; our record of action, as well as our expresxd
policies, makes it clearthat we would react in the same
manner whichever super-Powerwere involved. Rather.
we say it in the firm belief that it is the regional S~MEL~
themselveswhich are principally interested in solving P
problem which arisesin their midst without superimpc%ing upon it extraneouselementswhich might exacerbate
rather than abate the local tensionsthat exist.

36. Malta’s commitment to peace and security in the
Mediterranean has led my country to adopt a status of
neutrality, based strictly on the principle of nonalignment, as the centre-piece of its continuing role in
this process.
37. We have made it abundantly clear that we consider
our membership of the CounciI as providing a unique
opportunity for us to continue to fulfil this role.

42. NO country, least’ofall a non-alignedcountry, CSC~
tolerate a state of activeconfrontation between a superPower and a neighbouringcountry. In a regional co+
text, especially in a region as troubled as tha
Mediterranean, sucha confrontation not only is dangcr0us in itself, but alsoposesthe dauntingthreat of a direct
confrontation betweenthe super-Powersthemselves.

38. We are assured that our policies enjoy the respect
and support of all peace-loving States, both in our region
and beyond it. The two super-Power themselves and
4

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE E
DISK
033/34

S/PV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 05 Proof 01
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

.43. In the Mediterranean we have a dramatic manifestation of the complications which arise when States from
outside the region assume a primary, if not an exclusive,
role in defining and safeguarding the security issues of a
region. Our sea has become an arena of confrontation
between two massively armed navies which have
imported into our region the dangerous polarization
which exists at the global level, Any action by one party,
however localized or specific the intent in which it may
be conceived, cannot but add to this dangerous
polarization.

Republic of Malta to the Yugoslav press agency Tunjung.
In assessing the situation in the Mediterranean region,
she stated that
“One of the pillars of the Maltese socialist Government’s foreign policy is to turn the Mediterranean into
a zone of peace and co-operation.
“With this in mind, we have used every possible
international and regional forum to promote this idea,
and we are pleased to say that other non-aligned countries in this region share this view and have helped us
promote it.

44, As a neutral country in the heart of the Mediterranean, we feel a special responsibility in seeking to
engender a process of relaxation of tensions, which
would lessen and eventually halt the need for the massive
military deployment in our region, a region which might
soon be in the unenviable position of having mediumrange nuclear missiles sited in it. We strongly believe that
the brandishing of military hardware, however limited in
scope and objective, does not help in this process.

“Regrettably, the influence of the super-Powers in
this very important region is still manifest, and unless
their military forces withdraw from the Mediterranean
we shall have to work hard and long to turn our sea
into a peaceful, denuclearized region.”
50. This is the very message which my delegation would
like to echo today. Malta is committed to stability, peace
and security in the world as a whole, and in particular in
the Mediterranean region.

45. When local problems arise-and Mediterranean
countries are the last to ignore the frightening and painful reality of the existence of local conflicts-the tools
which must be utilized to solve these problems must be
scrupulously tailored to suit the local situation, In this
context, we have urged and continue to urge collective
responsibility by the regional States themselves. We have
based our own status of neutrality on this concept of
collective responsibility by seeking acceptance of it and
support for it from all our neighbours. We have every
asssurance that such a collective effort is the best guarantee that our region can have of evolving into the zone
of peace we all strive for.

51. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):At the outset, I should like, in the name of the
Chinesedelegationand on my own behalf, to extend a
warm welcometo Mr. Abdullah Salah,the new representative of Jordan, on hisjoining us in the Council and to
wish him successin the discharge of his important
responsibilities. We look forward to friendly COoperation with him.
52. The tensionnearthe Gulf of Sidra in theMediterranean hasbeena matter of public concern in the past few
days.

46. From the outside Powers, especially the superPowers, we seek genuine co-operation to enable us to
evolve this collective effort, The choices to be made in
any given instance might not always be self-evident.
However, what must invariably be evident is the readiness to utilize the pro:Fss of peaceful persuasion, in preference to the process of the threat of armed force, and
the readiness to permit the regional States themselves to
define and mould these peaceful processes.

53. The situation around this region hasbeencontinuously turbulent for sometime now. The recent showof
force and resort to military intimidation by a superPower have brought about a further deterioration there.
54. All the countriesof that region belong to the third
world. We have alwaysmaintainedthat there are no fundamentalconflicts of interest betweenthird-world countries and that they should and can find fair and
reasonablesolutionsto their differencesthrough peaceful
consultations.No foreign infringement of the independence,sovereigntyand territorial integrity of thesecountries, including the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, shouldbe
allowed, nor is any outside interferencein their internal
affairs permissible.It is our hope that the Organization
of African Unity [0.4q and the Leagueof Arab States
can play an active role in the mediation of their
differences.

47. Tragically, this has not yet been done for the Mediterranean, as the case before us amply demonstrates. We
must also recall that this has not been the first incident of
its kind and that we have no guarantee whatsoever that it
will be the last. Herein lie the deepest roots of Malta’s
preoccupation.
48. As a small country, one without any military backup forces, the only weapon we possess to convince other
countries to desist from destructive confrontation is our
determination and our political will. Our task is not easy.
It is time that we acted, and acted quickly and decisively,
in order to eradicate the ills which are besetting our countries and our peoples.

55. Any meddling or fishing in troubled waters by
super-Powerswould only aggravatethe tension andjeopardize the peaceand security of the region or even of
the whole world. This is something we must guard
against.

49. At this point, it is relevant to quote from a statement made last month by the Head of State of the
5

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE F
DISK
03304

S/PV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 05 Proof 01
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

56. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“friendly”
regimes can defend their Governments and
regimes if they want to? There is no need for United
States AWACS and naval forces to substitute themselves
by force for the patriotic people of those countries. Why
do the American forces not give the peoples of those
neighbouring countries a chance to enjoy defending their
country and their probably democratically elected
Governments which just happen to be American friend&?
How long can those “friendly” kings and presidents be
kept on the throne by American AWACS, fleets and air
forces against the will of their own peoples?

57. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic
of Iran): Thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important series of meetings, which is being held in
order to discuss the American aggression against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. You have just adjourned
another series of meetings about American-inspired
crimes against the Palestinians and, before having
reached a draft resolution on those crimes, you are now
opening another series of meetings, again to discuss yet
another incident of American aggression, How many
meetings did the Council have last year, and how many
will be needed this year, to discuss major American
attempts against the peace and security of some regions
of the world?

62. Even the people of the United States cannot accept
such fallacious allegations as those produced by the
United States against Libya. The entire population of
Libya, which has allegedly threatened American.inter:
ests, is slightly over 3 million and definitely below 3.5
million; the number of unemployed in the United States
is four times greater than the entire population of Libya.
Yet, amazingly enough, the threat comes from Libya,
does it not? The number of alcoholics and other addicts
in the United States is definitely over four times the total
population of Libya, and yet the threat comes from
Libya. My delegation does not really have the exact statistics on the number of criminals who are free and walking in the streets of the United States-thanks, probably.
to the Justice Department-but
the number is definitely
high enough to turn the country into a garrison State.
Yet Libya, with a population of less than 3.5 million, is
considered such a serious threat that it requires the
deployment of AWACS and an aircraft carrier to the
area.

58. There is American intervention in Latin America,
there are American military units on the coasts of Africa
and American Zionists in the Middle East, there is an
American military presence in the Far East, there are
American forces in the Indian Ocean and American
devouring forces against the oppressed all over the entire
world, yet, ironically enough, there is United States permanent membership in the Security Council. In this context, it is most appropriate, therefore, to say: “I take
refuge in God from Satan, the accursed”.
59. The United States, of course, claims that the presence of its fingers in the pies in every troubled part of the
world is due to its particular interest both in international peace and security and in the security of some
“friendly” regimes. The historic crimina1 war of America
in Viet Nam, of course, gives evidence of the United
States role in international peace and security. As for the
American concern for “friendly” regimes, the Muslims of
Iran know the exact meaning of American support for its
“friendly” clients, because we still remember the effects
of the 40,000 American military advisers, as well as the
close co-operation of the Central Intelligence Agency of
the United States (CIA) with the dirty regime of the Shah,
who happened to enjoy quite a lot of American support
as an American friend up to the last moment of his life,

63. American media claim-and
the United States
Administration
has not yet denied-that
a dozen
Libyans have been captured in the Sudan and that, therefore, the crisis is over; hence the AWACS have been
ordered to withdraw from Egypt all the way back to the
United States, and the aircraft carrier has been ordered
back towards where it had been before-near the fh~ez
Canal. In other words, a dozen Libyans, according to the
American estimation, can overthrow the regime in the
Sudan. Such a representation of President Nimeiri’s
regime by the United States-definitely
a friendly
country-does
not sound too complimentary. I am sure
that if the President of the United States were in President
Nimeiri’s shoes, he would be embarrassed to see how
poorly the President of the United States thinks of a
friendly country. Quite unfriendly of him, is it not?

60. Why is it that all regimes “friendly” to the United
States are usually hated by their own people7 Why is it
that without United States support the “friends” of
America cannot remain in power? Why is it that whenever a regime really friendly to American imperialism ia
toppled, the people of that country feel a great relief?
Why is it that the third-world countries identify their
liberation from a pro-American regime with the exact
meaning of freedom and independence?

64. This is not the first time that American military
forces and propaganda machines have threatened
regional peace and security in various parts of the world
under the guise of supporting some “friendly” regimes
against others. It is the policy of imperialist forces to
create differences, to sow agitation, to intervene in the
affairs of other countries and to keep the oppressed
nations under subjugation. It is the same forces which
imposed the Zionist base upon Palestine; it is the same
policy which has divided the Muslim world in order to
rule it; and it is the same policy which is supporting the
South African regime against the oppressed people of

61, Just for the sake of argument-only,
Mr. Treiki, for
the sake of argument-let us suppose that the American
allegations against Libya are correct. Let us suppose that
Libya is really threatening some of its neighbouring
. regimes. Do you not think that the peoples under those
6

S/PV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 07 Page OS Proof 01
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

Africa. Not to forget our own case, it is the same policy
which imposed the war of aggression against us.

patched from there for a spying mission against Libya,
while the aircraft-carrier Nimitz steamed towards Libyan
territorial waters.

65, The position of the Muslim people and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran vis-&vis, this situation is quite clear, We support the oppressed and their
struggles for independence from imperialist blocs. We
beiieve that it is the masses that make the final decision,
and it is their decision which is effective.
66. Thus, in spite of the military superiority of the
super-Powers-and,
in this case that of the United
States-the victory is actually that of the masses, the
people of Libya, and imperialist plots are bound to fail.
We condemn American military presence and intervention in the Middle East in general, and the recent American threat to the people and Government of the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in particular. We
strongly condemn all United States acts of aggression
and the American campaign against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. Such American attempts are always made
with the excuse that America has interests in such-andsuch parts of the world. American authorities must fully
realize that people in the different parts of the world are
definitely more entitled to their own interests than is the
United States. And so long as the United States cannot
give up its illegal interests in various parts of the world, it
will be impossible to maintain international peace and
security. The people and Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran are happy to see that the people and
Government of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya have remained firm in defending their country
bravely and decisively. We hope that their model will be
followed by some others in the area who have unfortunately made their homeland a base for American military
and political forces.

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE G
DISK
033/34

71. At first the American authorities declared that the
surveillance aircraft had been dispatched to Cairo to
engage in joint military manoeuvres with the Egyptian
air force, Then they stated that the Nimitz had steamed
to Libyan shores and that that military movement was
aimed at deterring the Libyan forces, which were said to
be preparing to interfere in the internal affairs of the
Sudan. Now the United States authorities have declared
that their mission has been concluded and that the
AWACS, as well as their naval force, have all returned to
their bases.
72, That is the brief scenario produced and directed by
the United States Administration. Actually, it is part and
parcel of a series of scenarios to which we have become
accustomed, the most recent of which was that of the
so-called Libyan assassination squads, which Washington stated had come to assassinate President Reagan.
The American media went to work on those Libyan
“assassination squads”, which were a figment of the
imagination. According to both previous and subsequent
reports, American intelligence has not stopped the intimidation and distortion campaigns to which Libya has
been subjected: American newspapers publish information to the effect that American intelligence had hatched
a plot to get rid of the Libyan President and negate the
Libyan revolution. In addition, the United States
launched a widespread campaign in African and Arab
capitals to bring pressure to bear on Libya and to undermine the African summit conference scheduled to be held
in Tripoli.
73. Those foolhardy provocations against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya were but one manifestation of the
aggressive policy pursued by the United States Administration,

67. It is deplorable that any country wishing to maintain its independence has to face some form of American
aggression. It is deplorable that no revolutionary people
or Government can be immune from American
conspiracies.

74. After forming the rapid deployment forces, the
United States stated that it had organized a special military command for the Middle Rast. That took place
simultaneously with the military manoeuvres conducted
by United States forces in collaboration with its puppets
in the area. One of those manoeuvres took place near the
shores of Democratic Yemen.

68, My delegation sincerely hopes that the Council can
demonstrate its independence and its commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations so as to exert pressure
upon one of its own permanent members in order to
prevent that member from following such destructive
policies in different parts of the world-indeed,
in the
third world particularly-which
are detrimental to the
cause of peace.

75. In other parts of the world, United States forces
continue their military manoeuvres aimed at intimidating
peoples and propping up puppet r6gimes. In Central
America, United States military manoeuvres aim at reinforcing pressure against the Sandinist revolution; m the
Far East, American forces continue their grand manoeuvres with the forces of South Korea, thus jeopardizing
peace and security in that area.

69. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation J?YII~ Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
Yemen, whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
70. Mr. AL-ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic): The Council is meeting today in the
wake of the grave developments resulting from the movements of contingents of United States air and naval military forces on the borders of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. Four AWACS were sent to Cairo to be dis-

76. There has been differing speculation about the real
significance of these American provocative acts. There
are those who believe that the United States Administration’s aim is to convince American public opinion of the
necessity for increasing military- expenditures at a time
7

WPV2416th
Meeting CIRCLE
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL

01 Page 08 Proof
340 EXT. 3-2988

01

when that policy is facing general indignation, owing to
its adverse effect on social-welfare allocations, which are
diminishing, thereby harming the poor and those with a
limited income. There are those who say that these military scenarios constitute a continuation of the United
States Administration’s policy aimed at winning votes in
the forthcoming elections. But those fairly familiar with
United States policy confirm that the campaign being
waged by the United States against Libya, on the eve of
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, is but an American
attempt to affect the proceedings of that conference and
to deflect it from confronting United States aggressive
policy. There are those supporters of the United States
who are preparing today to undermine the policy of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which is opposed
to imperialism and neo-colonialism.

Internal Composition

AM

VARITYPER

10/02/90

FILE

H

Due

00/O/90

DISK

SYSTEM

033/34

80. Mr. ABDALLA (Sudan) (interpretation
from
Arabic): It gives me pleasureto addressthe Council in
Arabic. As I do so,I am truly happy to extendthanks to
the Council for adoptingits historic decisionto introduce
Arabic asan official and working languagein its deliberations and work [resolution 528(1982)]. I extend warm
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumptionof the
presidency.We arecompletelyconfident that your political wisdom and diplomatic experienceand know-how
will enable the Council to fulfil all its duties and
functions.
81. I wish also to extend thanks to your predecessor,
brother Amega, the representative of Togo, for his
worthy efforts last month.
82. May I also extend sincerecongratulations to the
new membersof the Council, fully confident that their
membershipin the Council will enrich its work and help
it to assumeits role in the interestsof international peace
and security. My thanksgo alsoto the outgoingmembers
of the Council, who sparedno effort in promoting the
objectives which form the basisof the United Nations.

77. Whatever the reason, we have witnessed with grave
concern one of the permanent members of the Security
Council tampering with its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations. In addition to immobilizing the
proceedings of the Council, as well as the implementation of its powers, the United States is jeopardizing
international peace and security by its threats to use
force. What has taken place in Libyan airspace is one
such threat, The United States tried that policy during
the cotd-war period when it involved itself in a military
intervention in South-East Asia, but then it withdrew in
defeat. Does the United States want to repeat the same
tragedy in the Middle East?

83. The Council hasbeenconvenedtoday on Libya’s
request.I need not explainor stressthe commoncultural
links between the Sudaneseand Libyan peoples; these
links have been strengthenedthroughout history by
neighbourliness.Each of these links could have supported fruitful and soundrelations betweenLibya and
the Sudan but for the refusalof the Libyan leadershipto
allow the Sudan to exercisefull sovereigntyover its territory and to adopt the economicand political approaches
and the foreign and domesticpoliciesstemmingfrom the
aspirations and hopesof its people. To that one cod
add Libya’s disregardof the principlesgoverning normal
conduct among nations,including the principle of nonintervention in their internal affairs and the principle of
the non-useor threat or force in international relations.
Here liesthe bone of contention and the source of tension in the relations betweenthe two countries.

78. Democratic Yemen declares its full solidarity with
the Libyan revolution. It stands steadfastly against
United States provocations.
President Ali Nasser
Mohammed sent the following cable to his brother
Colonel Muammar Qaddafi:
“We in the People’s Democratic Yemen are following with grave concern the provocations faced by the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya stemming from the military
forces of American imperialism in the Mediterranean,
in co-ordination with Zionism and its allied forces.
These provocative acts are but an attempt to prevent
the fraternal Libyan people from exercisingits effective role on the sideof all progressiveArab forcesand
regimes in confronting the imperialist and Zionist
designsthat are aimed at dealing blows againstthe
progressiveArab forces and regimes and imposing
imperialist, military, political and economic hegemony on the Arab Statesand peoples.At the sametime,
we in Democratic Yemen commend your glorious
steadfastness
against these provocative actsand confirm our confidencein the continued steadfastness
of
the Libyan peopleand its ability to defeat all the imperialist and Zionist conspiracies.”

84. The Council hasalready beeninformed of Libya’s
numerous hostile practices and of its provocations
against our people and land, provocations which
extended to invasionand the useof mercenariesin July
1976 to carry out its designs.The defeatof that invasion
in 1976 was not the end. Libya proceededto a seriesof
vioIations of the independence,
sovereigntyand territorial integrity of the Sudan. In 1981 there were severa
Libyan violations of Sudaneseairspaceas well as the
bombardment of villagesalongthe bordersof the Sudan
and Chad. Libya intensifiedits aggressiveactions against
the social and economicinfrastructure and continued ary
anti-Sudan campaignin all its massmedia.
85. Last week’s events, which have been extensively
covered by all newsagenciesand by the world mass
media, are a continuation of Libya’s violations of all
international rules and instrumentsgoverning the relations of States with one another and good-neighbourly
relations in particular. Lastweekwe witnessedthe escala-

79. The PRESIDENT: (interprerarion from Russian):
The next speakeris the representative of the Sudan. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
8

S/PV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 09 Proof 01
Joo Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

tion of the armed Libyan presence on our north-western
frontier by the use of MiG-23s and long-range bombers,
The competent Sudanese authorities obtained information from some agents arrested in Khartoum which confirmed the existence of a Libyan scheme to overthrow the
legitimate Government of the country, to undermine its
constitutional institutions and to impose Libyan trusteeship on the Sudanese people.

makes it incumbent upon the Council to follow the situation closely and to take all necessary measures to put an
end to such practices.

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE I
DISK
033/34

91. Before I conclude I should like to say that the
Sudan would not have brought its differences with Libya
to the Council today had it not been for our concern to
place things in their proper perspective and to settle such
differences, which should have been done within the
framework of the regional organizations to which the
two countries belong. However, I had to do this because
the matter had been given a partial treatment which did
not reflect the full reality in the region.

86. Faced by these grave events, which jeopardize the
security, unity and stability of the Sudan and not only are
aimed at destabilizing the area but also have grave implications for international peace and security, the Sudan
took preventive measures to thwart that scheme and to
preserve its own independence and territorial integrity.

92. In concluding, I should like to appeal to the Council to follow developments in our area caused by Libya’s
policy of intervening in the internal affairs of its neighbouring countries, a policy which has adverse international and regional effects on and negative consequences
for the programmes for development and progress
required by the countries of the region. I also call upon
the Council to make the necessary arrangements to restore peace, stability and security there.

87. In the face of such an extremely dangerous situation, the Sudan could not but use all ways and means to
defend itself and its people’s safety, its sovereignty, its
territorial integrity and its airspace, in co-operation with
all friendly and fraternal countries, in the context of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as the charters of the regional organizations to
which my country has the honour to belong, and also
within the context of bilateral measures, foremost among
which is the Egyptian-Sudanese Defence Treaty.

93. The PRESIDENT
(interprefazion from Russian):
The next speakeris the representativeof Egypt. I invite
him to take a placeat the Council table and to make his
statement.

88. On the instructions of my Government, I should
like to inform the Council of the following: first, the
measures taken by the United States Administration
were necessary to thwart the massive Libyan concentrations against the Sudan; secondly, following the response
of the United States, it has been proved beyond doubt
that there were increasing Libyan concentrations along
the north-western frontier of the Sudan; thirdly, many
violations by Libyan aircraft and bombers of Sudanese
airspace were monitored, and our forces took preventive
measures and compelled the Libyan aircraft to withdraw;
and, fourthly, these joint efforts were highly effective in
thwarting the Libyan scheme.

94. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) (interpret&ionfrom Arabic):
The delegationof Egypt, in making its contribution to
the debate today through this short statement, is proceedingfrom its concern that the facts be clarified and
matters put in their true perspective. Indeed, after the
detailed,clear and moderatestatementof the representative of the Sudan, it is unnecessary
for my country’s delegation to deal with details of which the Sudanese
delegation is well aware.
95. At the outset I wish to state that we shall not be
lured into verbal clashesthat are of no use. We have
heardcommentshereand there and we seethat it iswise,
reasonable and logical to ignore such comments
altogether.

89. I need not reaffirm Sudan’s whole-hearted faith in
the principles and objectives which form the basis of the
United Nations and in the principles of the regional
organization to which both Libya and the Sudan belong.
The good-neighbour policy has always been one of the
corner-stones of the Sudan’s foreign policy, as witnessed
by the bilateral and multilateral instruments of cooperation binding the Sudan and its neighbours, which,
without a doubt, constitute important tributaries of international co-operation and of the strengthening of international peace and security. On that basis, we call upon
Libya to comply with these principles and to refrain from
its policy of intervening in the internal affairs of other
nations, particularly neighbouring countries.

96. The statementsissuedin Cairo concerningthe latest
developmentswere committed to refraining completely
from opening the door to the possibility of using these
developmentsto escalatethe situation or raise tension
needlessly,Cairo adopted this stancedeliberately, out of
its concern not to escalatematters, especiallysincethe
profiteers had failed to achieve their designs.
97. At the sametime, it behovesus to make it clear
before the Council that Egypt is fully committed to
defendingfraternal Sudan, in responseto its requestand
to the extent that would be agreedupon. There is no
ambiguity concerningthis matter. The mutual defence
treaty betweenour two countries is not a dead letter. It
commitsthe two fraternal countriesto the full implementation of all its provisions. The security of the Sudan is
part and parcel of Egypt’s national security and vice

90, We were recently informed by the mass media that
suicide squads were formed in Libya to assassinate some
presidents whose pictures were burned in public squares
in Tripoli. Among them was my own President. This
sheds further light on Libya’s persistent resort to the
threat and use of force in international relations and
9

S/PV.2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 10 Proof 01
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal

versa The two countriesare fully entitled to exercisethe
right of sovereigntyover the national territories inside
their bordersand also to take the measuresthey seefit
for self-defenceagainst any aggressionor threat of
aggression.

their destiny. We wish to find the necessaryguarantees
for the independenceof theseStates and the possibility
for their societiesto determinetheir own destinywithout
the pitfalls of military alliances that may undermine
genuine independenceand weaken the ability to launch
initiatives and take decisions.

98. That is what my delegationwishesto put on record.
We neednot go into detail and cite examplesof attempts
at interference in the internal affairs of neighbouring
countries. All we wishfrom the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
is that it commit itself in fact to what is stated by its
representativein documentS/15614-that is, to work for
the consolidationof peace and security in the areaand
the peacefulsettlementof disputes.
99. As everybody knows, Egypt has not raised any
weapon againstany Arab country. It has not shot one
bullet againstany Arab citizen. Throughout its long history, Egypt hasbeena shield and a pillar of supportfor
the Arab nation, in both its western and its eastern
flanks.
100. The PRESIDENT (interpret&on from Russian): I
should like to inform membersof the Council that I have
received a letter dated22 February from the representative of Jordan [S/15619], which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, PermanentObserverof
the Leagueof Arab States to the United Nations, to
participate in the consideration of the item entitled
‘Letter dated 19 February 1983from the Permanent
Representativeof the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nationsaddressedto the Presidentof the Security Council [S/15615’j’, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decidesto grant this request.
11 was so decided.

101I The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
Russicm): I
invite Mr. Maksoud to take a place at the Council tabIe
and to make his statement.

Composition

10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE J
DISK
033/34

104. What cuts us to the quick is to seethe effects of
outstanding disputeswhich would have beenbetter dealt
with on the legal baseson which regionalorganizations
are founded. The Leagueof Arab Statesand the OAU
are examplesof suchorganizations.Actually, this makes
us feel the necessityfor strengthening these regional
organizations, in accordancewith the Charter of the
United Nations. All thesedisputesare historically transient and not perennial in our beings or in our
consciences.
105. The conveningof the Council to considerthe military show-down in the Mediterranean leadsUS to the
realization of what goesbeyond in importanceand what
is deeper in effect in our contemporary history. We find
that the destiniesof many of the countries of the third
world have beenblown about by the wind. Instead, our
efforts and ideasshouldhave beenfocusedon the priorities of genuine peaceand development and progress,
especially as we in the Arab nation and the third world
have a vested interest in achieving international peace
and detente. This peacedoesnot constituteonly a morat
commitment on our part. It also constitutesfor us the
proper climate for the developmentof our societiesfrom
backwardnessto advancement.In all the communitiesof
the third world, we are suffering from economic and
technological crisesand from attemptsby hegemonistic
forces to dominate our political destiniesand economic
opportunities. If wedo not have a definite opinion about
someof the thingsmentionedin the courseof thesemeetings, we, as a regionalorganization which seeksto ct+ystallize and to statethe Arab viewsof the matter, hope the
United Nations will work to support the ability of the
regional organizationsto fulfil their tasksand to participate in the task of maintaininginternational peaceand
security.
106. The plight that weare witnessingtoday must be an
incentive for all the third-world communities,whatever
their differencesmay be, whether ideologicalor intellectual or political, to settlethosedifferences.They have to
realize that their destiniesare interrelated to a large
extent and that the bitter experiencethat we areundergoing today shouldleadusto riseabove it in order that we
may be able to discoverthat the factors which bring US
together in the communitiesof the third world, as well as
the challengesthat unify us, are much biggerand much
more effective than the factors of dissension
and conflict.
Such factors reducethe numberof our opportunities for
real independence,block our way towards unity and
impair our steadfastness
in progressand development.

102. Mr. MAKSDUD (interpretationfram
Arabic}:
Mr.
President,on behalfof the League of Arab Statesand its
delegation, I wish to expressour thanks to the Council
for having granted our request to speakat this meeting.
On this occasionI wishalso to expressthe warm appreciation of the Arab nation for your personalrole, aswell as
that of the Soviet Union, in supporting Arab issuesof
paramount importance to the fate of the Arab nation.
103. The convening of the Council with regard to this
developmenton the eveof a non-aligned summitconference shedsclear light on the tremendousimportance of
the reaffirmation of the States of the third world to commit themselvesto the policy of non-alignment and widen
the constituencyfor peacein the world in order that the
Arab, African, Asian and other Statesof the South may
not all be a stagefor confrontations in attempts to dictate

107. Therefore, we standtoday before this reality. We
had hoped that this reality would have becomea precedent that would preventthepattern of intervention in the
10

S/PV,2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page I1 Proof 01
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due00/O/90

destiny of the third world, that thiswould be an incentive
for us in the future.

for 24 hours. Then we witnessedthe pressconference
held by PresidentReaganin which he assertedthat there
wasno movementby the fleet and that the AWACS were
conducting joint training manoeuvreswith Egypt.

108. Thus, we hopethat the argumentswe have heard
today, whetheror not they arebasedon right, will enable
us to riseabove the climate of dissensionand to benefit
from them. We hope that this experiencewill act as an
incentive for usall in the Arab and third-world nationsto
make the policy of non-alignmenta reality in our conduct and a reality in our relationstogether,before we are
subject oncemoreto being usedaspawnsin the cold war
and the arms race.

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
DISK
033/34
FILE K

115. We had hoped to hear from the representativeof
Egypt, after the confirmation by his Government that
there were no joint manoeuvres,whether or not this is
true. I shall return to this point later.

116. The United States Departments of State and
Defenseimmediatelystatedthat therewere indeedmovementsby the fleet and the AWACS were there becauseof
109. We thereforehope that, at a momentof awareness the so-calledLibyan threat: the threat posedby 3 million
during this stageof the developmentof the Arab nation,
Libyans against50 million Egyptiansand 20 million Sudthis afternoon’seventswill serveasa prelude, giving us a
anese,The Egyptian army alone amountsto more than
senseof direction to confirm our independenceof decione third of the population of Libya. As the representasion and our resolutewill to contribute towards genuine tive of Iran said: even if there were a threat-and that is
and effective peaceand to liberatethe third world from
not true, for sucha threat doesnot exist-where doesthe
the dangersof acute polarization and international tenUnited Statescome in? Has it arrogatedto itself the role
sion, as well as from the attempts of fleets directly or
of the Security Council or the Leagueof Arab Statesor
indirectly to dictate their will on our ability to move
the OAU? It has no such role.
forward.
117. The representativeof the United Statesstatedthat
110. Thus, the challengewe face today should be an
her country is concernedwith the maintenanceof good
impetusenablingusto affirm the commondenominators relations among neighbours and that it intervened
we possess
sothat the differencesthat may arisebetween becauseLibya had intervened in the affairs of its neighus, the nationsof the third world, may be transient and
bours, We wish that this permanent member of the
not permanentdivisionswhich can be exploited for more
Council, the United States,would employ suchrational
polarization and tension.
and reasonablewords against Israel, which did not
merely intervene but occupied: it occupied the territory
111, The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian): of Lebanon, a neighbouringcountry. It has occupied a
The representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
portion of Syria and annexed Syrian territory. It has
wishesto speakin exerciseof hisright of reply. I now call
occupiedand annexedJerusalem.But no, there were no
on him.
such words, becauseIsrael is the strategic ally of the
United States. The Israeli aggressioncould not have
112. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (inrerpretaken place had it not been for United States
tationfrom Arabic): We heardthis morning the statement
intervention.
of the distinguishedrepresentativeof the United States
[2415th meeting’l.I say the “distinguished representa118. IS the United Statesconcernedabout the Egyptian
tive”, and I wish shewere here so that she could hear
people? Members of the Council will recall the masthesepolite termsand so that shewould refrain from the
termsshehasbecomeaccustomedto using even in such sacreof schoolchildrenin Bahar al-Baqar, in Egypt. Was
that school not destroyedwith United Statesweapons?
an augustbody as this.
Was not the Egyptian army destroyed again and again
113. I believemembersof the Council had all expected with United Statesweapons?The people of Egypt do not
like the United States,and they will never be an ally of
to hear something-something important-although
the United States-never, When the United Statescame
personallyI wascertain that shewould repeat the words
of the American massmediaand the accusationsmade to the realization that there had been a rapprochement
betweenEgypt and the rest of the Arab nation and that
by the Zionist-controlledAmerican media againstLibya
Egypt was joining the Arab ranks, the United States
and against the leadershipof its revolution, We had
expectedto hear proof or to be provided with evidence wished to intervene and to intimidate the Egyptian
Government, becauseit realized that the Camp David
concerningthe so-calledLibyan threat. But we heardthe
accordswere finished once and for all with the Beirut
representativeof the United Statesquoting Radio Sudan.
massacre.
Do the super-Powers
not have other sourcesof information? We thought only we smallcountries were in that
119. In the final analysis,therefore, all thesemanoeuposition.
vres are designedto intimidate Egypt or to hatch a plot
againstit from within.
114. If we analyse the American position from the
beginning-that is, before the pressconference held by
120. The United StatesSecretary of State hassaidthat
the President-we seethat, in a broadcast,ABC referred
a victory hasbeenwon: a victory by a super-Power-as
to the United States intervention and stated that the
Administration had askedit to postpone the broadcast though Libya were the Soviet Union or China- So the
11

WPV.2416th Meeting
Joe Akakpo-Martin

01 Page12 Proof 01
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition

CIRCLE

10/02/90

United Stateshastriumphed over Libya. How did it triumph?The Sudanese
regimemanagedto arrest 12Sudaneseplotters, and thus the United Statestriumphedand
achievedits aim. So the United StatesSixth Fleet returns,
along with the AWACS. This is the victory won by the
United States; that, regrettably, is the logic of a superPower which hold the fate of the world in its hands.It is
incredible that a Leadershipwith such a mentality has
assumedthe responsibilityfor the security of the world.
In my view, that is the most dangerousproblemfacing
the Security Council, which bears the responsibilityfor
the maintenanceof peace.

AM VARITYPER SYSTEM
FILE L
DISK
033/34

becausethat would makehim the friend of imperialism,
of monopolies,of colonialism.
125. Muammar Qaddafi is anti-imperialism;he is antimonopoliesand anti-Zionism,and he will remain so; and
this redoundsto his honour. Muammar Qaddafi would
cherisha certificate from the people of Nicaragua, or of
Cuba, or of Viet Nam, but not from the United States
Administration. We in the Arab nation, including the
peopleof the Sudan, feel that any friend of the United
States is a lackey. The United States does not accept
friends;it only acceptslackeys.When the questionof the
AWACS was consideredin Congress,Senator Jackson
said that the United Stateshad one friend in the region
of the Middle East and that the rest were lackeys. The
United StatesAdministration doesnot accept friendsor
semi-lackeys;it wants full lackeys. When theselackeys
are askedto accuseLibya, they accuseLibya; when they
are askedto accusethe Soviet Union, they accusethe
Soviet Union,

121. They talk about Libya’s terrorism. Does Libya
needcertification from the United States?For mypart, if
the United Stateswereto praiseQaddafi, I would be the
first to opposehim, becausethat would meanthat Qaddafi was a traitor. But it is my honour to be a soldierin
my leader’sarmy becausehe is against United States
imperialism.
122. Who has given a certificate of good conduct to
whom?In its decisions,the Sixth Conferenceof Headsof
State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries,held
in Havana in 1979,unanimously condemnedthe positions of the United States.It has not condemnedLibya
or Muammar Qaddafi but has condemnedthe United
StatesAdministration. The resolutionsof Arab summit
conferencesheld at Baghdad in 1978,Tunis in 1979and
Amman in 1980-with the participation of the Sudan
and, at Tunis, with the participation of PresidentNimeiri
personally-unanimously condemnedthe United States
policy of aggressionagainstthe Arab nation. The Third
Islamic Summit Conference,held at Mecca-Taif in 1981,
condemnedthe imperialist policy of the United States.
That policy hasalsobeencondemnedby the Arab Front
of Steadfastness
and Confrontation, by the conferences
of headsof State or Government of non-alignedcourt;
tries and by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries held at Belgradein
1978.
123. Who hasbeencondemnedby the United Nations
and by other international organizations? We are all
Members of the United Nations, and you havewitnessed
this year that the United States hasbeen isolatedalong
with Israel from the rest of the world; concerningSouth
Africa, sometimesother States havejoined themin their
isolation. Who is practising terrorism againstthe people
of El Salvador?Against the people of Nicaragua?Who is
practising intervention and terrorism againstthe people
of Poland? Against the people of Viet Nam? Who murdered hundredsof thousands of Vietnamese?Can the
United States hand out certificates of good conduct
regarding terrorism while it is leading international
terrorism?
124. I say to the United States that the windsof change
are blowing. Somozais gone. So is Bat&a. All the lackeysconsideredfriendly by the United Stateswill met with
the samefate, and no political leaderwill considerhimself honoured by the friendship of the United States,

Due 00/O/90

126, TheNew York Timesof 16January stated that the
CIA had indicated that someStates-including El Salvador, Guatemala,Hondurasand the Sudan-were in jeopardy. Sincethen, the CIA hasbeenpreparing for some
action againstLibya. We know of contactswith the CIA
and we know that the Agency’sdirectorshave madeV~Sits to the area, but we would have liked to be furnished
one pieceof proof of their claims.We challengethe allegation that there hasbeeneven one singleLibyan intervention in the affairs of the Sudan. If there are internal
problemsin the Sudan,they have nothing to do with us.
There have been 19 attemptedcoupsin the Sudan since
the May revolution; aseveryoneis aware,in one of those
attempted coups, Libya saved President Nimeiri and
sprang him from gaol, The internal problems of the
Sudan have nothing to do with us. We are a fraternal
peopleof the peopleof the Sudanand wewant to live in
peaceand prosperity with that people. We shall always
be close.Our real enemieswill remain the Americans.
127. We have had differenceswith the Sudan in the
past, and we have severedrelations and resumed relations.Now, we have differencesthat we will soon reconciIe
becausewe are Arabs, becausewe are Africans, and
becauseour enemyis Israeland our enemyis the United
States.We really have no enemy other than the United
States, which ‘provides Israel with weapons, which
murdersour children,which standsbehindthe massacres
of Deir Yassin and those of Sabra and Shatila. With
American napalm and American cluster bombs and
American weapons,the children of Sabra and Shatila
weremurdered. How, then, can Americans be friends of
the Arabs? That cannot be. Cairo was bombed with
American planes and so was Aswan. Ismailia was destroyed with American planes. Egypt was almost destroyed by American planes,and Egypt will not be a
friend of America. Hewho tries to be a friend of America
in Egypt will meetthe samefate asdid Sadat, not at the
handsof Libya but at the handsof the Egyptian people.
128. Libya will not intervenein the affairs of any State.
The diatribes and falsehoodsthat we have listened to

12

S/PV,2416th Meeting CIRCLE 01 Page 13 Proof
Joe Akakpo-Martin
NL 340 EXT. 3-2988

Internal Composition
10/02/90 Due 00/O/90

01

today from the representative of the United States are an
open secret. The responsibility of a super-Power, a permanent member of the Security Council, is a very grave
one. The representative of the United States stated that
what had happened to Libya will be repeated and that
the United States is prepared to indulge in more provocation and to continue the aggression. This is evident from
the statement of the United States representative. However, we say that if this is to be repeated, then let it be
repeated. Let there be another Viet Nam in the Arab
region. The will of the peoples is invincible. It is part of
the will of God. No matter how great the United States is
‘and no matter how strong it is militarily, our people will
not kneel. The Arab peoples, including the Egyptian and
Sudanese peoples, stand by the side of Libya. We are
certain that if America were to commit an aggression, the
Sudanese would be the first to fight at the side of the
people of the Jamahiriya.
129. I apologize for having spoken at some length, but
I think this issue is a very grave one and that it requires
numerous details and great accuracy, as well as a sense of
collective responsibility-the
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of peace, not the responsibility of
America. America is not God. The age when the United
States used atom bombs because others did not have
them is over. The age when it destroyed the people of
Japan is over. The age when it annihilated the Red Jndians is over. The age when the United States monopolized
Latin America is over. All of those ages are over.
Although ours is a small people, it will not capitulate.
Hence, we must say to American imperialism: “No, you
are not responsible for maintaining peace. You are not
the policeman of the United Nations.” We must condemn it, and we must combine our efforts, as we did
against nazism in the past, to spare humanity nazism’s
scourge.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

AM VARITYPER
FILE M
DISK

SYSTEM
033/34

130. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The representative of the United States wishes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply, and I now call upon him.
13 1. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
shall indeed be brief, as Mrs. Kirkpatrick
tried earlier
today to be brief, clear, precise and factual.
132. I want to assure the representative of Libya that I
will convey to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
his uncharacteristically
kind opening statement. I shall also convey to her the
unfortunately all-too-characteristic
tenor of the balance
of his remarks.
133. Two points only: indeed, we have many sources of
information, many excellent sources of information. One
of them is the radio service of the Sudan. We believe that
it is a reliable and authoritative source in very great part
because it is the radio service of a brave, courageous,
honourable and independent people. As for our relationship with Egypt, it is the earnest hope of my Government
and of the American people that we will be bound to the
country and to the people of Egypt with the bonds of
strong friendship. These are bonds that consist in great
part of shared concerns and shared values, pre-eminent
among which, in my view, is belief in non-interference in
the affairs of one’s neighbours and non-use of force in
the resolution of international conflict, thus serving the
goal of international peace and security and fulfilment of
the enduring principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

6020S-October

IWO-2,050
