S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6171st meeting
Monday, 27 July 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Guillermet
Ms. Čačić
Mr. Kassianides
Mr. Arima
Mr. Gebreel
Mr. Pintado
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mr. Williams
Mr. Gordon
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-42592 (E)

*0942592*

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated at the morning session, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to start by
expressing the Movement’s appreciation for the
briefing presented today by Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, which remains one of the most important tools
for assessing the situation on the ground and for
addressing efforts aimed at advancing the peaceful
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The situation in the Middle East, which has
deteriorated as a result of the ongoing unlawful Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories since 1967, continues to be a matter of
serious concern not only to the region, but to the entire
international community.
The Non-Aligned Movement regrets the lack of
progress made, despite increased efforts at the
international and regional levels, in achieving a just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine and a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East on the basis of
the two-State solution, the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1373 (2001), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).
That lack of progress is due to Israel’s continued
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights laws, and its rejection
of all calls to cease its flagrant violations and to pursue
negotiations in good faith on all tracks of the peace
process.
Israel, the occupying Power, obstructs efforts to
resume peace negotiations by its violations of the
human rights of the Palestinian people, including their
humiliation on a daily basis, in addition to its constant
actions aimed at imposing unilateral solutions by
illegally creating new facts on the ground aimed at

2

altering the demographic composition, status and
character of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
Israel does not refrain from taking measures that
prejudice the outcome of negotiations on final-status
issues, namely Jerusalem, settlements, the refugees,
borders, security and water. Such illegal measures
deepen mistrust, provoke further tension, prevent real
progress and raise real doubts as to Israel’s credibility
as a partner in the peace process.
In the West Bank, Israel continues its illegal
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in and around East Jerusalem, intensifying
its confiscation of Palestinian land, expansion of
settlements and transfer of settlers, construction of the
wall and other destructive measures, including the
demolition of more Palestinian homes, in an attempt to,
de facto, annex more Palestinian land. All of that is
being done in grave breach of international law and
United Nations resolutions, as well as Israel’s
commitments under the Road Map, which clearly calls
for a freeze of all Israeli settlement activities, including
natural growth, and the dismantlement of all outposts
established since March 2001.
Israel has failed to commit to a freeze on all
settlement activities and continues to defy the
international consensus in that regard. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must use all practical means and tools
available under the Charter and international law to
take the necessary measures to compel or to bring
Israel into compliance. The Non-Aligned Movement
expresses deep concern regarding the extensive
damage caused by the Israeli settlements, the wall and
the spread of checkpoints, which are severing the
Palestinian territories into separate cantons, isolating
East Jerusalem, undermining the contiguity, integrity,
viability and unity of the Palestinian territory, and
jeopardizing the prospects for achieving the two-State
solution.
Further, the unresolved crisis in Gaza continues
to have negative repercussions on all efforts to advance
the peace process and wreaks unacceptable havoc on
the fabric of society and civilian life in Gaza. Israel
continues to impose a blockade on the Palestinian
civilian population, to deprive them of their
humanitarian needs and to prevent Gaza’s
reconstruction,
in
violation
of
international

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).

to continue to support and to contribute to all efforts
aimed at achieving peace in the Middle East.

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
lift immediately its illegal blockade by allowing for the
immediate and sustained opening of all border
crossings to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to
realize the urgent early recovery and reconstruction of
Gaza. The Non-Aligned Movement also believes that
there is no legal, political or moral justification for the
Israeli imprisonment of the Palestinian population in
Gaza and calls for the end of such unlawful collective
punishment.

(spoke in Arabic)

Turning to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains deeply concerned by Israel’s ongoing air and
land violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty, in breach of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on
Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining Lebanese
occupied land in the Sheba'a farms, the Kfar Shouba
Hills and the northern part of al-Ghajar village.

I shall now speak in my national capacity. Egypt
is participating in the efforts to relaunch the peace
process, which, regrettably, are countered by
continuing Israeli rejection of the requirements for
peace, primarily the full cessation of all settlement
activities, in accordance with the commitments under
the Road Map. Israel’s escalation of its settlement
policy, particularly in and around East Jerusalem, does
not serve the goals of peace, but seeks to change the
realities on the ground and to create a new reality to
prejudge the final-status negotiations, hoping that the
international community will stand silent in the face of
attempts to seize Palestinian territory and to annex it
de facto. However, the international community as a
whole stands against Israel’s settlement policies and is
aware of its real endeavours and rejects them.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as the Israeli
measures to impose jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation also of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In this context, Egypt warns of the consequences
of settlement and so-called natural growth activities,
which not only hinder efforts to relaunch the peace
process, but are also aimed at undermining the
contiguity of the Palestinian territories and at
obliterating the chances of achieving an international
solution based on the existence of two States along the
lines of the 1967 borders. Those activities call into
question the credibility of the Israeli Government’s
commitment to the peace process, in particular because
they directly contradict the main principle upon which
the process was established — the principle of land for
peace.

International determination to work towards
achieving peace in the Middle East and ensuring that
commitments made are commitments monitored and
kept is stronger today than ever before. The Arab side
has reiterated time after time the readiness and
willingness for peace, as stipulated in the Arab Peace
Initiative, based on the concept of full land for full
peace. It is now the responsibility of Israel to seize the
opportunity to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace by stopping its illegal settlement
activities, bringing an end to its 42-year occupation
and clearly committing to the two-State solution, to be
achieved peacefully through negotiations on all core
issues on the basis of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. In that regard, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its firm commitment

Egypt warns against Israel’s intensifying
endeavours to alter the features of occupied East
Jerusalem and to separate it from its Arab and
Palestinian surroundings through the confiscation and
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction
of new settlement units, including the planned
construction of 20 new housing units in the Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhood. Israel has also attempted to
violate the sanctity of Islamic holy shrines in the city
by issuing statements that Jerusalem, including all of
its neighbourhoods, is the united capital of Israel. All
of those actions clearly contradict United Nations
resolutions repudiating all of Israel’s attempts to annex
East Jerusalem and declaring them null and void.

09-42592

At the same time, international endeavours to
attain a just and agreed solution to the long-term

3

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

refugee problem must be intensified. Israel has tried to
skirt that issue, in particular through recent increased
talk within the Israeli Government of the concept of a
Jewish State. Such talk has a negative impact on the
entire Arab population of the occupied Palestinian
territories.

confronted the international community with a real
emergency situation. The near impossibility of
providing people with their basic needs, the lack of
electricity, the limited supply of drinking water and the
serious breakdown of the sewage treatment system are
all causes for alarm.

Today more than ever, the international
community must work to end Israel’s violations and to
compel it to comply with its obligations to protect
Palestinian civilians and to work to promote peace and
security in the Middle East.

Switzerland recalls that, in conformity with the
obligations of international humanitarian law, Israel, as
the occupying Power, must ensure access for
humanitarian organizations to the civilian population
and the supply of basic necessities. Sixty years after
the adoption of the Geneva Conventions, respect for
international humanitarian law remains our best
response to the needs of the victims.

Egypt encourages the efforts of the United States
Government and welcomes the sincere desire of its
President to work towards a comprehensive peace in
the Middle East by ending settlement activity and
enshrining an objective vision of a two-State solution.
Egypt also supports the efforts of the international
Quartet, which has sent a clear message of solidarity
with the two-State solution and supports the convening
of a meeting in Moscow later this year to follow up on
the implementation of the Annapolis process. Egypt
will spare no effort to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation through the Cairo dialogue leading to the
reunification of the Palestinian people in the West
Bank and Gaza, under the legitimate leadership of the
Palestinian Authority represented by President Abbas.
Egypt is also working on arrangements to allow
the sustainable opening of the Gaza crossing points
based on the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access, an end to the collective punishment by Israel
of the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, and the
honest and full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
state my country’s views on the situation in the Middle
East. I will confine myself to a few aspects of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I welcome and thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his very relevant briefing
this morning.
Switzerland is deeply concerned about the current
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The recent
war and its severe consequences have made the living
conditions in that tiny and densely populated territory
increasingly precarious. Those consequences have

4

While respecting Israel’s security imperatives,
Switzerland believes that a concerted effort must be
made to establish a mechanism to ensure humanitarian
access and reconstruction. Such a mechanism — the
development of which is called for in resolution 1860
(2009) — should be based on the framework for the
provision of minimum humanitarian assistance to
Gaza, proposed by the United Nations, and be
coordinated by a technical committee providing for
substantial and sustainable humanitarian access. Its
frame of reference should be the four principles
established by humanitarian practice and endorsed by
the international community in the Outcome Document
of the 2005 World Summit: humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
Under the auspices of the United Nations, that
neutral, independent and international body should
ensure the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Gaza
Strip and establish a mechanism to monitor the
importation of goods. Switzerland is willing to
contribute to the establishment of such a body.
In the follow-up to a conflict, fact-finding
missions to investigate allegations of violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law are
a necessity for the victims. We believe that such
missions ultimately help to bring about a lasting
settlement to the conflict in question and contribute to
preventing future violations. To achieve these two
objectives, they must operate on the basis of a balanced
mandate that takes into account the concerns of all the
parties to a conflict as well as all kinds of violation.
That is the intention of the Goldstone mission,
which was mandated by the Human Rights Council.
We await with interest its report on the alleged

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

violations committed by all parties to the conflict. It
will then be necessary to determine the appropriate
follow-up to the report.
We welcome the renewed commitment of the
international community, in particular of the American
administration, to actively promoting a comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Peace
Initiative of the Arab League and the determination of
the State of Israel to achieve a lasting peace with its
neighbours are encouraging signs. It is therefore
essential that the international community be actively
involved in helping put an end to that agonizing
conflict.
The parameters of a settlement are already well
known. A total freeze on the expansion of all
settlements is a decisive factor for guaranteeing the
peace process. The destruction in East Jerusalem of
Palestinian houses situated near the old city and the
planned eviction of Palestinian families must not
happen. At the same time and in order to launch a
genuine political process, it is essential to renounce
violence. The halt to the rocket attacks against the
Israeli civilian population must be maintained.
Switzerland is convinced that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict cannot be resolved by military
means. The Clinton parameters, the Taba discussions
and the Geneva initiative clearly indicate the path
towards a solution. The creation of a viable Palestinian
State living side by side with the State of Israel,
existing within secure and internationally recognized
borders, is therefore the only path that can lead to a
lasting settlement of the conflict.

Security Council, as the wider membership is given an
opportunity to convey its views on a subject of such
importance. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his very comprehensive
briefing.
More than seven months have passed since the
ceasefire was agreed in the Gaza Strip, but the
humanitarian situation there continues to be a source of
grave concern. Access to basic goods remains clearly
insufficient, and much-needed reconstruction has not
been started due to the lack of building materials. The
relative tranquillity that we currently observe in the
Strip should not lead us to overlook the continued
plight of its inhabitants. Behind the statistics of the
Gaza war earlier this year, there are real men, women
and children. They no longer suffer daily
bombardments, but are still forced to live in entirely
unacceptable conditions.
Brazil therefore reiterates the urgency of an
international effort geared both at reconstructing Gaza
and at meeting all the humanitarian needs of its
population. Israel must fully abide by the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access and keep the
border crossings open. At the same time, militant
groups in Gaza must keep up the restraint they have
shown recently and refrain from all acts of violence
against the Israeli civilian population, especially in the
southern areas.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

With regard to the West Bank, we can only
express satisfaction with recent Israeli efforts to ease
movement and improve access to Israel. Such measures
are positive and must continue. However, more is
needed. It is crucial that Israel freeze all settlement
activities, including those undertaken to accommodate
natural growth, and dismantle the existing ones, mainly
those built after 2001. This aspect is particularly
relevant in East Jerusalem, where attempts to redraw
the demographic map only further complicate an
already very difficult situation. The construction of the
wall — found to be illegal by an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice — must also come to
a halt.

Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I congratulate you on your
timely decision to hold an open debate on the situation
in the Middle East. The press has followed suit, as
today’s issue of a local newspaper shows on its front
page. The format you have chosen vastly enhances the
relevance and impact of the monthly briefings to the

We need to foster social and economic
development throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, while providing ways to defuse tension and
lessen dissatisfaction with the limited possibilities of
everyday life. In this sense, Brazil is making a
contribution. We are currently building a sports centre

To conclude, I wish to stress the urgency and
importance of creating a mechanism for humanitarian
access and reconstruction in Gaza. We are counting on
the support of the Security Council in this process and
on the active participation of the Member States
concerned and the relevant entities of the United
Nations system.

09-42592

5

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

in Ramallah, together with our partners in the IndiaBrazil-South Africa forum, and will bring two of the
most prestigious Brazilian soccer teams to play for
peace. Our experience has shown that sport is a useful
instrument for creating hope and opportunities in
impoverished areas.
In the diplomatic arena, there seem to be
promising developments. The early and active
involvement of the United States in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and its continued support for the
two-State solution are very welcome. Prime Minister
Netanyahu’s openness to the idea of a Palestinian State
is also encouraging, although it must evolve in order to
recognize the need to endow Palestine with the
attributes of full statehood. If these promising signs are
to bear the hoped-for fruit, sustained political will and
true statesmanship will continue to be required.
This holds true for Palestinians as well. Brazil
commends Egypt’s efforts to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, but if they are to succeed all parties
must work in earnest to find common ground under the
leadership of the Palestinian Authority. On the ability
to overcome internal differences rests the possibility of
building a truly independent and prosperous
Palestinian State. History will not forgive those who
fail to compromise in the search for unity, since
without unity there can be no peace.
Brazil supports the 26 June declaration by the
Quartet on the resumption of negotiations to end the
conflict and reach a two-State solution based on the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Road Map and all previous
agreements. Such a solution is needed today, not
tomorrow. As Minister Celso Amorim said in the Cairo
conference on Gaza in March, it is time for peace, not
for a peace process.
Such views were also conveyed to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Mr. Avigdor Lieberman,
last week in Brazil. His visit was an expression of the
productive bilateral relationship that exists between our
two countries. It also provides evidence of my
Government’s willingness to contribute as much as
possible to the achievement of a comprehensive peace.
To the same end, the Brazilian Special Envoy to the
Middle East, Ambassador Ouro-Preto, recently
concluded another tour of the region during which, in a
wide range of meetings, he expressed yet again Brazil’s

6

support for peace and the promotion of mutual
understanding.
In the same spirit, the Brazilian Government,
together with the United Nations Department of Public
Information, has organized the International Media
Seminar on Peace in the Middle East under the theme
“Promoting Israeli-Palestinian Dialogue — a view
from South America”, being held today and tomorrow
in Rio de Janeiro. This event is bringing together
politicians, journalists, intellectuals and members of
civil society groups from Israel, Palestine, Brazil and
other South American countries. The seminar is a
gesture that embodies the spirit of openness and
dialogue that needs to be taken up in the political and
diplomatic arenas.
There are approximately 7 million Brazilians of
Lebanese descent. It is therefore no surprise that we
follow developments in that fellow country very
closely. We congratulate the Lebanese political parties
on their conduct of the recent elections and encourage
them to continue the dialogue to form a broad-based
and stable Government. We are particularly encouraged
by the tireless efforts of President Sleiman to build
trust among the main political forces in the country and
thereby consolidate stability.
The arms cache recently discovered in southern
Lebanon constitutes a clear violation of resolution
1701 (2006). It is crucial that all parties, without
exception, abide by the terms of the resolution. It is
also essential that all parties fully cooperate with the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in the
investigation of the incident.
My delegation believes that conditions more
favourable than those of the recent past are being
established to foster significant progress towards a
solution to the conflict in the Middle East. They
present an opportunity we must not miss. Brazil is
willing and ready to do all in its power to help the
parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first express
the appreciation of my delegation to you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We
also wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

briefing on the latest developments in the region. In
making this statement, Indonesia associates itself with
the
statement
delivered
by
the
Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Council’s debate today provides yet another
vivid reminder of the continuing hardships prevalent in
the occupied Palestinian territory and, not least, of the
paucity of progress in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Like others, Indonesia remains profoundly
concerned by the depth of the humanitarian crisis that
continues to permeate the Gaza Strip following the
Israeli attacks of December 2008 and January 2009.
While the worst of the military action may have
stopped, the flow of food, medicine and reconstruction
material allowed into Gaza remains grossly inadequate.
The international community cannot allow that
situation to continue. It must continue to speak as one
in demanding that Israel open the border crossings to
Gaza in order to allow reconstruction efforts and access
to much-needed humanitarian supplies to ease the
humanitarian crisis.
The litany of Israeli illegal practices is well
chronicled. Few, however, are as great an affront to the
prospects of peace and as great a hurdle to the peace
process as its illegal settlement practices. Israel
continues to build and expand illegal settlements, in
the process demolishing Palestinian homes and other
structures,
confiscating
lands
and
imposing
checkpoints that arbitrarily restrict the movement of
Palestinians. Despite the repeated protests of the
international community, Israel persists in its efforts to
change the character and legal status of East Jerusalem.
Indonesia once again condemns those settlement
policies, which gravely undermine the contiguity,
integrity, viability and unity of the occupied Palestinian
territory and jeopardize the prospects for achieving the
two-State solution for peace on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders through the establishment of a
sovereign, independent State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
While Israel persists in its illegal settlement
activities, Indonesia is encouraged by the everstrengthening international consensus rejecting those
activities and demanding an immediate halt to and the
dismantling of those settlements.

09-42592

Indeed, while Israel remains deaf to the
international exhortation to live up to its commitment
to a two-State solution to the conflict, Indonesia draws
encouragement from a number of recent significant
developments. First, there is a renewed sense of
urgency in the intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks,
facilitated by the Government of Egypt. We wish to
underscore the importance of making progress in those
efforts, which are aimed at promoting Palestinian unity.
Secondly,
there
has
been
a
practical
demonstration of the commitment of the international
community to the cause of peace in Palestine through
pledges of material assistance, as evidenced at the
International Conference on the Palestinian Economy
for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009.
Thirdly, there has been a stepping up of
diplomatic activity with the objective of restarting
negotiations. In that regard, we acknowledge in
particular the vigorous efforts being made by the
United States and the continued engagement of the
Quartet.
Indonesia, for its part, remains consistent in
calling for a settlement based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Our support of statehood for
Palestine is steadfast — statehood, we wish to
emphasize, with all its attributes.
A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires not only a solution to the question
of Palestine, but also progress on the Israel-Lebanon
and Israel-Syria tracks. In that connection, we continue
to demand that Israel comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967.
Similarly, we continue to be concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
we call on Israel to withdraw completely from the
remaining Lebanese occupied land.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, the
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav

7

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia
Herzegovina, Serbia, Iceland and Ukraine.

and

Developments over the past year have made it
abundantly clear that we must move swiftly towards a
renewal of the peace process in the Middle East. The
European
Union
remains
committed
to
a
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of international law; the relevant Security
Council resolutions; the terms of reference of the
Madrid Conference, including land for peace; the Road
Map; the agreements previously reached by the parties;
and the Annapolis process, as well as the Arab Peace
Initiative. We remain equally committed to the twoState solution, with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, comprising the
West Bank and Gaza, living side by side in peace and
security with the State of Israel.
We welcome the United States Administration’s
commitment to pursue vigorously a two-State solution
and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
European Union is ready to work with the parties to the
conflict, as well as with the United States, other
Quartet members and Arab partners, to achieve that
goal.
Both parties must now take concrete measures to
resume peace negotiations, respecting previous
agreements and understandings.
The continued settlement activities, house
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem, remain a
serious concern for the European Union. We urge the
Government of Israel to immediately end those
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected since
March 2001. The European Union reiterates that the
settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute an obstacle to peace. If there is to be genuine
peace, a way must be found to share Jerusalem as the
capital of two States. The European Union will not
recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders other
than those agreed by both parties.
A durable solution to the Gaza crisis has to be
achieved through the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). The European Union
remains gravely concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and calls for the immediate and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to

8

and from Gaza. Reconstruction and economic recovery
have to be allowed, and the current humanitarian crisis
must be resolved.
All violence must stop, including rocket attacks
on Israel. An effective mechanism to prevent the
smuggling of arms and ammunition into the Gaza Strip
should be put in place. We call on those holding the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay.
We call upon the Government of Israel to work
unequivocally towards the two-State solution. The
European Union welcomes the initial step, announced
by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, of
commitment to a peace that would include a
Palestinian State.
We call upon the Palestinian Authority to
continue to make every effort to improve law and order
in territories under its control, and we welcome steps
taken so far. All parties must stop incitement and
violence against civilians, and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights must be ensured.
The European Union will continue to follow closely
investigations into alleged violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.
The European Union calls upon the Palestinians
to step up the intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts in
support of President Mahmoud Abbas. We support the
mediation by Egypt and the Arab League. Palestinians
should quickly overcome their divisions and find
common ground on the basis of non-violence, with a
view to preserving the prospects for the creation of a
future State. Reconciliation will facilitate the
reconstruction in Gaza and the organization of
elections.
The European Union will promote Palestinian
State-building and intensify work in partnership with
the Palestinian Authority on reforms. The efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to develop an effective and
reformed security sector are positive. We will
cooperate towards additional improvement. Civilian
police and the judicial sector will continue to be a
focus of European Union support.
The declared readiness of the Government of
Israel to promote Palestinian economic development is
a positive sign. This should be carried out within the
framework of the broader perspective of the two-State
solution. The European Union welcomes the positive

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

steps recently taken by the Israeli authorities regarding
the easing of restrictions on the West Bank. We look
forward to further and sustained improvements in
movement and access in all of the occupied Palestinian
territories. The Agreement on Movement and Access of
2005 must be fully implemented. The European Union
is ready to work closely with Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and international donors in order to achieve
sustainable development of the Palestinian economy.
The European Union will contribute substantially
to post-conflict arrangements aimed at ensuring the
sustainability of peace agreements, while also
addressing the regional economic and security
dimensions. We call on all partners in the international
community to contribute actively to the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement. Arab countries and other
partners should be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority. In
line with the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative, the
European Union invites Israel and all Arab countries to
take confidence-building measures in order to
stimulate mutual trust and to create an atmosphere
conducive to conflict resolution.
A lasting settlement of the conflicts between
Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon
should be pursued in parallel, creating mutually
reinforcing processes. The European Union expects
Syria and Israel to resume peace negotiations.
The European Union congratulates the people of
Lebanon on the successful holding of parliamentary
elections, which is an important step in the democratic
development of the country. At the same time and in
the light of some worrying recent developments in
southern Lebanon, which also affect the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the European Union
reiterates its call to all the parties to fully abide by and
implement the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
In the light of further developments at the
political level and on the ground, the European Union
stands ready to support concrete and early results on
the path to a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): The situation in the
Middle East, especially the question of Palestine,
remains of concern, with no progress or clear view of a
durable and lasting peace leading to a two-State

09-42592

solution. It is my delegation’s hope that our meeting
today will assist in changing this status quo and will
enable the relevant parties to re-start negotiations in
good faith towards finding a lasting solution to this
issue, which has long beleaguered the international
community, and more so the Middle East, particularly
Palestine. In this regard, we thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for giving us this
opportunity to participate in this open debate. Allow
me to also congratulate you, Sir, for your presidency of
the Council for the month of July.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement by
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
For genuine progress to be made on the Middle
East peace process, including a resumption of peace
negotiations, all parties must demonstrate honesty and
sincerity aimed at achieving the objective of a just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on a
two-State solution, the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Words must be matched with
actions to reflect this genuine desire.
Unfortunately, the negative signals from Israel,
from statements by its leaders to actions in the Gaza
Strip and inaction on halting illegal settlement
activities in the occupied territories, among others, are
indicators that Israel is not in any way close to
reflecting any intent or desire to find a durable and
lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, including a
two-State solution. It baffles us all that while, on the
one hand, it seems to agree to a two-State solution, on
the other hand, illegal Israeli settlements continue to be
built in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem.
Palestinian lands are also illegally confiscated,
including through the building of the separation wall,
which continues to be built despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on
stopping its construction. Not only has the construction
of settlements not been halted and they have not been
demolished, there is even a caveat for allowing their
expansion due to natural growth. Would not allowing
these settlements to expand for natural growth
presuppose that these illegal settlements are accepted
as a permanent feature in the occupied Palestinian
territories? Would not that then violate the various
Security Council resolutions that call for Israel to
return to the 1967 border and run counter to achieving

9

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

a two-State solution and a comprehensive lasting and
durable peace?
Clearly the calls by the international community,
including by one of the major partners, to stop these
illegal settlements has not been heeded. The building
of these settlements, let alone their expansion for
whatever reasons, violates all international laws and
norms and various Council resolutions. We continue to
call on Israel to cease constructing these settlements in
the occupied land and to return it to the Palestinians.
We urge the Council, in particular, to ensure that Israel
abides by the relevant Council resolutions in this
regard and to desist from changing the facts on the
ground.
Despite the almost seven months since the Israeli
onslaught on Gaza that saw devastating consequences
for the life of the Palestinian people in Gaza and its
infrastructure, the humanitarian situation remains dire.
Israeli imposed a blockade on Gaza, through access by
land, air and sea, perpetually imprisoning the people of
Gaza in an open prison and depriving them, especially
children, women and the elderly, of daily essentials.
While international efforts are afoot trying to
rebuild what was destroyed by Israel, humanitarian aid
and personnel continue to be largely restricted from
entering Gaza, and in many ways the area is strangled
and its inhabitants isolated from the outside world.
Such action grossly violates international humanitarian
law on ensuring the protection of civilians. In this
regard, we again urge the Council to take the necessary
action to end this siege on Gaza and to allow the
movement of goods, including humanitarian aid, into
Gaza. Compensation must also be made to the people
in Gaza by those responsible for the casualties and
destruction to homes and infrastructure.
The actions by Israel have thus far not reflected a
genuine and honest desire to find a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine based on a twoState solution. All parties must fulfil their roles as
honest parties to this peace process, lest we remain in
the state we are in now, far from seeing peace in the
Middle East and a solution to the Palestinian question.
The price for the international community if peace is
not achieved is high and higher still for the people in
the Middle East, especially the Palestinians.
We urge the Security Council to take the
necessary and appropriate action to ensure all parties
resume the peace negotiations. On this note also,

10

Malaysia supports the recent proposal by the European
Union High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy regarding the need for the Security
Council to set a deadline on resolving the question of
Palestine and on the eventual creation of a Palestinian
State by the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al Nafisee (Saudi Arabia): At the outset, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Ugandan
presidency of the Council for organizing this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, and to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing on
this issue.
No regional crisis has greater potential to affect
other regional conflicts than the Arab-Israeli conflict in
Middle East. It has overshadowed and dominated all
other issues in the Middle East for the past six decades.
This situation has created a climate conducive to the
development of extremism and the spread of terrorism,
while hampering regional development, modernization
and reform.
Saudi Arabia,
along
with
other Arab
Governments, has made its commitment to peace loud
and clear in the Arab Peace Initiative. We have
continued to affirm our commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace based on international law.
Unfortunately, on the other side, no reciprocal
commitment has yet been forthcoming from Israel. It is
very crucial to stress the importance of reviving the
peace process and Israeli seriousness and truthfulness
towards the peace process, including the immediate
cessation of the building of settlements or their
expansion.
The status quo in the situation in the city of Gaza
is another factor exacerbating the problem in that
besieged city. The call on Israel to withdraw its forces
from all occupied lands, including the Golan in Syria
and the Sheba'a farm lands and Kafr Shouba in
Lebanon, must go hand-in-hand with the overall peace
plan in the region.
Saudi Arabia welcomes the effort of President
Obama’s Administration to push for a comprehensive
peace plan and the establishment of a sovereign State
for the Palestinian people, living side-by-side with the
State of Israel.

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.

main starting point to deal with the Arab-Israeli
dispute.

Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first of all like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.

Now is a good opportunity to do that, given
regional and international efforts to find a solution to
the conflict in the region. However, Israel is continuing
its unilateral policy in an effort to impose a fait
accompli on the occupied territories. Israeli plans to
establish new settlements, in particular in East
Jerusalem, and its expansion of existing settlements,
are totally unacceptable. Attempts to create a new
situation on the ground clearly violate both
international humanitarian law and the commitments
that Israel entered into under the Road Map. They also
increase tensions in the region and jeopardize the
chances of finding a just and lasting solution and for
establishing a viable Palestinian State.

Jordan associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt earlier today
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
During its ministerial meeting held on 11 May
(see S/PV.6123), the Security Council sent a clear
message to all parties concerned about peace in the
Middle East. The Council reiterated the urgent need to
restore peace to the region in accordance with the twoState solution and previous agreements and
obligations. We are meeting today not just to reiterate
the importance of that message, but also to emphasize
that, given developments in the region in recent
months, now is the appropriate time to achieve tangible
and genuine progress in the Arab-Israeli conflict, so as
to produce concrete results on the ground. If we let this
opportunity pass us by, there will be catastrophic
consequences for the region and its peoples, the peace
and security of Israelis and Palestinians and
international peace and security as a whole.
Finding a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian problem, which is at the heart of the
conflict in the Middle East, is the key to the overall
solution of other problems in the region. Any solution
must be based on Security Council resolutions and the
terms of reference adopted at international conferences
with regard to the Palestinian problem. In particular, it
must be based on resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), which reiterated that an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict could only be based on the twoState solution. We must therefore intensify efforts and
embark upon serious Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
Those negotiations must take place according to a
properly defined timetable and be based on a clear and
acceptable plan to achieve a peaceful resolution and
ensure security for Israel.
Under the guidance of His Majesty King
Abdullah II, Jordan is certainly prepared to make every
effort to support that undertaking, so as to launch
negotiations to establish a contiguous, viable and
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in line with agreed international terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, which is the

09-42592

If Israel truly wants to demonstrate its sincerity
about moving towards peace, it must immediately halt
all settlement activity and dismantle all illegal
settlement outposts. Israel must not alter East
Jerusalem, and must end its policy of Judaizing
Al-Quds and changing its historic Islamic character. It
must stop its excavations near Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
must cease destroying houses and erecting barriers. It
must end its confiscation of land and all other acts that
could have a negative impact on a peaceful settlement.
Such acts also run counter to international law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.
As a country of the region, we have taken note of
the positive impact of President Obama’s message
delivered in Cairo, in particular as regards the
commitment of the United States to a two-State
solution, to find comprehensive peace in the Middle
East and to improve relations with the Arab and
Muslim world. In that regard, Special Envoy George
Mitchell is making an effort in the region. It is
extremely important to support and build on all such
efforts, as well as to give them every chance of
success.
In line with its responsibilities under international
humanitarian law, the international community must
act immediately to halt the ongoing humanitarian
suffering of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
That includes lifting the blockade stifling the
Palestinian people, who should also be provided with
the necessary assistance to address their difficult
circumstances, imposed by the occupation. The
deteriorating humanitarian situation of Palestinians in

11

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

the Gaza Strip is also resulting in increased despair and
frustration, both in the region and in the Arab and
Muslim world. That will have an impact on security,
stability and peace efforts throughout the region.
Under the guidance of King Abdullah II, Jordan
will continue to make every possible effort to
encourage international stakeholders to end the
suffering of the Palestinian people in Gaza. Voluntary
Jordanian organizations will also continue to deliver
the necessary aid to our brothers in the Palestinian
territories.
Achieving peace in the Middle East is not just a
cherished goal of the countries concerned. That goal
has now taken on an international dimension as well,
given its impact on international peace and security.
Resolving the conflict will be to the benefit of all
parties, and of the entire international community. We
must seize this historic opportunity to achieve peace in
the region, for the region must have peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to participate in today’s
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Despite the passage of years, the succession of
Governments, the plethora of initiatives and the deep
and unprecedented changes in international relations,
the Palestinian situation and the Middle East crisis
continue unchanged, awaiting a comprehensive and
just settlement and the realization of hopes and
aspirations for stability, security and cooperation.
All relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly emphasize the right of the
Palestinian people to establish a viable and
independent State, the need for Israel to withdraw from
the territories occupied in 1967 and respect the status
and character of Jerusalem, and the illegality of all of
Israel’s administrative and legal measures, including
the confiscation of land and the construction of
settlements. Yet, the lives of the Palestinian people are
unchanged and the suffering of the Palestinians, due to
displacement, the siege, starvation, the imposition of
checkpoints and border crossings and the lack of access
and movement, continues.
The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
sincere willingness to achieve peace. It has taken a

12

positive part in all negotiations and has honoured all its
commitments — proof that it is a true partner for
peace. Yet Israel has countered this willingness with
procrastination and has continued its oppressive
practices aimed at compelling the Palestinian people to
give in.
All United Nations recent reports and all the
hearings of the Human Rights Council and its June and
July investigation into the incidents in Gaza have
documented Israel’s practice of deliberately targeting
innocent Palestinian civilians. Testimony to that effect
has been given by some Israeli soldiers. Despite the
passage of six months since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), the Palestinians are
still awaiting the full implementation of that resolution.
As regards Jerusalem, Israel continues its efforts
to Judaize the Holy City in order to undermine its
historical and religious nature as a Holy City which
represents coexistence and convergence among all
sacred religions.
The serious and tragic situation in the Middle
East requires the international community and the
Security Council to make intensive efforts to compel
Israel to resume the negotiations from the point at
which they were halted and to take practical and
tangible steps commensurate with the gravity of the
situation. Chief among these is the cessation of
settlement activity, which runs counter to all
international resolutions and to the commitments
undertaken by Israel under the Road Map.
As for the Arab side, it has continued to
emphasize its political will to achieve comprehensive
peace. It has put forward the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is serious and practical, offering a
comprehensive vision for the Middle East based on
coexistence,
good-neighbourliness
and
mutual
cooperation.
The Kingdom of Morocco appreciates the
principled position expressed by the new United States
Administration vis-à-vis the two-State solution and the
necessity of putting an end to the settlements. We also
appreciate Washington’s repeated endeavours to urge
all States to return to the negotiating table.
In that connection, we salute the positive position
enunciated by the Quartet at its joint meeting last
month with the League of Arab States Follow-up

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

Committee on the implementation of the Arab Peace
Initiative.
His Majesty the King of Morocco, Chairman of
the Al-Quds Committee, believes in peaceful
negotiations and dialogue as the best means to achieve
peaceful coexistence and peace. He continues to
support this vision and to support efforts to achieve the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital.
In a few weeks the world will mark the sixtieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. That will be an opportunity to recall the
injustice and the problems to which the Palestinians
have been subjected. It is time for the international
community to shoulder its responsibility towards the
Palestinian people with a view to achieving a
comprehensive and just peace agreement and
settlement — for which all people of the region yearn.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time my country is speaking under your
presidency, I would like to extend to you, Sir, the
congratulations of Ecuador and our support in your
leadership of the work of the Council this month.
We would also like to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his complete briefing on the
situation in Palestine and in the Middle East. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The position of Ecuador on the Palestinian
question is well known to the entire international
community, but we cannot fail to speak out whenever
necessary to condemn the serious humanitarian and
security situation to which the Palestinian civilian
population continues to be subjected as a direct
consequence of Israel’s aggression and its occupation
of the Palestinian territory.
It is regrettable to note that almost seven months
since the most recent massive Israeli intervention in
Gaza and despite the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the subsequent adoption of
resolutions by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council, there still has not been “an immediate,

09-42592

durable and fully respected ceasefire, leading to the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza” (resolution
1860 (2009), para. 1) or “the unimpeded provision and
distribution ... of humanitarian assistance, including of
food, fuel and medical treatment” (para. 2). Nor have
there been any specific sanctions as a result of
investigations carried out by competent United Nations
bodies into “the grave human rights violations
committed in the occupied Palestine territories”,
especially during last January’s attacks.
More than half a year has passed, and yet there
continues to be a border blockade on the provision of
humanitarian assistance, food, medicine, fuel and
construction material. There is also an ongoing ban on
the free movement of civilians, many of them women
and children or sick people. There has also been
selective destruction of public and private property,
which has exacerbated the emergency humanitarian
situation which has never ceased in the Gaza Strip, as
recognized
by
specialized
agencies
and
non-governmental organizations present in the region.
That is why, on behalf of the President of the
Republic of Ecuador, Rafael Correa Delgado, I wish to
reiterate the solidarity of the Ecuadorian Government
and people with all the innocent victims of the ongoing
Israeli aggression and, at the same time, to urgently
appeal to Council members to immediately resolve the
humanitarian crisis and resume the search for an
enduring solution and a lasting peace in the region,
through the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including those I mentioned
earlier.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Ecuador advocates the peaceful solution of
international disputes and conflicts and emphatically
rejects the threat or the use of force as a mechanism to
resolve them. Therefore, Ecuador believes that any
comprehensive solution that will make it possible to
achieve and maintain a lasting peace in the Middle East
cannot be reached by military means, but only through
ongoing dialogue, the strictest respect for international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and, above all, a true
commitment to non-aggression and reconciliation that
includes Israel’s withdrawal from the territories
occupied since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

13

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

Regrettably, in recent weeks, the world has seen
that the efforts of the Quartet on Middle East
negotiations, particularly during its most recent
meeting, held in Trieste on 26 June, in seeking a lasting
peace with the recognition of two independent States,
have in no way been echoed in the State of Israel. On
the contrary, we have heard the Israeli authorities insist
on their plans for settlements on Palestinian territory
and close the door to the possibility for a future space
for the establishment of a Palestinian State in their
customary arrogance towards and isolation from the
international community.
My country believes that, without prejudice to the
aforementioned efforts and the noteworthy initiatives
of Egypt and the League of Arab States and the
statements in other forums, such as the Group of Eight
it is primarily the responsibility of this Organization to
seek and implement all the measures provided for in
the United Nations Charter to pressure the occupying
Power, Israel, to stop violating existing international
law, human rights law and international humanitarian
law.
That responsibility must be shouldered by the
entire international community through coordinated
actions in different multilateral and bilateral organs and
bodies towards building a lasting peace not only for the
benefit of the peoples of Palestine and Israel, but for
the whole region. My country is ready to offer its
ongoing support for such actions.
On the broader issue, I would also like to say how
pleased my Government is with the progress in the
diplomatic negotiations with Syria and Lebanon and
with the progressive establishment of security in the
latter country. We trust that the timely formation of a
new Government that represents all the communities in
that country will strengthen it.

East Jerusalem as its capital, the restoration of lasting
peace and security in the Middle East, and full
enjoyment by all inhabitants, irrespective of their
nationality, of their fundamental rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Pino Rivero (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Cuba endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the Middle East resulting from
the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory and other Arab territories, which has
continued since 1967, remains a matter of great
concern not only to the region, but also to the entire
international community.
Cuba regrets the lack of progress, despite the
increasing international efforts and the resumption of
the peace process in late November 2007, in addressing
the main issues and in pursuing the key positions on
the Palestinian question. We would also like to express
our great concern at the serious deterioration in the
situation and in the critical political, economic, social,
humanitarian and security conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, owing
to the ongoing illegal policies and practices by Israel,
the occupying Power.
Israel must immediately cease military aggression
against the Palestinian people. Our delegation
underscores the importance of achieving a permanent
ceasefire starting in the Gaza Strip and extending to the
West Bank, and expresses its support for Egypt’s
efforts in that regard.

Lastly, I am pleased to express my Government’s
support for the strengthening of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the appeal to all parties to the conflict to
respect their commitments under the Road Map, while
reiterating that any comprehensive solution must
sooner or later include dialogue and direct negotiation
between Israel and Palestine.

We reiterate our condemnation of Israel’s
inhumane and illegal closure and blockade of the Gaza
Strip, which has resulted in the imprisonment of the
entire Palestinian civilian population by obstructing its
freedom of movement, including that of the sick,
students and humanitarian personnel; by hampering
access to humanitarian aid and basic necessities, such
as food, medicines, fuel, electricity and building
materials; and by blocking all trade.

The victims of the serious humanitarian situation
in Palestine deserve that the United Nations and the
Security Council and all its members shoulder their
responsibility and take the action necessary to lay the
foundations for the creation of a Palestinian State with

It is time for Israel to cease such illegal practices
against the Palestinian people and permanently put an
end to its illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, allowing
the immediate and permanent opening of all border
crossings in the Gaza Strip, and permitting movement

14

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

to and from the territory of the persons and goods
needed to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to effect
the immediate reconstruction and economic recovery
of the Palestinian people.
The situation in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to be a source of great
concern. In that regard, we condemn Israel’s ongoing
intensive campaign to establish settlements, including
the confiscation of vast tracts of land; the construction
and expansion of illegal settlements and their outposts
and infrastructure; the transfer of additional Israeli
settlers; the building of the wall; the demolition of
homes; the excavations; and the imposition of arbitrary
and racist restrictions on residency and movement
through a system of permits and checkpoints
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in and around occupied East Jerusalem.
Such policies and measures by Israel are grave
violations of international law and a flagrant challenge
to the United Nations resolutions and the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
We emphasize the incompatibility of peace
process negotiations with such illegal settlement
activities, which are clearly aimed at illegally
acquiring and, de facto, annexing more Palestinian
territory and forcibly imposing a unilateral solution.
We harbour the hope that the ongoing efforts to achieve
reconciliation and unity in Palestine will soon reach
their objectives, for the benefit of the Palestinian
people.
We reiterate our call for the prompt solution of
the issue of the Sheba'a farms in full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated by
resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all parties to
cooperate in protecting the sovereign rights of Lebanon
in that area, and we note the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard.
Similarly, we reaffirm that any measure or action
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power,
aimed at changing the legal, physical or demographic
condition or the institutional infrastructure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, and any measures by Israel to
impose its jurisdiction and administration in that
territory, have no legal effect. It is now time for Israel
to comply with resolution 497 (1981) and to withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.

09-42592

Cuba will continue to support and to contribute
actively in every possible sphere to achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
based on all relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I shall deliver
this statement on behalf of our Permanent
Representative, but before doing so I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting,
which is of vital importance. I also wish to convey my
appreciation to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his very
informative and comprehensive briefing this morning.
I also wish to state that the Bangladesh delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chairman of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In addition, I also wish briefly to make
certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.
Bangladesh has always been committed to the
cause of Palestine. It maintains affirmed solidarity with
the Palestinian people in their just and legitimate
struggle for self-determination and statehood. Our
solidarity with the Palestinian cause and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are constant
and unwavering. Bangladesh reiterates its longstanding position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region. The people of Palestine
are being denied their fundamental rights to selfdetermination and to live freely in their own land. We
believe that the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital is
the only sustainable solution to this long-lasting
conflict.
Bangladesh condemns Israel’s illegal settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
undermines the Palestinian territory’s unity and
contiguity. All concerned parties should call for an
immediate freeze on the expansion of Jewish
settlements, as well as for the dismantling of the
existing ones in the occupied territories.

15

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

Another major cause for concern is the unilateral
blockade imposed by the Israeli authorities. Such
repressive measures affect the lives and livelihoods of
the Palestinian people. Consequently, their social,
political and economic institution-building stands
crippled. Such injustice cannot be allowed to continue
and must be rolled back in the interest of the free
movement of people and access by the humanitarian
agencies. It is necessary to rededicate ourselves to the
Palestinian cause of self-determination and statehood,
and to work together to bring that aspiration to fruition.
While Bangladesh welcomes the various
initiatives and efforts undertaken on Palestine to date,
it emphasizes that the lack of progress on those
initiatives should not deter us from renewing our
commitment to and intensifying our efforts for a
permanent solution to this long-standing issue. We
need to seize every opportunity and take measures to
ensure that Israel and its patrons comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions on Palestine. All
concerned must comply with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009). The United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, must undertake the
necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution.
The continuous defiance and blatant disregard of
international law demonstrated by the occupying
Power should be addressed by all concerned, including
the Security Council and the international community.
Effective measures should be taken to oblige the
occupants to comply with international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Road Map. We should
demand that the Quartet assume greater responsibility
in steering the peace process and in ensuring Israel’s
compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and principles of international law.
As we continue to reiterate and strengthen our
support for the Palestinian issue and for the longstanding human tragedy associated with it, we believe
that the unity and solidarity of the Palestinians need to
be preserved by all means. Otherwise, the whole effort
to achieve the goal of founding an independent
Palestinian State will be delayed.
Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just settlement is the key to peace in the Middle
East. The relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Middle East Road Map can be

16

viewed as the guiding principles in this regard.
Bangladesh hopes that all parties involved will take a
pragmatic approach to this issue for the early
implementation of the Road Map for Peace in the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to extend to you, Sir, and through you
the brotherly Republic of Uganda, our sincere
congratulations on your presidency of the Security
Council this month. We pay tribute to your leadership
and your efforts to crown the Council’s various
deliberations with success.
I also wish to congratulate the delegation of
brotherly Turkey on its able and successful presidency
of the work of the Security Council last month.
This open debate of the Security Council
provides Member States with the opportunity to
address the very important issue of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. It is an
opportunity to recall the historical responsibility of the
United Nations vis-à-vis the Palestinian question and
for Member States to give momentum to efforts aimed
at moving the peace process forward and
reinvigorating the recent endeavours of many
influential actors to resolve differences in the region.
Under the leadership of President Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali, Tunisia attaches great importance to the
question of Palestine.
His Excellency the President has consistently
affirmed our unswerving position on the Palestinian
question and has always stressed that, as in the past, we
shall always stand alongside the brotherly Palestinian
people in its just struggle to retrieve its legitimate
national rights and establish an independent State of its
own on its national soil. We also support the strategic
choice of peace and have always contributed to every
effort intended to find a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian question in
conformity with resolutions of international legitimacy
and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the Arab Peace Initiative.
In that connection, we welcome the positive
position set out by the new United States
Administration regarding the peace process and the
vision of two States living side by side in peace. We

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

call again on the international community and on the
Quartet to intensify their efforts and resume
negotiations on the basis of resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, which, with
international support, has now become one of the
principal terms of reference for peace.
There is international consensus that peace must
inevitably be brought about through negotiations. This
requires coordinated efforts by the entire international
community to overcome the obstacles in the way of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace. We have been
encouraged by some hopeful indications that the
Middle East impasse will soon come to an end, but we
are duty-bound to draw attention to the ongoing
dangerous Israeli practices towards the brotherly
Palestinian people. Those practices deprive the
Palestinian people of the legitimate rights they are
guaranteed by all relevant international instruments
and resolutions. The continuing settlement policy and
the imposition of a blockade on the Palestinian people
hinder efforts towards a settlement and towards peace.
They harden the obstacles preventing the resumption of
negotiations, which must be built on trust and on the
commitment of all parties to honour their commitments
under existing agreements and the principal terms of
reference.
In discussing the situation in the Middle East we
cannot fail to recall the need for Israel to withdraw
from all occupied Syrian and Lebanese territories, in
order to attain the goal of a comprehensive settlement
of the Middle East crisis in all its aspects in a manner
that will bring security and stability to all the peoples
of the region.
Today’s debate should provide an opportunity for
us to work in a more holistic and effective manner to
address everything that endangers peace in the Middle
East, in particular in the wake of Israel’s oppressive
aggression against Gaza, which caused vast loss of life
and the destruction of vital Palestinian infrastructure
and institutions. It also provides an opportunity for
Member States to contribute to peace efforts, work to
achieve a settlement and put an end to the pain of a
people that has been suffering for more than six
decades and has been deprived of its fundamental
rights.
We look forward to the day when the legitimate
national aspirations of the Palestinian people and the
hopes of the international community will give rise to

09-42592

tangible efforts to pave the way to peace, independence
and sovereignty for the Palestinian people. This will
eliminate tension in the region and lead to a new era of
security, stability and advancement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and your country
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing this morning.
The right of conquest is viewed as an offence to
human rights, to the sovereignty and self-determination
of peoples and to the norms governing relations among
nations, including the inadmissibility of the seizure of
territory by force. We thought it had been eliminated
with the end of the age of colonization by the Western
Powers and with the drafting of the Charter of the
United Nations, but in the twenty-first century it
appears still to be enjoyed by Israel in the Middle East.
A colonial Power had only to put a handful of men on
the territory to be colonized to view itself as endowed
with the right of conquest — a right that, even before it
was actually exercised, made that Power the master of
the territory to be conquered. The natural inhabitants of
the territory, once the owners of their ancestral lands,
came to live in utterly precarious, depressing and
miserable conditions — if they survived the
conquering Power’s genocide.
That is the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The Israeli violations that flout the very
basis of the modern-day international legal order are a
fundamental transgression of the basic norms of
international law, which possess the character of jus
cogens. These basic norms are the legitimate concern
of the entire community of nations; all peoples can
appeal to them and have an interest in safeguarding
them and ensuring their implementation.
Early last week, in defiance of the international
community and in particular the Security Council, the
Government of Israel asserted a unified Jerusalem as
the capital of the Jewish people and of the State of
Israel and that its sovereignty in Jerusalem was not a
matter for discussion.
During the Six-Day War of 1967, Israel seized
East Jerusalem as war booty. Then, in 1980, it adopted

17

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

national legislation encompassing the eastern and
western parts of the city, proclaiming this as its eternal
and invisible capital. That measure is illegal under
resolution 478 (1980) and illegal in the eyes of the
General Assembly, which has reaffirmed that all
legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, that have altered
or purported to alter the character, legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem are null and
void and have no validity whatsoever, in particular the
so-called Basic Law on Jerusalem and the proclamation
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and that such
measures must be reversed.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, there has been no
progress since the end of the Israeli military operation
seven months ago. The inhabitants of Gaza cannot
rebuild their lives. The majority of the population of
1.5 million is having extreme difficulty making it to
the end of the month. Seriously ill people are suffering
because they cannot access medical treatment. Many
children are suffering from serious psychological
problems. Civilians whose homes and possessions were
destroyed during the conflict cannot recover. In short,
the blockade imposed by Israel three years ago remains
unchanged and the United Nations does nothing.
Poverty in Gaza is directly related to the blockade.

Nonetheless, and in spite of United Nations
resolutions declaring the illegality of Israeli actions in
East Jerusalem, tension has continued to rise after more
than 40 years of occupation. This is a result of Israel’s
destructive and provocative policies and actions,
through its settlement campaign throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. This is under way
primarily in Jerusalem, where Israel continues fiercely
to wage its final conquest and colonization of the city
and the neighbouring areas. The isolation of Jerusalem
from the remainder of the occupied Palestinian territory,
the Judaization of the city and the destruction of its
original demographic composition and its historical
and cultural heritage, along with the expansion of
illegal settlements at an unprecedented pace, constitute
an ongoing violation of articles 49 and 53 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

In order to prevent the misery from increasing
with every passing day and to enable people to rebuild
their lives, the restrictions on movement and goods
must be lifted. The uninterrupted occupation of Arab
territories by Israel in implementation of its policy of
conquest and expansion is an ongoing violation of the
United Nations Charter. Unfortunately, the Security
Council has adopted no effective measures to put an
end to Israel’s illegal actions. It has permitted
continued violation of the status of the city and its
residents and helped dim the prospects for peace,
which is essential to the future of Jerusalem. An
agreement between both interested parties that
recognizes East Jerusalem as the capital of the new
Palestinian State is essential to achieving lasting peace.

The continued occupation has further exacerbated
the situation of the Palestinian people, which has
already been precarious since the construction of the
wall that has dismembered its territory, isolated its
various areas and separated East Jerusalem from the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. This has led to
a serious physical, economic, cultural and social
disaster.
The building of the wall was the subject of an
International Court of Justice advisory opinion of
9 July 2004, which stated that the wall being erected by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and its
environs, was counter to international law and that
Israel was obligated to end its non-compliance with
international law and to immediately halt construction
work on the wall and to immediately dismantle existing
structures.

18

We must underscore the extreme urgency of these
matters and once again reiterate that the Council, on
the basis of its own as yet unimplemented resolutions,
must comply with its obligations under the Charter and
act against the illegal actions of the occupying Power,
Israel, in the occupied Palestinian territories.
We hope that the day is coming when Israeli
actions with regard to Jerusalem will respect and
recognize the etymology of the city, whose name
derives from the Hebrew for “house of peace” or from
the Arabic, Al-Quds, which means “sacred site”.
Nicaragua calls for a politically just solution to the
Palestinian problem based on numerous United Nations
resolutions, including the resolution establishing the
right of return for Palestinian refugees and those
resolutions calling for Israel’s withdrawal from all
Arab territories occupied since 1967, in accordance
with the principle of land for peace, established at the
Madrid conference and in the Arab Peace Initiative,
which will allow for the creation of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

There is universal consensus that the Palestinian
people must not remain under occupation. Israeli
colonialism must end. The Palestinian people must
exercise their inalienable rights and the State of
Palestine must be established immediately. We reiterate
that only with the establishment of the two States,
Palestine and Israel, and with an end to Israeli
occupation of occupied Arab territories will there be
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Once again, Nicaragua wishes to express its
support for and solidarity with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Government of Lebanon
as they seek territorial unity for their respective States
and consequently an end to Israeli occupation in those
territories.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Enge (Norway): Norway fully supports the
current efforts to resume final status negotiations. A
political framework for a two-State solution based on
the Road Map is necessary in order to mobilize broad
international support for Palestinian State-building.
Without such a political framework, we fear that
international support may be eroded. The time has
come to hold the parties to account and to demand that
they honour their Road Map commitments and other
key obligations. Without tangible improvements on the
ground, the work of the negotiators will be undermined
and public support for the two-State solution will
evaporate.
Norway strongly supports Egyptian efforts to heal
the internal division among Palestinians. We commend
Egypt for its patience and hard work in trying to find a
political solution that will make it possible for a
legitimate Palestinian Government to be in full control
of both Gaza and the West Bank.
The situation of the civilian population of the
Gaza Strip is unacceptable. In January this year, the
Security Council called on Member States to support
international efforts to alleviate the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza, including through the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee. For life in Gaza to improve,
the civilian population must be allowed freedom of
movement. For the economy in Gaza to revive, the
import and export of goods must be restored. Norway
urges the Government of Israel to reconsider its policy
towards the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. At
the same time, Norway demands an end to the

09-42592

indiscriminate firing of rockets and mortars against
Israeli civilians and the immediate release of Corporal
Gilad Shalit; now in his third year of captivity.
In view of Norway’s role as chair of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee — the international donor group
supporting the Palestinian Authority — let me make a
few observations focused on the connection between
the political and the economic aspects of the peace
process.
First, we must all act on our long-held
understanding that economic progress in the
Palestinian territory is essential to bringing the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to an end. The institutions of the
Palestinian Authority are the foundation of the future
Palestinian State. Through timely budgetary support
from major donors, Prime Minister Salam Fayyad has
staved off the impending crisis for now. However, a
considerable remaining gap must be filled to enable the
Palestinian Authority to pay salaries and utility bills
throughout the year. Western and Arab donors alike
should therefore honour their pledges from the donor
conferences of Paris and Sharm el-Sheikh.
On the other hand — and this is my second
point — the parties are ill-advised to take the donors
for granted. The international donor community’s
support to the Palestinian Territory is in essence
political, not humanitarian. Our aim is to facilitate the
establishment of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. Without the political endgame in
clear view, donor commitment at current levels can
hardly be sustained.
Third, donor dependency is not a solution, while
private value generation is. Let us not forget that, 10
years ago, the Palestinian Authority ran a budget
surplus. Israel must lift restrictions on commercial
flows to, from and within all parts of the Palestinian
territory, including the Gaza Strip. The many
roadblocks that literally stand in the way of economic
development must be removed, in accordance with
Israel’s international obligations.
Finally, let me conclude by turning to the work of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. The June meeting in
Oslo took stock of the grave economic situation of the
Palestinian Authority. The meeting sought to identify
measures that would underpin sustainable economic
growth in the Palestinian territory, including the Gaza
Strip, and mobilize much-needed budget support for

19

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

the Palestinian Authority. The next Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting will take place in New York in the
margins of the opening of the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly.
One of the objectives of the upcoming Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee meeting in New York is to provide
Prime Minister Fayyad with an opportunity to lay out
his recently announced vision for establishing a
Palestinian State within a two-year time frame. Norway
is pledging its full support for Prime Minister Fayyad’s
vision. We expect Prime Minister Fayyad to use the
occasion in New York to explain to donors in some
detail how they can help turn his vision into reality.
We, the donors, in close coordination with the
Security Council and the Middle East Quartet, should
be prepared to act on these proposals, mindful that the
next couple of years may be our last chance in the
foreseeable future to salvage the two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin, Sir, by joining other speakers in
congratulating you on the skill with which you have
presided over the Security Council this month and in
thanking you for having convened this timely open
debate. I also wish to extend our thanks to Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing to the Council this
morning.
Like every single other day in the past six
decades, the period under review has been witness to
an unabated bloody campaign and racist and aggressive
policies and practices by the Israeli regime. The
defenceless Palestinians continue to be subject to some
of the most vicious measures ever employed and to
abhorrent war crimes perpetrated by Israelis, as a result
of which dozens more Palestinian civilians have been
killed or injured and more and more have been
displaced.
In violation of the most basic principles of
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and in clear contempt for and
defiance of the unambiguous calls made by the
international community, the Israeli regime’s illegal
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territories
continues, the demolition of Palestinian homes and
properties and confiscation of Palestinian lands have

20

intensified, and the construction of settlements and
settlement infrastructure, as well as the transfer of
Israeli settlers, have increased.
At the same time, and despite United Nations
resolutions and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the construction of the
illegal apartheid wall is continuing unabated, bringing
more and more brutal damage to Palestinian lives,
livelihoods, lands, freedom and property. The
Palestinian people are suffering from daily humiliation,
hardships and deprivation caused by criminal and racist
Israeli policies and practices, including the continued
existence of at least 613 checkpoints and other
obstacles to the movement of persons and goods
throughout the West Bank.
One and a half million Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip are subject to collective punishment and are
facing an unprecedented humanitarian crisis as they are
deprived of their most basic goods and health care
services as a result of the inhumane Israeli blockade of
the Gaza Strip.
Continuation of this brutal siege has not only
worsened the already dire humanitarian crisis in the
Strip but also made reconstruction in the wake of the
devastation caused by the Israeli aggression against
Gaza a few months ago — the rebuilding of even the
most urgently needed basic infrastructures —
impossible.
The aggressive and expansionist Israeli policies
and practices against Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan have also continued. In flagrant violation of the
fundamental principles of international law, the Geneva
Conventions and Security Council resolutions, the
Israeli regime insists on its illegal occupation of the
occupied Syrian Golan, on its criminal settlement
activities and on the alteration of the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.
It also continues its aggression against Lebanon
through its continued occupation of Lebanese
territories, violation of Lebanese airspace on a daily
basis and the deployment of spy networks in the
country.
The reports of the Secretary-General on
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) note that
violations of Lebanese airspace, and defiance of the
provisions of Council resolutions, including resolution
1701 (2006), have become a matter of routine policy

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

by the Israeli regime. Statements by officials of the
Israeli regime, together with the policies and practices
of that regime in the past several months, have yet
again shown that it has no belief in, or respect for,
peace. Under the slogan of peace, it only tries to
mislead others in order to buy time and pave the
ground to further pursue its aggressive policies.
Israel’s intransigent insistence on the pursuit of
its illegal campaign of colonization and settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territories on
the absurd and false pretext of so-called natural growth
shows its vicious intention to continue to expand its
occupation of the Palestinian territories rather than
heed the international community’s calls to stop it.
The remarks by the Speaker of the Israeli Knesset
just a few days ago, in which he called for the
expansion of the territories occupied by the Israeli
regime to include territories on the east bank of the
Jordan river, displayed once again the dangerous,
aggressive and expansionist policies that this regime
harbours for the entire region.
The international community’s failure to stop the
Israeli crimes against Palestinians and others in the
region has only emboldened the regime to continue
with its inhumane and criminal behaviour. Concrete
and resolute measures by the international community
and by the Security Council are imperative in order to
stop this vicious cycle of Israeli aggression and
violence.
The time to act is now. The international
community should not continue to turn a blind eye to
these abhorrent crimes. There should be no doubt that
occupation lies at the centre of the Palestinian conflict
and overall tension and instability in the Middle East.
Unless this principal cause of conflict is effectively
addressed, the crisis will never subside.
We expect the Security Council, in particular, to
shoulder its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security by putting an end to
the Israeli regime’s inhumane and aggressive acts. It
should force the Israeli regime to completely and
permanently cease settlement activities, lift the
blockade against the Gaza Strip, cease and desist from
its inhumane violation of Palestinian rights and end its
occupation of all Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian
territories.

09-42592

I wish to conclude by putting on record that my
delegation rejects the baseless and absurd allegations
made against my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime in the Council today. This is another
tired attempt by the Zionist regime to divert attention
from that regime’s war crimes and crimes against
humanity. This wicked ploy has not worked in the past;
nor will it work in the future. It is preposterous that a
criminal regime that possesses nuclear weapons, is not
a party to the international treaties on weapons of mass
destruction and feeds on terrorism and bloodshed can
accuse others groundlessly. Nothing could be more
dangerous for the world and the region than nuclear
weapons in the hands of the terrorist Israeli regime,
which has proved to have no respect for any human
right or any international regulation. This danger
should be countered resolutely and urgently.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the Pakistan delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your skilful steering of the Council’s work
during this month. Let me also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for his briefing and update on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, which is one of the most pressing and longstanding issues on the agenda of the Security Council
and the United Nations.
The statements that we have heard in this debate
reaffirm the fundamental interest of the international
community in a comprehensive resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict leading to a just and lasting settlement
of the core issue of Palestine. With regard to the latter,
there is a clear sense that the current state of affairs
remains untenable. The situation of the Palestinian
people remains intolerable. Their legitimate aspirations
for freedom and dignity and an independent and
sovereign State of their own can no longer be held
back. While we have to address the immediate human
rights, social and economic and humanitarian concerns
and needs of the oppressed and besieged Palestinian
people in the occupied territories, we must also create
the conditions for an early resumption of negotiations
and also avoid the risk of renewed conflict and
bloodshed, which have so often affected lives for many
generations.
While little optimism is offered by the political
developments in the region and the continuing grave

21

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

situation on the ground, the international consensus
and the call for peace are growing stronger in the new
global political scenario. The priority accorded to this
issue by the United States Administration — particularly
the commitment of President Obama to personally
pursue a peaceful resolution of the conflict and his call
on all sides to live up to their obligations — has been
welcomed by all.
I think there is full recognition of the fact that a
just settlement of the Palestinian question is central to
ending the cycle of suspicion and discord that has
undermined peace and security in the Middle East and
has also strained the relations between neighbours in
this land. The question is how to convert this
international consensus into credible action that will
bring to fruition this arduous search for peace. What
we need is a transformative shift — not only in the
political process, but also in the situation on the
ground, since they remain interdependent.
There is no option but to return to the negotiating
table. The futility of the use of disproportionate force
and unilateral action is beyond doubt. Efforts to create
new facts on the ground that prejudice the outcome of
negotiations should not be recognized; nor should they
be acceptable to the international community. We
should also learn from the half-hearted attempts,
unfulfilled promises and aborted peace processes that
we have so often witnessed in the past. Greater
political will is required to bring the parties together
and help them engage in a sustained negotiation
process — in good faith and without preconditions —
aimed at achieving, within a reasonable time frame, a
comprehensive agreement on all permanent status
issues.
But any progress will be difficult without the full
implementation by the parties of their respective
obligations in support of the peace process. We believe
that the fulfilment of commitments by the parties is in
their own interest and that it should be perceived not as
a sign of weakness, but as a measure of strength and
confidence in the peace efforts.
In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a crucial role in supporting the
efforts for renewed negotiations and their early
successful conclusion. I believe that this is an ideal
opportunity for the Council to ensure respect for and
the implementation of its resolutions and to restore its

22

own relevance, credibility and legitimacy by giving a
serious push to the resolution of this issue. If there is to
be a comprehensive peace in the region, it is also
essential to make parallel progress on the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon fronts through the conclusion of
peace agreements, particularly those under the Road
Map.
Regrettably, we are now witnessing the contrary.
Some of the essential confidence-building measures are
nowhere in sight. The construction of the illegal
separation wall continues unabated. The suffocating
complex of roadblocks and permits remains in place,
disrupting and adding misery to the everyday lives of
the Palestinian people. Thousands of Palestinians,
including women and children, remain incarcerated in
Israeli prisons. The inhumane blockade continues in
the Gaza Strip, where the people are still struggling to
come to terms with the destruction and tremendous
human suffering recently inflicted as a result of
aggression, for which, unfortunately, there is no
accountability. Israel continues with impunity its
illegal settlement activities in the West Bank, including
in and around East Jerusalem. That is not acceptable.
Given the serious implications of all this for the
peace process, the international community is right in
calling on Israel to freeze all settlement activity,
including natural growth, to dismantle outposts erected
since March 2001 and to refrain from provocative
actions in and around East Jerusalem, including home
demolitions and evictions. Obliging Israel to comply
with its commitments remains a real test of the
international
community’s
seriousness
and
commitment vis-à-vis equitable solution.
The root cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
occupation of Arab lands. In its recent statement, the
Quartet rightly underscored that the only viable
solution to this conflict is one that ends the occupation.
That is the ultimate objective that has eluded us here in
the Security Council so far, but it should not be
allowed to escape us any longer. The framework for
peace is there in all the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); in
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace; in the Road Map; and in the Arab
Peace Initiative. All are available to us. The
international consensus and requirement for peace are
also very clearly there on our part. We must all act now
to achieve what has been awaiting us and what,

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

inarguably, is in the interest of our world and, above
all, in the interest of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

clarified in the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Pakistan’s full
support for that objective and our strong commitment
to the realization of an independent, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967
borders.

My delegation continues to be concerned about
Israel’s construction of the separation wall in the West
Bank. The Israeli Government has pursued the
construction of the separation wall, which cuts through
the West Bank, confiscating large chunks of Palestinian
farmland, residences and commercial property for this
purpose. Israel’s building of the separation wall runs
counter to the will of the international community.

The President: I now call on the representative
of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
opportunity to participate and share our views in this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. South Africa aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In recent weeks and months, there has been some
encouraging movement towards reigniting the search
for peace in the Middle East. The successful elections
in Lebanon and the ongoing regional initiatives of the
League of Arab States to promote and achieve intraPalestinian reconciliation and unity have been positive
developments; so was the address by the United States
President, Mr. Barack Obama, on 4 June 2009. Recent
meetings between senior United States officials and
leaders in the Middle East aimed at promoting peace
also raised hopes in the Middle East and, indeed,
beyond.
However, those encouraging developments have
yet to be translated into progress on the ground,
especially in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
reality is that Palestinians continue to live under an
occupation that they have endured for decades. They
face daily hardships, compounded by the existence of
many checkpoints that restrict their movement and
access. The violent incursions by the Israeli army into
Palestinian areas continue unabated, while Israeli
settlements and the separation wall expand in spite of
international condemnation.
South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade and the ongoing construction and expansion
of illegal settlements. We reiterate our call to Israel to
immediately cease the building and expansion of
settlements in the West Bank. The intensified home
demolition programme on the part of Israel that we are
currently witnessing in East Jerusalem constitutes a
serious violation of international law, as definitively

09-42592

South Africa has consistently demonstrated our
support for the rights of the Palestinian people to a
State of their own. South Africa’s clear and unwavering
support for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State is based on its firm belief that only a two-State
solution can bring lasting peace to the Middle East.
We believe that a vision of peaceful coexistence
between Israelis and Palestinians, based on the creation
of a Palestinian State existing side by side in peace
with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders, is the only sustainable solution to
this conflict. We remain convinced that negotiation is
the only way to end the conflict and to bring about an
end to the occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories.
The Security Council should not neglect its
Charter-mandated responsibility to assist in the
attainment of peace in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Its failure to find a lasting solution to this crisis is a
failure to give hope to the people of Palestine. We
therefore urge the Council, in line with its Charter
obligations, to act decisively and take action to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
For its part, South Africa continues to support a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in
line with international resolutions and initiatives, such
as Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which calls for the establishment of a
Palestinian State existing side by side in peace with the
State of Israel within internationally recognized and
secure borders.
South Africa welcomes the holding of successful
parliamentary elections in Lebanon early last month.
We commend the Government of Lebanon for its
continuous efforts to stabilize the country in the
aftermath of Israel’s aggression and violation of its

23

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

territorial integrity and sovereignty. We are also
concerned about the explosions that occurred on
14 July 2009. In that regard, we call on all parties to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, South Africa will continue to
support and contribute to all efforts aimed at achieving
a lasting peace in the Middle East, based on all
relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and to thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in the form of an open debate,
which gives us an opportunity to discuss the issue,
which is of paramount importance for security and
development in our region and throughout the world. I
also express our appreciation to Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for the briefing that he presented on behalf of
the Secretary-General.
We continue to witness the effects of the recent
Israeli military aggression on Gaza, the destruction and
damage that it left behind and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation resulting from the Israeli army’s
use of disproportionate force and banned weapons such
as white phosphorus in heavily crowded residential
areas, as well as its targeting of houses of worship,
schools, hospitals and United Nations facilities. This is
considered a war crime, and those responsible for it
must be held accountable. Moreover, the new Israeli
Government is moving ahead with its predecessor’s
obstruction of access to humanitarian aid and
reconstruction materials.
These extremely serious practices are targeting
the population at a time when the international
community’s concern for the security of civilians is
heightened. The Security Council periodically
discusses the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and a few days ago the General
Assembly began its consideration of the responsibility
to protect. Moreover, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations continue to focus on

24

the need to protect the human rights and human
security of civilians throughout the world.
Despite all this, the suffering of Palestinian
civilians as a result of Israeli occupation and illegal
Israeli practices not only continues but is also being
intensified. Human conscience requires that we expose
the truth about all human rights violations committed
during that armed conflict. We must ensure that the
perpetrators of these crimes do not go unpunished.
We await the report of the fact-finding mission
appointed by the Human Rights Council to investigate
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law perpetrated in Gaza. The Israeli
Government must cooperate with that independent
international mission and with its Chairman, who is
known for his impartiality. The Secretary-General has
briefed the Security Council on a summary of the factfinding team’s report. This team was formed over two
months ago, and we are still waiting for the Council to
take concrete measures based on the team’s
recommendations.
Israeli authorities continue to build the separation
wall and to expand their settlements in a quest to, de
facto, annex more Palestinian territories. This threatens
the contiguity of Palestinian territories, which is
considered a basic requirement for a Palestinian State.
This can therefore be considered as a deliberate act that
aims to eliminate any chances of a permanent solution
to the Palestinian situation and as a blow to
international mediation efforts, especially those of the
international Quartet.
The State of Qatar believes that the solution to
the Palestinian issue lies in the establishment of two
States, living side by side in peace. Qatar believes that
the Israeli Government’s attempts to expand
settlements, especially those around East Jerusalem,
undermine the chances of a two-State solution based on
the 1967 borders. If the Israeli Government seeks to
justify the expansion of its settlements by what it calls
natural growth, then we stress that we categorically
reject this concept, because settlement activity is
illegal to begin with, and such growth is by no means
natural. The general policy in Israel encourages
settlement in occupied Palestinian territory, especially
in East Jerusalem. It does so by offering Government
assistance and incentives to encourage the transfer of
Israeli civilian residents to Palestinian territory, in
violation of international law.

09-42592

S/PV.6171 (Resumption 1)

Israel continues to violate Lebanon’s sovereignty,
in particular its airspace, on an almost daily basis. In
addition, Israel continues to occupy some Lebanese
territory and the Syrian Golan Heights. In that regard,
we reiterate that Israel’s decision to annex the Golan
Heights is null and void. We stress the need to return
the Golan to Syria and to return the remaining
occupied Lebanese territory to Lebanon.
Just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region can be achieved only on the basis of the
principle of land for peace, the terms of reference
embodied in the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, and the Arab Peace Initiative. The latter was
reaffirmed at the Doha summit of March 2009, which
also noted that the continued offer of the Arab
Initiative was contingent upon the Israeli side’s

09-42592

acceptance of it. The new Israeli Government must
therefore refrain from adopting extremist positions. It
must take advantage of the genuine Arab desire to end
the crisis in the Middle East.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation reiterates
the need to ensure the participation of all Palestinian
factions so as to ensure the success of the peace efforts.
Our Palestinian brothers must seriously endeavour to
achieve national unity in the service of the Palestinian
people.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

25
