202

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

by the consequent flight into those three countries of
large numbers of families, including children of school
age,
A ware of the problems confronting the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland created by the entry into their school systems of large numbers of children from the South African side of the border and their
need to determine more precisely the number of children involved and the extent of the assistance required to
relieve the Governments of this particular burden.
Recognizing the need to enable former student
refugees from Zimbabwe to continue their education in
neighbouring countries until alternative arrangements
can be made for their education in their own country.
I. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources and organize the programme of assistance to
student refugees in the host countries of southern
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the assistance which they are giving to the student refugees
and for the extent of co-operation which they have extended to the Secretary-General and to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on matters
concerning the welfare of these refugees;
3. Notes with satisfaction the financial and material
support provided for the student refugee programmes
by Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
4. Decides to make provision in the student refugee
programme for former student refugees from Zimbabwe until they complete their studies in the country of
asylum or until alternative arrangements can be made
for the completion of their education in their own country~
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to organize and implement an effective programme of educational and other appropriate assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to contribute generously to the assistance programmes for these students, through financial support of the regular programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and of the projects identified in the report of
the Secretary-General;
7. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. the World Food
Programme, the World Bank and the United Nations
Children's Fund, as well as other international and nongovernmental bodies, to provide humanitarian and development assistance to expedite the resettlement and
integration of refugee families from South Africa who
have been given asylum in Botswana. Lesotho and
Swaziland;
8. Calls upon all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner

for Refugees in the implementation of humanitarian
programmes of assistance for the student refugees in
southern Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to continue to keep the matter under review and to
apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the programmes, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/185.

Human rights in Bolivia

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Member States have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolution 34/175 of 17 December 1979
on effective action against mass and flagrant violations
of human rights.
Having taken cognizance of reports on violations of
human rights in Bolivia,
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the
Preparatory Committee of the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States to include the question of Bolivia in the agenda for its tenth regular session, and of resolution 308 of 25 July 1980 of its Permanent Council. 1"''
Taking note also of the letter of the Bolivian
authorities to the Secretary-General, dated 29 October
1980, indicating their readiness to fix a date on which a
delegation from the Commission on Human Rights may
visit Bolivia, 1111
l. Urges the Bolivian authorities to ensure respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of expression and trade union rights;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
accept the invitation by the Bolivian authorities, in order to study the human rights situation at first hand and
to review at its thirty-seventh session the human rights
situation in Bolivia.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35 / 186.

Exchange of information on banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 /173 of 17 December 1979,
in which it recognized the urgent need to take concrete
measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a
world-wide basi~.
Noting with regret that the Secretary-General was unable to present the report requested in General Assembly resolution 34 · 173.
.... See Organi1.ati,,n of American States. Annual Report of the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights to the General Assembly
(Oh\ Ser.I'. ,\(i 'd"c 12.:'9 'XO). chap. II. sect. H.

'" ,\ c.' \'i l)
