S/PV.8022

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8022nd meeting

Thursday, 10 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-25225 (E)
*1725225*

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Nigeria to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and to give her
the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Council on my recent visit to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This undertaking,
from 19 to 27 July, was the first of its kind — a highlevel mission focused entirely on women and peace
and security and development. I was pleased to be
joined by the Executive Director of UN-Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, both of whom are here
with me today, as well as Ms. Bineta Diop, the African
Union Commission’s Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security. We were four African women from
two organizations, visiting two countries, with one
goal — advancing peace by advancing the equality,
empowerment and well-being of women. This reflects
both the Secretary-General’s vision and the Security
Council’s agenda, as embodied initially in resolution
1325 (2000) and reaffirmed most recently in resolution
2242 (2015).
The mission also deepened the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as we work together to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as the accompanying
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in
April on the initiative of the Secretary-General. I am
2/26

10/08/2017

pleased that the Permanent Observer from the African
Union will be briefing the Council alongside me today,
reinforcing the joint nature of our mission. In that broad
context, I would like to share with the Council some of
what we saw and heard, as well as some thoughts on
what we must do now.
In both countries, we met with Heads of State,
ministers, donors, diplomats, faith leaders, Parliaments
and the United Nations mission and country teams. We
made a point of spending the lion’s share of our time
with the women and girls most affected by conflicts,
including in visits to camps for internally displaced
persons. While each country is unique, the situations
share some commonalities. Both have dismally low
levels of women’s participation in politics and are
experiencing conflicts marked by extremely high levels
of sexual- and gender-based violence. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, sexual violence is widespread. In
northern Nigeria, abductions, forced marriage and the
use of women as suicide bombers have taken a terrible
toll, and in the camps, sexual exploitation, including in
the form of sex for food, is a new and alarming trend.
The international community must better understand
the role of women in development and peacebuilding,
together with the gender dimensions of conflict, if our
responses are to be effective.
Both countries are also in the grip of grave
humanitarian crises. In Nigeria, the eight-year conflict
in the North-East has generated a risk of famine,
displaced 1.9 million people and left 8.5 million in need
of assistance. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
7 million people need assistance and 3.8 million are
displaced, the largest internally displaced population in
Africa and one of the worst such situations in the world.
Those dire circumstances are being made worse by a
large gap in humanitarian funding, including the issue
of failures to meet the commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and the Lake
Chad Region. There is an acute need for sustained and
scaled-up funding to avert famine in Nigeria and address
the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Beyond those immediate concerns, since
both crises are rooted in conflict, poverty and political
challenges, they will require regional political solutions
and integrated responses that cut across historically
siloed approaches.
Let me turn now to some of the specifics of each. In
Nigeria, we were moved by our meeting with the Chibok
girls — facilitated by the Honourable Minister of
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

Women Affairs. Their remarkable strength as survivors,
rather than victims, is inspiring. Many are receiving an
education and psychosocial support to prepare them for
reintegration. But thousands of other young women who
have been abducted and returned, subjected to sexual
violence and affected by conflict in other ways have yet
to receive adequate support. We also interacted with
displaced women and girls who are facing exploitation
and abuse in the camps. We held meetings with women’s
leaders who underscored the need to address mental
health and women’s empowerment.
I commend the Governments of the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria for their efforts to promote
stability, including through the Multinational Joint
Task Force within the Lake Chad Basin regional
cooperation. International support will continue to be
crucial in addressing the root causes of the crisis in
those very complex situations.
I am also pleased to note that since our visit, the
Acting President of Nigeria has established a judicial
commission to investigate alleged violations of human
rights by Nigerian security agencies, and to recommend
ways to prevent such violations. I commend that
initiative and encourage the relevant authorities to
include sexual- and gender-based violence within the
commission’s work. The United Nations stands ready
to support that important effort and also to reinforce
protection measures for displaced women and girls.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains complex and volatile, with State and
non-State armed actors alike perpetuating violence
and the illicit flows of natural resources and deepening
political tensions, including over the delayed elections.
There are real risks of increased political instability and
deepening crises if the 31 December 2016 agreement
becomes irrelevant.
We are all aware of those and other challenges, yet
we also see a real opportunity to get the country on track
towards stability. In all of our meetings, we emphasized
the need to respect and implement the 31 December
agreement and the willingness of the United Nations
to provide its support. That endeavour will require
further investment, not a scaling back of our capacities
and resources. While it is imperative to ensure the most
efficient use of available resources, particularly in a
fiscally constrained environment, it is equally critical
that mitigating measures are taken to avail vulnerable
populations of the level of protection they need. In that

S/PV. 8022

respect, I commend the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the steps taken to mitigate
the possible impact of the closure of its bases in some
locations and for its efforts to develop and implement
a more holistic approach to the protection of civilians.
We commend the efforts of the Government,
including through the appointment of a personal
representative of the President on sexual violence and
child recruitment, to decrease incidents of conflictrelated sexual violence committed by the security
forces and to take real steps towards delisting from the
Secretary-General’s reports on conflict-related sexual
violence. Those efforts must continue, along with our
pledged support, until we reach zero.
At the time of our visit, the electoral commission
had registered more than 80 per cent of voters. That
number now stands at more than 90 per cent, with
registration expected to be accelerated in the Kasais
following the calming of tensions. Of those registered,
48 per cent are women, placing the country in the same
bracket as more established democracies, such as the
Solomon Islands and Paraguay. The collection of sexdisaggregated data is itself commendable, as is the
provision on gender parity in the constitution, which
should now be supported and translated into law.
In that regard, we had lengthy conversations with
President Kabila, who has committed to releasing
an elections calendar and to holding elections that
are violence-free and Congolese-led, but where
international observers will be welcome. We welcome
that commitment and look forward to the early release
of that electoral calendar.
The United Nations-AU delegation met with
women in Goma who were being moved as a result
of the closing of an internally displaced persons
camp where they had lived for years in barely life
sustaining conditions. Despite those hardships, some
women did not want to return to their communities
without assurances that a key means of support in
the camps — microcredit — would continue to be
available. While it was not possible to delay the closure
of any of the camps, I am encouraged to note that our
intervention made it possible for some of the women
to remain in local communities and to continue to be
supported through the micro-credit programmes that
have been facilitated by UN-Women. For these women,
security is a matter of financial empowerment. I thank

17-252253/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

the donors that are generously supporting these efforts
and call on all to do even more.
We also met with women who have no choice but
to cook with coal in their tents, at great risk to their
health and that of their children. Those tents were their
only shelter and coal was their only accessible mode of
sustenance and heat.
We asked about the future of those women and
their families upon the closure of the camp and were
informed that the United Nations does not have
the funds or capacity to shift from humanitarian
assistance to support host communities or the
reintegrated individuals. While we may debate the
humanitarian-development nexus philosophically here
in New York, without resources flowing to both sectors
simultaneously and a real investment in early recovery,
we can neither sustain peace nor prevent future genderbased violence. In that spirit, I encourage donors to
respond to the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
reintegration challenges at this time — based on need,
and need alone.
While in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our
delegation was briefed on MONUSCO’s investigation
into the murder of two experts working for the
United Nations. The report on that horrific incident,
which I strongly condemn, is to be published shortly,
and I would like to reiterate the need for thorough
investigations and justice for the perpetrators of that
crime. The United Nations will continue to support that
effort until justice is served.
I would like to thank the many dedicated men
and women with whom we met during our important
and productive journey, in particular my colleagues
in MONUSCO, especially the women, whose work
was greatly appreciated by all we met, as well as the
United Nations country team in both countries — and
within them UN-Women, whose efforts to support
the empowerment of women is so crucial. I am most
grateful for the invaluable contribution from to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I would also like to express my gratitude and
thanks to the African Union as a partner in progress.
Its partnership is invaluable as we strive to continue
to work together to stabilize the region, to advance the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, and to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
4/26

10/08/2017

One message resounds most — investing in women
and girls must be central to our efforts in Nigeria,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and beyond if
we are to have sustainable peace and development.
Giving special consideration to the context will be
key to the responses that deliver the right results. We
look forward to working with national Governments,
regional organizations, civil society, women and girls
themselves and international partners to deliver results
that will advance peace, development and dignity
for all.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: Since this is the first time that the
African Union (AU) is taking the floor at the Security
Council since the start of the presidency of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, let me join the voice of the African
Union in commending you, Sir, and supporting the
activities of your presidency for the month of August.
I would like to sincerely thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her very detailed
briefing on the mission, for her vision, her commitment
and contributions to finding, in concert with the
African Union, sustainable solutions for a peaceful
and stable Africa. The Deputy Secretary-General,
together with the African Union Commission’s Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop; the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka; and the United Nations Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten,
played a key role in the realization of the joint United
Nations-AU high-level solidarity mission in Nigeria
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that took
place from 19 to 27 July 2017. Ms. Bineta Diop would
have loved to join today’s meeting but due to unforeseen
circumstances, she could not be here with us today.
The joint United Nations-African Union (AU)
solidarity mission, which was carried out in the context
of the High-Level Women Leaders Forum for Africa’s
Transformation that took place in New York from 31 May
to 2 June, allowed both organizations to better assess
the positive role that women can play to advance peace,
security and development. The joint United Nations-AU
solidarity mission also reinforced our understanding, at
both the policy and operational levels, that it is possible
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

to have significant and positive impacts on the lives of
vulnerable populations only if and when the African
Union, the United Nations, Governments, civil society
organizations and women and youth all join together in
their efforts. We witnessed that throughout the mission,
joint efforts engendered unprecedented perseverance
for the realization of common objectives.
Africa is a strategic region for the stability of the
world, and women and youth play a pivotal role in the
promotion of peace, security and development. The
African Union Commission remains a key partner
of the United Nations for the implementation at the
continental level of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.
The African Union is also at the forefront in the
implementation phase of the landmark Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which was signed
in April by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. The landmark document
recognizes two strategic points for collaboration
between the AU and the United Nations. The first
point that the document stresses is that “African
peace and security challenges are too complex for any
single organization to adequately address on its own”.
Secondly, it notes the need for the African Union an.d
the United Nations to “work together to identify and
respond to indicators of potential conflict and plan
for prevention”
It is in that spirit of prevention and intensified
collaborative efforts that the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission delegated the AU Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security to the joint United
Nations-AU solidarity mission, thereby reaffirming his
commitment to the advancement of the role of women
in peace processes across the continent.
The changing nature of conflicts has highlighted
alarming challenges, including the worsening
humanitarian situations to which the Deputy SecretaryGeneral referred, as well as increased violent extremism.
Dire humanitarian challenges, such as those seen in the
north-east of Nigeria and the East and Kasai regions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, significantly
impact the well-being of communities, particularly
of women and girls. Furthermore, armed groups such
as Boko Haram are increasingly using young girls as
agents of violence and suicide bombers. Just days before

S/PV. 8022

the visit of the joint United Nations-AU delegation to
Maiduguri, four Boko Haram suicide bombers killed
19 people in a series of attacks. It was later reported
that one of the four suicide bombers was a young
woman. In order to curtail such a worrisome trend and
avoid marginalization that can lead to exclusion and
radicalization, there is a need to support the social and
economic empowerment of women.
To date, there is no solution to the problem of
transnational actors constantly changing their ways of
operating, except by effectively and rapidly adapting to
the changing conflict patterns and dire consequences
of vulnerable populations. In that regard, the African
Union strongly condemns the continued violations of
women’s and children’s rights, the erosion of their wellbeing and all forms of violence perpetrated against them
in conflict-affected countries or countries emerging
from conflict.
It is no coincidence that the joint United NationsAU solidarity mission was undertaken under the theme,
“Revitalizing women’s participation and leadership in
peace, security and development”. Both the AU and
the United Nations have recognized the importance of
women’s participation and leadership in peace, security
and development initiatives. The mission brought
greater visibility to the role that African women can
play in advancing prevention, peace, security, the 2030
Agenda and Agenda 2063. Additionally, the high-level
delegation offered a unique platform to bring the voices
and experiences of women on the ground to the ears
of those in positions of leadership of their respective
countries, including Heads of State, Foreign Ministers
and Members of Parliament. The delegation was able
to receive first-hand information from women and
young women leaders actively working on the ground,
related to a number of key needs, including reinforcing
ground actions for peace, security and development,
empowering women through quality education and
capacity-building for employment, and offering them
the necessary infrastructures to support their physical
and mental rehabilitation in countries enduring
conflicts or emerging from conflicts.
The African Union continues to support the
rehabilitation and empowerment of internally displaced
persons and survivors of sexual violence. In the context
of the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and the
Lake Chad Basin Region held in February, the AU Peace
and Security Council, in its session on 19 July, called
on the international community to provide necessary

17-252255/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

assistance that is commensurate to the needs of affected
people in humanitarian emergencies. It is also necessary
to ensure rapid disbursement of pledges made in order
to alleviate the current humanitarian crisis.
In that spirit, the African Union commends the
new United Nations Humanitarian Fund of over
$10.5 million, which has been allocated to help women,
children and men in need of life-saving humanitarian
assistance, in line with the Nigeria Humanitarian Fund.
We acknowledge that more joint humanitarian efforts
and assistance remain to be delivered in conflictaffected regions of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by the international community.
The African Union will continue to work closely
with the United Nations to support conflict-affected
populations, including displaced and host communities,
that are suffering from peace and security crises,
humanitarian emergencies and development deficits,
including the understated risk of famine. In that regard,
the AU commends the unprecedented efforts of its
member States and first responders to refugee and
humanitarian crises, such as the crisis in Uganda.
The joint United Nations-AU solidarity mission
highlighted key recommendations that are essential if
we are to achieve overall sustainable peace, security
and development. First, it is necessary to enhance focus
on enabling the empowerment and return of internally
displaced persons and refugees, particularly women
and children. Secondly, there is a need to facilitate
the stabilization of countries facing challenges related
peace and security by providing them with the necessary
human, financial and expert support, particularly
through enhanced women’s participation. Thirdly, we
must enhance access for humanitarian organizations, in
accordance with the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s mandate and peace and security architecture.
Finally, it is necessary to enhance women and
youth’s effective participation in conflict prevention,
mediation, electoral processes and decision-making in
order to allow them to act as agents of peace.
As the African Union and the United Nations seek
to underline the role of women in peace, security and
development in Africa, I would like to stress that the
joint United Nations-AU solidarity mission also took
place in the spirit of the priority actions set for the
initiative of the African Women Leaders Network, which
was launched by the African Union Commission in
partnership with United Nations Women and Germany.
6/26

10/08/2017

The African Women Leaders Network aims to
bolster the leadership of women in governance, peace
and security, all in the interest of transforming Africa.
The Network represents an entry point for an enhanced
United Nations and African Union partnership and
a specific contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which was introduced by
Namibia in 2000. The tripartite partnership of the
African Union, UN-Women and Germany behind the
African Women Leaders Network has set the goal of
generating sustainable and concrete actions for women
in Africa, in line with African Union and United
Nations commitments to prevention and delivering
tangible solutions on the ground.
The action plan of the African Women Leaders
Network reinforced the need to create a fund within the
platform that can address concrete issues on the ground,
such as the capacity-building of women and young girls
through education and the reinforcement of educational
infrastructure by building schools and support centres.
The need to strengthen educational, physical and
mental support systems proved vital during the fruitful
exchanges of the high-level delegation with women and
young girls on the ground. Education and capacitybuilding will offer the necessary platform for women,
girls and communities at large to heighten awareness
on gender-based issues, including on addressing
sexual violence.
Our joint findings on the ground have confirmed
what women and girls affected by conflict and
humanitarian tragedies are able and willing to manage
camp activities, which serve as support systems for
other survivors and assist in the rehabilitation and
reintegration processes through microfund financing
and peer support. The solidarity mission in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo allowed for
the conclusion of discussion on the importance of the
capacity-building of institutions and justice systems
in countries in conflict or emerging from conflict.
The African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security will brief the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the specific outcomes of the joint
United Nations-African Union solidarity mission.
In closing, it is recognized that no single
organization can on its own ensure global peace and
security. There is therefore a need for the African
Union and the United Nations to work closely to achieve
peace and security in Africa. Our efforts must continue
to be based on comparative advantage in the pursuit
17-25225

Peace and security in Africa

10/08/2017

of strategic objectives. In that regard, the emerging
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations in the areas of peace and security
need to be reinforced, based on the creative reading
of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, to allow the African Union and its
regional mechanisms to fully play their role as integral
components of collective security.
Lastly, the African Union recognizes the often
ignored drivers of conflict, such as gender-based
violence and gender inequality. It therefore reaffirms
its strong commitment to focus on preventive strategies,
as inscribed in the African Union Charter, which
reinforce the empowerment of women and tackle the
sources of instability but inflict pain and violence on
our continent.
The President (spoke
Mr. António for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Ambassador
Тéte António and, above all, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for sharing their analyses of their important
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
northern Nigeria.
May I also commend the work of UN-Women and of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, who also took part in the
visit. Together, they have really brought home to us the
horrific, disproportionate impact that both those crises
have on civilians and in particular, on women and girls.
It is an impact that the Council knows only too well,
following our visit to the Lake Chad region in March,
but I am sure that none of us who were on that visit
will forget the stories of anguish that we heard then. We
heard so many of them from mothers or daughters who
had lost everything — their children, families, homes
and hope — all to Boko Haram.
Sadly, it seems that those stories are still being told.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and Governments of the region, the suffering
continues, with over 2 million people still displaced
in the Lake Chad region — over 96 per cent of them
because of the insurgency. Similar stories can also be
heard loudly and clearly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which now has the highest displaced
population in Africa. The reports emanating from the

S/PV. 8022

Kasai regions should make us all sick to our stomachs.
They speak of mass graves, brutal killing and maiming,
including of women and children. They tell of rampant
sexual violence. Over 1,000 cases have been responded
to since the crisis began last year, with the actual
number of cases likely to be far higher.
That has sparked a crisis that has left 400,000
children at risk of severe acute malnutrition. Those two
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
northern Nigeria are different in many ways, and yet
they are product of the same vicious cycle. It is a cycle
of instability — one that breeds violence and leads to
a breakdown of law and order. It is a cycle that allows
groups like Boko Haram to flourish and carry out those
most heinous crimes.
Put simply, we need to break the cycle. By we,
I mean all of us, including the Security Council,
but responsibility must fall first and foremost to
the Governments affected. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of Nigeria have a duty to restore stability because
instability fuels crises. As they do so, they must respect
human rights and international humanitarian law. They
cannot be part of the problem if they want to be part of
the solution.
That means that Governments must protect civilians
as they restore stability. It means that they must act on
allegations of human rights abuses, including sexual
violence, irrespective of whether they are allegations
against their own forces or any other group and that
includes United Nations peacekeepers too. It means
Governments holding to account those who have
committed such crimes, showing that there can be no
impunity or escape and that the rule of law applies
to everyone.
We need to help them in that effort. That is why
the United Kingdom, together with our United Nations
and non-governmental organization partners, are
supporting the Nigerian Government to re-establish
basic social services to areas that they have stabilized. It
is why we pledged $6 million to support to humanitarian
response in the Kasais, and why we support the Human
Rights Council’s unanimous decision to deploy a team
of experts to look into the situation there. It is why
we provide training to the Nigerian armed forces and
to African peacekeeping contingents on protecting
civilians and on preventing sexual and gender-based
violence. And it is why the United Kingdom is funding

17-252257/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

legal assistance in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to help the survivors of those crimes.
But ultimately, those are all comparatively shortterm actions. To end the crises that afflict so many
women and girls disproportionately in both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria, we
need to see long-term progress on the women and
peace and security agenda. At its heart, that means
women’s equality in all aspects of politics, Government
and society. It is unacceptable that women continue
to be so poorly represented in formal governance and
peace processes when, time after time, studies show
that women’s participation in such processes aids their
ultimate success.
In Nigeria, for instance, women’s participation
in the House of Representatives and the Senate has
fallen since 2011. It now stands at around 5 per cent.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, only two
women were involved in discussions to reach a political
agreement during the crisis last year. Had just one more
woman been involved, they would have matched the total
number of women sitting around this table representing
the member States of the Security Council. Whether
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Nigeria
or, indeed, in the Security Council, let us all advocate
for the full active participation of women. Women have
spent too long enduring and surviving these crises. It
is long past time for them to play their fullest part in
solving them.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Egyptian delegation for having
convened today’s briefing on the goals and outcome
of the high-level joint African Union-United Nations
solidarity mission to the Federal Republic of Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 19 to
27 July.
I commend the participation of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed; Ambassador Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Executive Director of UN-Women, whom we
welcome. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Téte António for the quality of their
respective briefings, which were very comprehensive
and rich.
The African Union and the United Nations had
every reason to conduct a joint visit to these two large
8/26

10/08/2017

African countries — which have quite rightly been
qualified as giants of the continent, given their size,
demography, economic weight, rich cultural diversity
and extraordinary biodiversity — in order to promote
truly sustainable and inclusive development. Indeed,
looking at the situation of the countries visited, and
many other cases, we are convinced that the women and
peace and security approach is one very useful method
out of several used to respond to crises and to build the
resilience of the States and the communities in question
when faced with a wide array of traditional challenges
as well as new threats.
It should be recalled that resolution 1325 (2000) was
inspired by Africa. As just mentioned by Ambassador
António, the resolution was inspired by Namibia.
That is why the configuration of the mission, which
combined the extraordinary female leadership of the
United Nations with that of the African Union, beyond
the purely symbolic, seems to be a fine example of
cooperation between the United Nations and the panAfrican organization. That cooperation is very useful
in order to address adequately the many challenges
to peace, security and development in Africa. The
Senegalese delegation would therefore like to warmly
congratulate the initiators of the mission who, as our
briefers explained, was rich in teachings.
We would like it to be just as rich in terms of its
impact both on policymakers and on the targets of those
policies, namely, the women in those countries and, in
particular, those directly affected by the security and
humanitarian crises. This is a model of concerted action
that constitutes one further step in the implementation
of resolution 2242 (2015), adopted by the Council
in October 2015, 15 years after the aforementioned
pioneering resolution 1325 (2005). The visit highlighted
the crises in the countries visited in terms of the place
and the role of women in the future of their societies
and countries, especially in times of conflict.
My delegation would like to note with satisfaction,
in view of the content of this high-level mission, the
desire to align and create consistency on a practical
level among the Sustainable Development Goals and
the African Union Agenda 2063 and its Peace and
Security Architecture.
Finally, a great deal of information was gathered on
the ground, and positive interactions were enjoyed by
the joint mission, both in Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular with the highest
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

authorities of those countries, as well as with women
victims of conflict and crises, such as the high school
students of Chibok. We remain convinced that the
information and the interactions will strengthen the
work of the networks set up to better address the issue
of women and peace and security at all levels.
Senegal echoes the appeal of the Deputy
Secretary-General for the increased mobilization of
the international community in favour of these two
countries, the central African subregion, and Africa in
general. Next month, the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union will hold in
Addis Ababa their eleventh annual consultations. I see
no better opportunity to follow up on the visit.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks the Egyptian presidency for convening
and organizing this meeting. We also welcome the
presence among us of Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, Ambassador Teté António.
Bolivia should like to acknowledge in particular the
Deputy Secretary-General, not only for the briefing,
but also for realizing the initiative to carry out the first
joint United Nations-African Union high-level visit
focused on the importance of women’s participation in
the processes of peace, security and development, in
addition to the fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict. We believe that this trip can become a model
and that visits of this nature can take place not only
in Africa, but in other regions of the world. Both are
necessary to raise societal awareness of the role that
women should play in all areas — economic, political
and social — with respect to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
Concerning sexual violence in conflict, Bolivia is
of the view that this crime is one of the most inhuman
acts, the emotional and physical consequences of which
permanently affect the personal development of the
survivors. The international community now needs to
address this problem, pooling its efforts to implement
measures at the national, regional and international
levels. We believe that sexual violence in conflict
represents a threat to international peace and security.
That is why the Security Council decided to adopt the
implementation of the agenda on women and peace
and security.

S/PV. 8022

In that connection, we highlight United Nations
efforts to implement Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2242 (2015), and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions in order to integrate
the gender perspective effectively. However, and in
spite of those efforts, women’s participation remains
marginal. The Security Council alone has adopted eight
resolutions related to sexual violence against women
and the strong correlation between peace processes and
the participation of women therein. We must continue to
work to ensure that the situation of women in conflict is
treated as a matter of priority within the agenda of the
Security Council. Seventeen years ago, resolution 1325
(2000), highlighted the crucial link between gender
equality and international peace and security.
Sexual violence in conflict does not distinguish
between genders; however, it does mostly affect
women and girls, who are victims of rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced marriage, forced
sterilization and other forms of violence. One example
is the case of Nigeria, where since 2014, Boko Haram, a
violent extremist group, has kidnapped approximately
7,000 women and girls who are victims of these crimes,
leaving deep wounds in the female population of
that country.
Terrorist groups also use sexual violence not only
as a weapon of war, but also as a means of financing
their activities. It is therefore necessary to fight
attempts to legitimize illicit profits derived from
sexual exploitation and forced prostitution that have
entered the global financial system through money
laundering and so-called tax havens, which tend to
reduce or eliminate controls in place in various areas of
investment. In this context, it is necessary to investigate
whether these terrorist groups gain access to these socalled tax havens.
Similarly, we are concerned at the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to data
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in the Kasai region, one of the most affected
by violence, more than 500 boys and girls have been
recruited into armed groups. There have been more than
600 cases of sexual violence since August 2016, and there
are numerous cases of victims of human trafficking and
smuggling, summary executions, arbitrary detentions
and arrests. Furthermore, according to UNICEF data,
in the Kasai region, violent clashes between the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the

17-252259/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

10/08/2017

Kamuina Nsapu militia have had devastating effects
on children.

a human right, but it also provides a basis for achieving
sustainable peace and development.

In addition to the foregoing, one of the most
difficult consequences of sexual violence that survivors
have to overcome is the stigma they and their children
face, together with the related discrimination and the
socioeconomic marginalization that relegates them
to second-class status. Accordingly, the international
community should contribute to lending support to
national initiatives aimed at reintegrating the survivors
of these traumas and their children into society, so that
they can fully enjoy their rights.

In our experience, the Bolivian experience, the
sovereign administration of natural resources is
paramount for the socioeconomic development of
a State. Indeed, it is through it, together with proper
leadership and political will, that a structural shift can
be made in the key areas of development.

To this end, Bolivia supports the SecretaryGeneral’s four-pronged strategy to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse and respond to existing cases,
including giving priority to victims and listening
to their needs and experiences; putting an end to the
impunity that triggers stigmatization; promoting the
participation of civil society and foreign partners; and
improving strategic communication in order to raise
awareness. In addition, measures needed to prevent
armed conflicts and promote the participation of
women in peace, security and development processes
should be implemented.
We acknowledge that there remain structural
challenges, such as the patriarchal mindset of
appropriation and ownership of women’s bodies,
including control over their sexuality and even their
reproductive capacity. Violence against women is the
expression of the patriarchal system rooted in society,
which is made even more radical when women and girls
are used, among other things, as military shields.
Bolivia emphasizes the need to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and other regional organizations in
the fight against sexual violence in conflict. Close
communication between the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission is vital if we are to implement the women
and peace and security agenda on the African continent
and thereby strengthen existing mechanisms.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
well as the African Union’s 2063 Agenda, hold gender
equality and women’s empowerment among their most
important goals. Without women taking their full place
as key actors, it will be impossible to make progress in
terms of social development. Gender equality is not just
10/26

Since the promulgation of its new political State
Constitution in 2009, Bolivia has drawn up and
implemented legislation designed to build a fair society
with equal opportunities for women, emphasizing
their political empowerment by establishing parity and
alternation in the lists of candidates for representative
office, making ours the country with the second-highest
number of female parliamentarians in the world. In the
economic sphere, the law on the community renewal of
agrarian reform ensures the right of women to own land.
In conclusion, Bolivia proposes drawing up, in
addition to the Secretary-General’s four-point plan, a
pact that guarantees the empowerment and inclusion
of women in the light of Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda,
which calls for the Security Council and other United
Nations entities in the United Nations system to address
this issue. This pact should ensure, first, the political
empowerment of women through laws that guarantee
parity and alternation in elected representation posts.
Secondly, it should ensure and promote women’s
participation in peace processes by carving out an
active role for them in prevention, mediation and
dialogue in order to find solutions on an equal footing.
Thirdly, in this pact, we should ensure that women are
engaged in post-conflict reconstruction through their
economic, social and cultural reintegration. Fourthly,
the economic empowerment of women should be
ensured through laws and public policies that allow,
inter alia, for access to land ownership and credit to
facilitate their attainment of economic independence.
Of course, all peace and development processes must
include women if we truly want a fair, stable and
lasting peace.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish to
thank Ambassador Téte António and, in particular,
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, for their
briefings on the tremendous challenges that women
continue to face in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the Lake Chad Basin. We applaud this inaugural
joint effort Deputy Secretary-General has launched
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

with the African Union to draw needed attention and
renewed international impetus to advancing women’s
roles in peace and security and development processes
worldwide. The Security Council needs to do a better job
understanding the threats that women face in conflict
zones as well as acknowledging that we can better help
countries recover from conflict by promoting the full
inclusion of women in peace processes.
The use of sexual violence in conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has a long history,
and the recent violence in the Kasai regions is the
latest horrific chapter. The United Nations has received
more than 600 reports of sexual violence in the Kasais
since August, including 186 reports of conflict-related
sexual violence by certain units of the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
heard reports of atrocities against civilians including
executions of children. Civilians are being mutilated,
burned alive and hacked to death, and the violence
is still getting worse. The violence and ongoing and
egregious abuses have forced more than 1.3 million
people to flee their homes in search of safety.
It is important that the Deputy Secretary-General
has raised these issues with us today. Far too many
victims are suffering with too little attention paid to their
plight. The Security Council needs to act now to stop
this violence, including by demanding that Government
forces cease violations and hold accountable those who
commit sexual violence and other atrocities.
In Nigeria, Boko Haram has ravaged the northeastern regions of the country, kidnapping scores of
women and children, subjecting them to slavery and
brainwashing these victims to carry out still more
attacks. In March of this year, I had the opportunity
with other Council members to visit the Lake Chad
Basin and to meet with the displaced in Maiduguri
in north-eastern Nigeria. The women there spoke
movingly of what they had endured at the hands of Boko
Haram. There were accounts of kidnappings and forced
marriage and of gender-based and sexual exploitation
perpetrated by Boko Haram and other armed groups.
And the victims, including women and girls, continue
to suffer enormously from stigmatization and a lack of
psychosocial support. These abuses are sickening; they
should shock us.
Seven years of violence in north-eastern Nigeria
have taken the lives of more than 15,000, forced more
than 2 million from their homes, and left more than

S/PV. 8022

4.7 million dependent on food aid and at risk of famine
in many areas. As the Deputy Security-General has
reported, women and girls who have been liberated
from the traumas they faced under Boko Haram
sometimes return home to their villages only to face
new trauma. This new reality comes in the form of
exclusion and stigmatization from communities that
they once called home. After capture by Boko Haram,
many of these women and girls cannot go home — even
once they have been freed. These women and girls, and,
in many cases, the children born while they were in
Boko Haram’s custody, face homelessness and despair,
and these challenges may well linger for generations.
The United States will continue its work with the
Government of Nigeria to root out Boko Haram and
support stabilization in the north-east.
The threat posed by Boko Haram and affiliates
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in West
Africa remains grave, but, as we work to make
progress in the conflict, it also remains essential that
Nigeria continue to work to win the peace. That will
require strengthening Government institutions, in
particular local Governments and regions impacted
by the conflict, supporting economic investment
and development and providing services to citizens
in establishing effective and regionally coordinated
disarmament, demobilization, deradicalization and
reintegration programmes.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Lake Chad basin are unfortunately just two examples
of a much broader pattern characteristic of the conflicts
on the Security Council’s agenda. In an increasing
number of places, when War or conflict breaks out,
women are among the first to become victims of
unconscionable abuse. Fighters often seek degrading
the dignity of women and girls as a central element of
their strategy for repressing the populations that they
target. We hope that the trip and briefing today by the
Deputy Secretary-General will help increase awareness
of that dire and widespread problem.
The United States will remain strongly supportive
of policies that aim to protect women who are the
victims of conflict and that promote the role of women
as peacemakers when violence ends. One suspects
that many of the intractable conflicts on the Council’s
agenda would perhaps be a little less intractable if
more women were at the table. The United States will
work to recognize the unique contributions that women
make and to draw attention to their plight when they

17-2522511/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

are the victims of conflict. Moreover, the United States
remains committed to implementing the United States
national action plan on women, peace and security — a
plan born out of resolution 1325 (2000).
We hope that today’s meeting will help push the
members of the Council to take action in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Lake Chad basin and in
other conflicts in which women and girls are at grave
risk. The Deputy Secretary-General has brought those
issues to our and the world’s attention today. Our
responsibility now as members of the Security Council
is to follow up this briefing with consequences for
those who perpetrate the abuses. The United States
will continue to lead the way in pressing for this much
needed accountability.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Permanent Observer of the
African Union, Mr. Téte António, for their useful and
detailed briefings. We would also like to commend
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Pramila Patten.
Preventing and resolving conflicts is a necessary
precondition for ensuring stability and sustainable
development and for promoting and protecting human
rights. We support the work of the African Union and
subregional bodies in their roles regarding conflict
prevention and resolution, since it is precisely those
organizations that have the best information concerning
the situation on the ground and the possibilities for
peaceful settlement. We also favour strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.
The issue of women and peace and security is an
integral part of the overall peace process and postconflict peacebuilding. The African Union five-year
Gender, Peace and Security Programme 2015-2020
is a clear example of a regional initiative to bolster
women’s participation in peace processes. It is also
important to ensure that such work is not merely
declamatory but leads to specific results in connection
with improving women and girls’ status in conflict and
post-conflict societies.
We are concerned about ongoing reports of sexual
violence perpetrated by terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram.
12/26

10/08/2017

We categorically condemn that criminal practice used
by terrorists. We urge States to cooperate actively in
combating the shadow economy of terrorists who
benefit financially from human trafficking, sexual
slavery and forced prostitution. We support the work
of the multinational armed forces comprised of African
troops to combat Boko Haram.
We concur with our colleagues’ concerns that the
deteriorating situation in the Congolese provinces
of Kasai is harming women and children. We are
concerned about the escalating confrontation between
the authorities and tribal armed militias in those
provinces. The Government and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo need to take additional measures
to diffuse the situation. We would, however, like to warn
against indiscriminately blaming what is happening
on the Congolese troops and police for their allegedly
disproportionate use of force. Members of the Kamwina
Nsapu militia are also to blame. They are attacking
Government officials, schools and polling stations and
recruiting child soldiers. That cannot justify human
rights violations by law enforcement agencies. We
nonetheless need to wait for the outcome of the official
investigation by the authorities.
We believe that the root causes of that problem
should be addressed by assisting the Congolese
authorities to reform their security sector so as to
ensure that law enforcement agents uphold human
rights. The implementation of the human rights due
diligence policy needs to be carried out more cautiously,
as it does not allow for the building of the capacity of
law enforcement agencies, but as a consequence the
military and political situation is failing to improve
and there seems to be a vicious cycle. We believe
that in order to improve stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the comprehensive political
agreement of 31 December 2016 needs to be upheld by
all Congolese parties.
The protection of women in armed conflict from
the threat of sexual violence is the primary task of the
Governments of States involved in conflicts. We would
therefore like to particularly highlight the measures
taken by the Government of Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to combat gender and sexual
violence in armed conflict, including combating
impunity for that type of crime, deploying female police
officers in camps for internally displaced persons and
refugee camps, providing medical, psychological and
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

legal assistance to the survivors of such violence and
helping them in social and economic reintegration. We
believe that the international community, including
the United Nations, faces a significant challenge in
helping build national capacity related to combating
and preventing violence against women and girls
in armed conflict and in assisting national efforts to
improve women’s participation in conflict prevention
and resolution.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Egyptian presidency for convening this
meeting. It is my special pleasure to welcome Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed. I thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union, Ambassador Téte António, for
his very useful contribution.
Italy commends the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General in having organized the first-ever
joint high-level mission with the African Union focused
on women’s meaningful participation in peace, security
and development. We welcome it for three main reasons.
First, the mission has paved the way for a more
sustained partnership with the African Union in that
area, which we applaud and fully encourage.
Secondly, the initiative aims at tackling a problem
for which the United Nations system has always
been criticized, namely its work in silos, which has
prevented at times an efficient response to crises. In
keeping with resolution 2242 (2015), it is vital that we
ensure better mainstreaming of the gender perspective
in the development, prioritization, coordination and
implementation of policies and programmes.
Thirdly, it is important that the United Nations
continue in its advocacy and engagement in the field
so as to support national authority in ending all current
violations and holding all perpetrators accountable.
In this regard, we do not consider it a coincidence
that the notorious rebel commander and warlord Ntabo
Ntaberi Sheka, who was implicated in the brutal mass
rape of at least 387 civilians in Walikale in 2010,
decided to surrender to MONUSCO on 26 July while
the Mission was in place.
As its visit has demonstrated, advancing gender
equality and promoting women’s active involvement in
the peace process are essential for achieving sustainable
development as well as lasting peace and security. As
exemplified by the many women whom the Deputy

S/PV. 8022

Secretary-General met during her mission, women
are a driving force in development, even in the most
challenging situations. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for instance, displaced women, despite
their dramatic living conditions in refugee camps,
have succeeded in organizing some form of access to
microcredit, enabling them not only to survive but even
to contribute to their communities.
In the meeting with Government officials, the
women and peace and security discourse, namely, the
revitalization of women’s participation and leadership
in the peace and security process, was meant to be
an entry point for an initial dialogue with the local
authorities in both Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Italy welcomes the choice made by the Deputy
Secretary-General to visit Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Nigeria, Boko Haram
continues to be a major threat to peace and security,
also because of several cases of abduction targeting
women, such as the one involving the Chibok girls
perpetrated by that terrorist group. During the Security
Council mission to the Lake Chad basin in March, of
which I had the privilege of being part, we observed
the strong engagement of local government in the fight
against Boko Haram and other terrorist groups and the
attention devoted to promoting the participation of civil
society in the fight against radicalization.
It was stressed by the main interlocutors that a
crucial role was played in this regard by women’s
organizations in particular. It is critical for us to keep
supporting such efforts.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I
had the privilege of serving my embassy for more than
three years, we witnessed one of the worst humanitarian
crises in the world, with a total of 3.8 million internally
displaced persons. We believe that it is important to pay
close attention to the situation. In this context, women
and children suffer most of the consequences, both in
the eastern provinces and the Grand Kasai region. In
the Grand Kasai region in particular, we hope that the
Government will conduct a prompt, transparent and
independent investigation to establish the facts and
the circumstances of the human rights violations and
abuses perpetrated over the past months.
In this regard, while recalling that the Congolese
authorities have the primary responsibility to protect
their people, we hope that the United Nations Joint

17-2522513/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will continue to be provided with the
resources necessary to assist the Local government in
the promotion and protection of human rights.
Allow me to reiterate our deep concern at the
current political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is one of the causes of the current
wave of violence. The swift implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement is urgent, together with
the full implementation of the confidence-building
measures agreed in that same agreement. Critical steps
must be taken in order to organize elections as soon as
possible, with the full and equal participation of women.
To conclude, I would like to once again assure the
Deputy Secretary-General and the Council that we will
continue to promote and support women’s participation
and leadership in peace, security and development in
Africa and help the continent achieve its Agenda 2063.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I should like to start
by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General for
the informative briefing on the first joint African
Union-United Nations high-level visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, in the
context of Security Council resolution 2242 (2015), on
women and peace and security.
We express our appreciation to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
efforts and commitment and are gratified to see the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on the women and peace and security agenda. We
also thank Ambassador Téte António for his remarks.
The use of sexual violence as a tactic by Boko
Haram terrorists in northern Nigeria has indeed been a
matter of serious concern affecting the lives of women
and children in a tragic and painful manner. The same
victims are also the most affected segments of society
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Internally
displaced persons, particularly women and girls in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Nigeria, including those in the camps, continue to face
specific protection risks as a result of the situation of
vulnerability in which they find themselves and the
lack of sustainable solutions to respond thereto.
It is critical that the root causes of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo be addressed and that
the threats posed by Boko Haram in northern Nigeria
be effectively handled so as to reduce and eliminate the
14/26

10/08/2017

vulnerabilities of women and girls in conflict-affected
areas and prevent further displacement. This would
require giving greater attention to the integration of
women in the peace and security agenda, particularly
in addressing the specific needs and vulnerabilities of
women and girls in their protection challenges. Herein
lies the value of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
relevant Council resolutions on women and peace
and security.
We recognize the importance of further
strengthening the emergency preparedness and
response so as to provide effective protection and
achieve sustainable solutions for those internally
displaced as a result of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria,
particularly women and children. It is in this context
that we would like to stress the need to strengthen the
collaboration between humanitarian and development
actors to find sustainable solutions for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and northern Nigeria, particularly in
supporting the provision of basic services, livelihoods
and the deployment of opportunities for IDPs as well
as the necessary infrastructure, including within
the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063.
This would contribute to reducing and eliminating
the vulnerabilities of internally displaced women and
girls, and reduce their dependence on humanitarian
assistance. That is why we appreciate the attention
given by the Deputy Secretary-General to the need to
link humanitarian and development responses in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria.
We encourage her to persist in this noble endeavour.
Finally, I would like to conclude by affirming the
strong commitment of Ethiopia to working with all
relevant actors in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda and in ensuring the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant subsequent
resolutions aimed at enhancing the participation and
engagement of women, women leaders and groups
in prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding activities.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): My delegation appreciates
the briefing by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed as well as the briefing by the Permanent
Observer of the African Union. We also look forward to
the input by the representative of Nigeria.
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

We welcome both the conduct of thematic regional
visits and the initiative of informing the Council
on their outcomes. Such visits and the subsequent
briefings provide us with additional insights and a
better understanding of situations on the ground, thus
better equipping the Council to properly evaluate the
problems and challenges in respective countries.
It is praiseworthy that the visit was conducted to
raise the profile of gender-related issues in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The role of
women in bringing about positive change after conflict
can hardly be overestimated. Women are a driving force
behind peacebuilding efforts in their communities.
The direction of social and economic development
depends on the active participation of women in public
life and entrepreneurial activities at both the local and
national levels.
The ultimate success or failure of peace agreements
and the effectiveness of peacebuilding efforts can quite
often be linked to the level of engagement of women in
these processes. Having a seat at the negotiating table,
shaping an agenda to ensure the inclusion of genderrelated issues and playing a role in the implementation
of negotiated arrangements — all this is a sine qua
non if sustainable peace is to be built in conflictaffected areas. It is therefore highly commendable that
in its meetings with high-level officials from Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the joint
delegation of the United Nations and the African Union
stressed the importance of women’s participation in
peace and security processes, as well as in elections
and other political activities. Concrete and tangible
follow-up is needed in order to promote women’s rights.
In many places in Africa, conflicts and crises are
accompanied by a devastating surge in violence directed
at women and girls. The persistent use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war in African conflicts has left lasting
scars on communities and societies. In that regard,
one of the stated objectives of the visit — to make
the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence
against women and girls more visible — is extremely
timely. The meetings and conversations with the Chibok
girls in Nigeria and displaced residents in North Kivu
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo must have
been very difficult, given the suffering that many of
them have endured.
Discussing sexual violence, sexual slavery, forced
marriage and physical and psychological abuse can be

S/PV. 8022

devastating. But such conversations are essential if we
want to understand how we can support survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. There can be no hiding
from the fact that these survivors are revictimized
through public shaming and stigmatization way too
often. Much more must be done if they are to achieve
proper socioeconomic reintegration. Another equally
important aspect is ensuring accountability for
committing crimes of sexual violence, not only to meet
demands for justice, but to help societies break cycles
of conflict. The perpetrators of sexual violence must be
brought to account without regard for their affiliation
and rank.
The pervasive nature of this horrible scourge makes
it imperative for us, the international community,
to double down on our efforts to end it. Designing
prevention policies, ensuring accountability for the
perpetrators and providing adequate support and
rehabilitation for their victims should be part and parcel
of any conflict resolution endeavour.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, the Deputy
Secretary-General, for her thorough briefing on the
joint visit of the United Nations and the African Union
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria a
few weeks ago. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations. It goes without saying that
the African Union is a fundamental partnership of the
United Nations where peace and security are concerned.
I would like to begin by expressing Uruguay’s
full support for the initiative to make the joint visit,
emphasizing the participation of senior United Nations
officials, including the Deputy Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In our view, this kind of initiative
is extremely useful for giving us a deeper understanding
of the situation of women in armed conflict and helps
to turn a spotlight on this vulnerable group, which
nonetheless has a key role to play in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts.
We also believe that it can be a good complement
to the efforts of the Security Council’s Informal
Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
my delegation, jointly with the delegation of Sweden,
has the honour to chair. As members know, the Group
was established in accordance with resolution 2242

17-2522515/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

(2015), which the Council adopted in October 2015. In
the 18 months of its existence it has held 12 meetings
to discuss the situation of women in Mali, Iraq, the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan, Yemen and the
Lake Chad basin. The information and analysis it has
produced has also been used by various stakeholders
in the effort to advance the agenda on women and
peace and security, from donors and policymakers to
defenders and agents for women’s rights on the ground.
I would like to comment briefly on the particular
cases of Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the countries that were the object of the visit.
We are very concerned about the systematic use in
Nigeria of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism, such
as in the terrorist group Boko Haram’s abduction and
sexual exploitation of thousands of women and girls
and the increasing use of women as suicide bombers.
However, there is a dearth of information on the impact
of gender on such complex humanitarian crises, as
well as on the role that women’s participation and
leadership and gender-equality issues have to play in
peacebuilding efforts, for example in the fight against
violent extremism, the restoration of State authority
and the protection of human rights.
In that regard, my delegation has identified
several key areas requiring special attention, such
as transborder judicial cooperation; assistance in
dealing with the stigmatization of victims and their
children; the provision of basic services in areas such
as education and sexual and reproductive health, as
essential components of the humanitarian response; and
ensuring that national and regional strategies identify
survivors of sexual violence as victims of terrorism so
that they can receive appropriate aid.
During the Security Council’s visit in March to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin, we had the opportunity
to hear valuable testimony by Nigerian women, from
members of Parliament to activists and the internally
displaced, in our meetings in Abuja and Maiduguri.
All of them shared their expectations, aspirations and
frustrations, their initiatives and plans. Above all, we
were struck by the clarity of their message, which was
their simple desire to have the opportunity to freely
exercise their rights and make decisive contributions to
their country’s social and political development.
With regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uruguay supports every effort
to guarantee women’s participation in supporting the
16/26

10/08/2017

country’s political process and organizing and holding
elections. It should be emphasized that the Security
Council has tasked the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with supporting the Government and the
United Nations country team in ensuring women’s
representation and participation in political processes.
We would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this area, particularly by strengthening the Ministry
of Women and appointing a special adviser to the
President on these issues. We urge it to continue its
efforts to ensure women’s full and equal participation,
especially in the approaching elections.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to join other members of the Council in thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Ambassador Téte António for their valuable briefings
and contribution.
The joint mission of the United Nations and the
African Union is an important effort to close the gap
between the perceptions and the reality of the agenda
on women and peace and security that exists between
New York and Africa. It is also very significant as the
very first joint trip based on the enhanced partnership
between the African Union Commission and the United
Nations in the area of peace and security. I would
therefore like to commend Ms. Mohammed’s strong
and insightful leadership, which made the visit a great
success, and we hope that other, similar, missions will
follow. This one made it clear that gender inequality
and discrimination against women are among the root
causes of conflict in both Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, during the visit
to the Lake Chad Basin region in March, members of
the Security Council witnessed the important role of
women in ensuring peace and security in the region.
The existing conflicts will become further
protracted and peace will become more distant and
fragile if countries in the region and the international
community fail to protect women, who are often the
first victims of conflict, and do not ensure their
participation in any peacebuilding efforts — as women
are bearers of peace.
When it comes to the protection of women, we have
to address sexual violence first. Holding perpetrators
legally accountable and providing victims with judicial
redress are both key elements that require both a legal
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

structure and its consistent implementation. Japan is
proud to be a leading supporter of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and specifically the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, in their effort to provide assistance to
Governments in Africa, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to ensure the rule of law.
Regarding women’s participation, we must enable
women to serve as leaders and to aspire to a better
future. Women’s involvement makes their communities
and regions more resilient. It will prevent the infiltration
of violent extremist groups and end the negative spiral
of poverty and conflict. Japan continues to collaborate
with UN-Women to promote women’s participation
through empowerment, community dialogue and
education, focusing on the Sahel region.
In Nigeria, it is encouraging that a group of Chibok
girls were released. However, as today’s briefing
clarified, we must not forget that so many other girls
are still held captive and used as weapons of war by
terrorist groups. Even after their release, many are still
stigmatized and struggle to adapt to the return to their
communities. In such cases, we see the need to find
comprehensive and long-term approaches to support
women in conflict settings.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
are gratified that perpetrators of rape are being held
accountable. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
is at an important crossroads in the maintenance and
enhancement of peace and stability throughout the
elections. The success of the elections hinges on women
being actively involved in the decision-making process
for their own future. The bitter experiences of both
countries should serve as prominent lessons for other
conflict-affected nations in Africa and beyond.
In conclusion, let me add that Japan underscores
peacebuilding in Africa, including through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD). This month, Japan will organize the TICAD
Ministerial Meeting in Mozambique. This fall, Japan
will host the Fourth World Assembly for Women in
Tokyo. Japan has emphasized the fundamental nexus
between peace and women through these international
forums, which I believe embody the same values and
message as the joint AU-United Nations Mission.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking the
Deputy Secretary-General Ms. Amina Mohammed,

S/PV. 8022

and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ambassador Téte António, for their valuable briefings
this morning and for the leadership that they have shown
in women, peace and security. They illustrate how the
African Union (AU)-United Nations partnership is
growing even stronger, which we very much welcome.
Sweden applauds the initiative for the joint
visit. Today we put the women, peace and security
agenda front and centre, thus enabling us to properly
understand and respond to contemporary security
challenges in Nigeria and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. With resolution 2242 (2015), the Council
should be shifting women and gender equality from a
peripheral to a core issue in the Security Council. It is
also at the heart of Sweden’s feminist foreign policy.
Combatting root causes is only possible with truly
inclusive solutions. It is also why we remain a steadast
supporter of UN-Women here today — to ensure that
women will be a part of the solution in humanitarian
assisstance, development and in peace and security.
Going forward, we would also highlight three
priorities. First of all, no sustainable peace can be
achieved without effectively linking humanitarian,
security, human rights and development efforts.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
the Sustaining Peace Agenda provides an integrated
approach and the master plan for the United Nations in
that regard. There can be no humanitarian solution for a
political crisis or for long-term development challenges,
which was quite evident during our visit to Lake Chad
in March where we witnessed first hand how the roots
of the conflict run much deeper than the Boko Haram
insurgency and how humanitarian assistance and
military efforts must be supplemented by development
assistance and investments.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sweden supports the Humanitarian Fund from both
its humanitarian programme and its development
programme to enable humanitarian actors to commit to
longer-term engagement and planning. In all that we
do, SDG 5 should guide our efforts to make sure that
the needs of women and girls are heard and addressed.
Secondly, nothing should be discussed about
women without women. Exclusion will always result in
inequality and the risk of continued conflict. Women’s
effective participation and full enjoyment of their
human rights is crucial to achieving effective and
sustainable peace.

17-2522517/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
democratic and peaceful development requires the full
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement,
including women’s full participation in the upcoming
elections. We are encouraged by local efforts to increase
the registration of female voters by, for example,
keeping voter registration facilities open on Sundays.
It is clear that there is no shortage of women wanting
to get involved in Congolese politics, as the umbrella
network Rien sans les femmes and other Congolese
organizations have vividly demonstrated.
In Nigeria, encouraging local efforts to bring more
women into decision-making positions are also under
way, which is most welcome since women currently
hold less than 6 per cent of the seats in the Parliament
and in the courts. Efforts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Nigeria to enhance women’s
participation must be strongly supported by the
international community.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen our efforts to
combat sexual and gender-based crimes. Violence
against women and girls violates their human rights
and hinders development. In Nigeria and the Lake Chad
region, survivors of sexual and gender-based violence
risk stigma of association with insurgents, creating
further alienation and isolation which, in turn, risks
leading to further socioeconomic frustration and the
continuation of the conflict.
It is, of course, the primary responsibility of States
to ensure their citizen’s safety and dignity and, when
violated, accountability, but if States are unwilling
or unable to do so, the the international tribunals
have an important complementary role to play. The
Security Council should also increase its attention to
sexual and gender-based violence transgressions in the
implementation of its mandates. We would also like
to see enhanced attention to sexual and gender-based
violence in both thematic and country-specific action
when it comes to sanctions. We note that sexual and
gender-based violence rarely receives the appropriate
attention in United Nations reports.
In conclusion, today’s briefing has shown that
the women, peace and security agenda needs to be
properly addressed when the Security Council debates
geographic security challenges. It is now important
to ensure the effective follow-up of that important
initiative. We look forward to continued discussions
in the Council and in the Informal Expert Group on
18/26

10/08/2017

Women, Peace and Security. We need the whole United
Nations system to more coherently report and act in line
with resolution 2242 (2015) as a part of the follow-up.
That initiative should serve as an inspiration for
continued efforts in the field and we encourage similar
trips to more countries and regions by United Nations
senior leadership, United Nations Women and other
relevant actors. Intensified cooperation between the
AU and the United Nations related to women, peace and
security benefits both organizations because it benefits
the strive for peace and prosperity for all, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. In
such efforts, Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed,
Ambassador Téte António and all colleagues of the
Council can count on the full support of Sweden.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to first
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
for her comprehensive briefing on her visit to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I commend
her for her inspirational leadership. I would also like to
thanks Ambassador Téte António for his briefing.
Following the 19 April signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security by SecretaryGeneral Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
second joint United Nations-African Union high-level
trip has been significant in focusing on the meaningful
participation of women in peace reconciliation, security
and development. Such collaborative efforts must not
only continue but also be intensified in order to bring
the two organizations closer to reaching the targets
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
We have to help the region overcome the challenges
of eradicating poverty and achieving inclusive and
sustainable growth. We must support Africa’s steady
pursuit of stability and transformative, sustainable
development. In that context, the predominant emphasis
must be placed on the involvement of woman and
youth, as well as their right to human dignity without
any form of degradation. Therefore, we encourage
strengthening the growing cooperation between the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the African
Union Commission and the Security Council on gender
and youth issues.
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The African peace and security architecture and
the Silence the Guns by 2020 initiative will bring a new
focus on preventive diplomacy, which cannot succeed
without the support of the international community.
Therefore, in all negotiations, woman and youth, who
constitute the majority of the population, must inherit
and shape a continent that is free from conflict in all
forms, especially violence against women.
We will reach our goals only if we pursue a
significant dialogue between the United Nations and the
African Union on implementing resolution 2242 (2015).
We must also integrate the women and peace and security
agenda across all of the Council’s activities, including
United Nations system programmes, the mandate of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
issues related to sexual abuse, as well as work related to
women and children in armed conflict and international
organizations. Therefore, Kazakhstan will stand by all
peace initiatives in Nigeria, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and elsewhere, which have to incorporate
bottom-up and top-down strategies that will bring
about transformation.
The situation related to women’s rights in the
countries that the Deputy Secretary-General visited
is extremely fragile and alarming. The situations in
Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been aggravated by ongoing military actions of
armed groups, particularly Boko Haram. Therefore,
every effort must be made to ensure the protection
of the human rights of women, keeping in mind that
the African Union pays special attention to that issue
through the recently established Pan African Women`s
Association, which has been classified as a specialized
agency of the African Union.
We must also pay full attention to the dire
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which greatly impacts women and girls, who
represent the largest number of internally displaced
persons and refugees. More than 11 million people
have been affected by the humanitarian crisis and more
than two-thirds of those 11 million are women and
girls. We believe that United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and international donors must elaborate
a single, comprehensive strategy for the region in order
to increase the volume of humanitarian aid and ensure
that that aid reaches those in need. We express special
appreciation and call for support to be provided to the
Government and the people of Uganda, Ethiopia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania and other

S/PV. 8022

countries that have kept their doors open for refugees
fleeing from conflict.
It is especially important to further support the
African Union’s efforts to increase the role of women
in strengthening the human rights, security and
development nexus, which is essential for stabilizing the
overall situation in those countries. We are convinced
that long-term stability and sustainable peace can only
be achieved by investing in the strong connection
between peace, security and development. Therefore,
we should address the root causes of the crisis in the
region and create better opportunities for education and
employment for the next generation. Kazakhstan will
always stand for the engagement and contribution of
women and youth in all phases of mediation, conflict
resolution, post-conflict recovery and long-term
development in the joint efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union.
We commend the launch of the African Women
Leaders Network’s, which was initiated on 2 June
by the African Union Commission, UN-Women and
Germany. The Network seeks to enhance the leadership
of women in the transformation of Africa. It focuses on
governance, peace and stability.
To conclude, we emphasize the crucial need for
development programmes in the aforementioned
countries visited by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and throughout the whole African
continent. The close link between security and
development is very important, particularly in the
region but also in the world as a whole. That is because
the nexus of security and development is actively
working on addressing many ongoing issues. We need
to support interdependence across the pillars of the
United Nations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and
Ambassador António for their briefings.
China welcomes the joint United Nations-African
Union visit to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The visit has a positive significance for the
international community in helping it to understand
the situation on the ground related to the protection of
women and children in relevant countries and regions. It
will assist the international community and the United
Nations in providing further assistance to relevant
countries. China commends the visit.

17-2522519/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and northeastern Nigeria are faced with varying challenges
related to armed conflict and terrorism. Their security
situations are complex and grave. Women and children
in the region are under the severe threat of sexual
violence. The international community should pay
greater attention to that issue and comprehensively
enhance the protection of vulnerable groups of women
and children. I would like to emphasize the following
three points.
First, effective measures need to be adopted in
order to stabilize the situation and improve security
at an early date. The international community should
stick to the general direction of settling hotspot issues
by political means, and pushing relevant parties to
settle their disputes peacefully through dialogue and
negotiation. Efforts to combat terrorism and crossborder organized crime should be enhanced in order
to cut off the channels for the movement of terrorists,
provide necessary protection and humanitarian
assistance to vulnerable groups, such as women, and
create a secure and stable environment.
Secondly, integrated measures should be used
to enhance the capacity-building of the countries
in question, which bear the primary responsibility
for preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict and for protecting women and children in the
country. The international community should respect
the sovereignty and will of the countries in question,
respect the measures adopted by the Governments in
question in the light of their own situations, provide
targeted and constructive assistance so as to promote
their recovery and development, and enhance their
capacity-building in the sectors of security, social
services and governance.
Thirdly, synergy arising from cooperation between
United Nations agencies and regional organizations
should be ensured. The Security Council should
fully play its role as the organ bearing primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security; strengthen coordination with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women; and
continue to strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in order to coordinate its work related to women, peace
and security.
20/26

10/08/2017

China would like to work with the international
community to create a peaceful, secure and stable
international environment and make a greater
contribution to the swift eradication of sexual violence
in conflict and continued advancement in the global
cause to empower women.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing and initiative to lead the joint
United Nations-African Union solidarity mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria and
for being personally involved in combating violence
against women. It is a daily struggle that calls for
commitment and initiative, and France will support all
ongoing efforts in that area.
I would also like to commend the efforts and
commitment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Executive Director of UN-Women, and reiterate
our full support.
I also commend the enhanced cooperation between
the Security Council and the African Union’s Peace and
Security Council, which is the focus of today’s meeting.
In that regard, I would like to thank Ambassador Тéte
António for his briefing.
Today’s meeting is in keeping with the SecretaryGeneral’s cross-cutting and comprehensive approach,
which we support as it seeks to avoid the silo mentality.
We have stated on several occasions that, if we want the
United Nations to fulfil the mandate that its Member
States and peoples have conferred upon it, we must
not address issues relating to peace and security,
development and human rights separately. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and, in
particular, the goals and targets aimed at empowering
women and achieving gender equality.
Today’s discussions attest in particular to the
need for the Council to take at least three issues into
more regular and systematic consideration: upholding
women’s rights, combating violence against women
and, above all, encouraging their full participation in
the process to achieve sustainable peace. The consensus
today is that when we neglect half of humankind,
we are sure to see ongoing conflict. That principle
must be understood but it is also an urgent call for
greater effectiveness. Through detailed accounts by
Deputy Secretary-General’s and the various missions
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8022

undertaken by the Security Council, we are well aware
that the plight of many women is closely linked to our
attempts to address threats to peace and security.

Ms. Amina Mohammed just underscored. Long-term
solutions must be developed and implemented to
address the situation of displaced women.

The next open debate on women and peace and
security, which will be held in October, should enable
us to offer and adopt concrete and operational solutions
in that area and to again examine the specific ways to
fully implement the eight resolutions on this agenda
that have been adopted by the Council. More must
be done to ensure that the rhetoric and commitments
so often repeated are translated into action and bring
about veritable change so that women are no longer
victims, but rather actors in their own right in their
respective societies. With regard to sexual abuse and
sexual violence, France reiterates its full support for
the Secretary-General’s strategy and the zero-tolerance
policy towards those responsible for perpetrating
such abuses.

Given the extent of the crimes committed by Boko
Haram against civilians in the Lake Chad basin region,
which the Council visited last year and was the subject
of discussion surrounding the issue of violence against
women, the Council recalled that it was crucial for the
security response to the terrorist group to be tethered
to a judicial response, and that it be coordinated with
neighbouring countries. Combating impunity must also
be a priority, along with respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law.

I shall now turn my attention to the two countries
the Deputy Secretary-General visited.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must capture the Council’s full attention.
All efforts must be made to ensure that elections
are held and that the crucial measures to ease the
political tension outlined in the agreement reached on
31 December 2016 are implemented. Women must be
fully involved in that process. France is particularly
concerned by the violence in the Kasais, which has
reached an unsustainable level. The crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will not be resolved
unless justice is served for all those who were victims
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law and, in particular, women and girls.
We call on the Congolese authorities to cooperate
fully with the team of international experts set up by the
Human Rights Council in June. Those experts must have
unhindered access to the places and people concerned in
order to find those responsible for the violence. This is
a crucial step so that those responsible for the violence
can be brought to justice. We also reiterate our call for
the Secretary-General to establish a special board of
inquiry to shed light on the death of two experts who
were working with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Finally, we are also concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which affects women in particular, as

The Deputy Secretary-General can count on
France’s full support for her efforts. I would like to take
this opportunity as she is here with us today to inquire
about future missions to address the plight of women
and the issue of sexual violence.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
very comprehensive briefing on her recent visit to
Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to thank the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, Mr. Тéte
António, for his briefing.
I also take this opportunity to laud the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
in efforts to address conflict-related sexual violence.
This is an example of a partnership between the United
Nations and a regional organization that should be used
as a model to address sexual violence in conflict.
I should now like to highlight the following points.
First, Egypt welcomes the measures taken by the
United Nations to address sexual violence in armed
conflict, including the increase in the number of
women protection advisers on the ground, support to
strengthen national institution capacity and the launch
of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence.
Egypt also commends the efforts undertaken by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and in particular the support it
gave to strengthen the capacity of States during armed
conflict and post-conflict, in areas such as conducting
inquiries and investigations, judicial prosecutions and

17-2522521/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

criminal trials, dispensing military justice, legislative
reforms, the protection of witnesses and reparations.
Secondly, Egypt underscores its unwavering
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, championed by
the Secretary-General. Egypt is committed to working
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
within the framework of the General Assembly, to end
to all forms of violence against women. Incidences
of such violence committed within peacekeeping
operations must be investigated, in line with General
Assembly resolution 71/297. We reiterate that it is
important for Blue Helmets to be properly trained to
handle incidences of sexual violence.
Egypt commends the efforts undertaken by
Nigeria to put an end to the sexual violence committed
by the terrorist group Boko Haram, in northeastern Nigeria. Those efforts include rehabilitation
and support programmes for victims, programmes for
the reintegration of women and girls into their local
communities, and for the provision of legal, judicial
and medical services to women who are victims of
sexual violence.
In that regard, the fight against sexual violence
requires synergy and strengthened cooperation between
Nigeria and its neighbouring countries. Moreover, the
international community, for its part, must continue
to lend assistance to Nigeria so that the country can
address the challenges linked to cases of sexual
violence. In that regard, I would like to underscore
that international efforts must be aligned in order to
strengthen the capacity of community and religious
leaders to raise the awareness of local communities about
the importance of putting an end to stereotypes and the
stigmatization that affect victims of sexual violence and
their children. That stigmatization should be borne by
the perpetrators of these crimes and not the victims. We
must also prevent terrorism and extremism and win the
intellectual war, including the fight against attempts by
extremists to make rape permissible in religious terms.
In that regard, we would like to welcome the role of
Al-Azhar in the fight against erroneous fatwas issued
by terrorist organizations pertaining to the situation of
women in conflict.
Egypt welcomes the progress that has been made
by the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to put an end to sexual violence in conflict. We
acknowledge the measures taken in that vein, including
22/26

10/08/2017

the establishment of the post of a special adviser to the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
tackling sexual violence and the recruitment of child
soldiers. We also welcome the efforts to implement the
relevant national strategy, including the appointment
of women judges and their deployment in the various
regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There
have been a variety of measures aimed at ensuring that
victims have access to justice and also that they receive
adequate and appropriate care.
On another note, recent violence has worsened in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
in Kasai and other regions. There have been many
victims of this worsening violence, including the
two United Nations experts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who lost their lives. As a result, the civilian
population is faced with growing challenges, including
the risk of sexual violence in conflict. This is a risk
mostly faced by women and girls. In that respect, I
highlight the reports on rapes perpetrated by militia
against boys and girls in Kavumu in southern Kivu.
Such reports underscore the importance of ramping
up our efforts to ensure the implementation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo national strategy
to combat sexual violence, with the support of the
United Nations, and with a key role to be played by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on
all partners to make their contribution to heed the
humanitarian appeal of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to make available the necessary resources
to United Nations agencies and to civil society as they
seek to provide humanitarian aid, including to victims
of sexual violence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Egypt for organizing this briefing. I also commend the
Deputy Secretary-General for taking her important
trip to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and for her detailed briefing. We are pleased
to note that the Deputy Secretary-General seized the
opportunity of the visit to highlight the importance of
women’s role in achieving peace and development, and
even the Sustainable Development Goals.
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

We also thank Ambassador Téte António of the
Observer Mission of the African Union for his briefing.
It is evident that women and children suffer more,
are extremely vulnerable to violent extremism and are
victims of terrorism in many parts of the world most
affected by the scourge. We condemn in the strongest
terms the abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of
women and girls by extremist groups, including the
heinous activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region, particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. Indeed,
we condemn the use of women and girls as sex slaves.
In this regard, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations aimed at improving interagency coordination,
knowledge-building, advocacy and technical countrylevel support.
My delegation believes that to achieve an enduring
result in the search for workable solutions to the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict, priority must
be accorded to addressing the enabling environment
and underlying root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
hunger, human rights abuses, injustice, unemployment,
corruption, lack of inclusiveness and impunity.
Perpetrators of sexual violence must be held
accountable, but the capacity of the State to do so given
the prevalence of weak structures and institutions needs
to be addressed. Beyond the law-enforcement approach,
however, dealing with the political economy of
conflicts in a more holistic manner is crucial to finding
potential remedies to the situation of conflicts around
the world. In this regard, multilateral cooperation
should be enhanced to strengthen States’ capabilities in
order to deal with the threats posed by violent conflicts,
criminality and terrorism.
This briefing bears great relevance to the terrorist
activities of Boko Haram in the north-east region of
Nigeria, which have led to a huge displacement of about
2 million people and conflict-related violence against
women and girls that has been widely condemned.
Nigeria has always acted concertedly to ensure
accountability for sexual violence crimes. We have
also collaborated with the United Nations and other
international partners to improve service delivery and
enhance protection measures, both in communities and
in areas where women and girls seek refuge. These
efforts of the Government of Nigeria are in the context
of the great strides made by our military in degrading
Boko Haram.

S/PV. 8022

In spite of daunting challenges, Nigeria has always
been in the vanguard of promoting the involvement of
women in conflict resolution, as well as in the promotion
of peace and security. In May 2017, Nigeria launched
the revised national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions on
women, peace and security. The plan reflects our
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
children during armed conflicts and enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. We have also taken measures to
enhance the security of women and girls in the camps
for internally displaced persons so as to reduce their
vulnerability and promote their safe return to their
homes and reintegration into society.
As part of efforts to counter violent extremism,
Nigeria is taking steps to deradicalize convicted
terrorists through the development of a range of experts
in psychology and counselors to pioneer rehabilitation
efforts, and to utilize Islamic scholars to counter
extremist narratives by training them on aspects of
dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working
assiduously with the affected communities to design
economic revitalization programmes targeted at people
most affected by terrorism and extremism.
We seize this opportunity to assure the Council
that, following the release of some of the abducted
Chibok school girls, the Government has intensified
its efforts to secure the release of the remaining girls,
including freeing them from the ideological grips of
Boko Haram terrorists. Having regained their freedom,
it is equally important that they regain their self-esteem
and be assisted in returning to their families and back
to their schools. Furthermore, emergency teams of
psychosocial counselors and health professionals have
been dispatched to the north-east to assist with the
profiling of victims for appropriate therapies.
In addition, the Government of Nigeria has put
in motion legal remedies for victims of Boko Haram
terrorism in the form of rape and other sexual violence
against children, the abduction of children and other
grave violations. Other remedies of a legal and social
nature taken so far by the Federal Government
include the diligent prosecution of 203 detained Boko
Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as well
as the reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the peculiarities of each
victim of sexual violence.

17-2522523/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

The Nigerian Government has launched the
Safe Schools initiative, aimed at providing education
and piloting safe education facilities in the conflictaffected areas of the north-east. Nigeria also endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration, by which it committed to
implementing the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
Nigeria’s laws and policies on the promotion
and protection of the rights of children reflect our
commitment to the relevant international instruments
to which we are signatory. The Government is operating
an enabling environment that provides women and
children with equal opportunities, protects their rights
and facilitates their full participation in society. A
national child policy is in place to further facilitate the
actualization of the rights enshrined in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Child’s Rights Act.
The Child Rights Act, which was signed into
law in 2003, prohibits all physical and mental abuse
of children. The Government was at the vanguard of
supporting and ratifying the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa. Article 6 of the Charter sets the
minimum age for marriage at 18. The Government
has also adopted a national action plan to monitor
compliance with international human rights obligations.
Within this framework, a Human Rights Commissioner
has been appointed as Special Rapporteur on the Rights
of Children. The mandate for this position is to monitor
and assemble data on child rights abuse.
The Government has also set up agencies with a
mandate to protecting children. The National Human
Rights Commission, established in 1995 to protect and
enforce human rights in general, is very active in the
fight against child abuse. The National Agency for the.
Prohibition of Traffic in Persons works in partnership
with United Nations agencies and other Government
institutions at both the federal and state levels to
carry out the fight against trafficking in persons,
prevent trafficking, rehabilitate trafficked persons
and prosecute offenders, with particular emphasis on
trafficking of the girl child.
A national priority agenda for vulnerable children
2013-2020 has been developed as a strategic framework
to guide the multisectoral operationalization of the
Vision 20:20:20 strategies and objectives of ensuring the
protection of the most vulnerable children in Nigeria.
Funding has been made available to bolster awareness
24/26

10/08/2017

of the public. The Government has also created the
Children’s Parliament, as well as public holidays such
as Children’s Day and Day of the African Child. Several
non-governmental organizations also complement the
efforts of the Government in that regard.
The Federal Government has also signed an
agreement with the International Labour Organization
and the International Programme on the Elimination of
Child Labour to establish shelter centres to rehabilitate
trafficked children and reunite them with their families.
In addition, the Government recently adopted a child
labour policy aimed at protecting children against
all kinds of abuse in the workplace and all forms of
labour that militate against the proper development of
the child. This is in line with our approach to fighting
human trafficking, which combines law enforcement
with policies aimed at the prevention of trafficking and
the protection of victims.
The Buhari plan is the current Administration’s
comprehensive recovery blueprint, which integrates all
actors and actions into a coordinated set of activities
expected to create traction for the rapid recovery of
the north-east from the wreckage caused by the Boko
Haram insurgency.
Nigeria is aware of the challenges in the fight to
protect children and acknowledges that there is still
work to be done. The Government is firmly committed
to the task of protecting its women and children, and
counts on the continued support of the United Nations
in this regard. The Government will uphold all its
obligations under relevant international instruments
pertaining to international humanitarian law.
If there were any doubt about our commitment
to the protection of human rights, the Government, it
should now be put to rest. On 4 August, the Government
established the National Judicial Commission to look
into human rights abuses committed by military
personnel in the country. Its mandate is to, among
other things, scrutinize the compliance of the armed
forces with human rights obligations and rules of
engagement, especially in local conflict and insurgency
situations; to investigate alleged acts of violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law under
the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria of
1999, the Geneva Convention Act, the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights and other relevant laws
by the Nigerian security agenies; and to look at factors
that might be hindering the quick resolution of local
17-25225

10/08/2017

Peace and security in Africa

conflict and offer solutions on how to prevent human
rights violations in times of conflict in the future.
Nigeria commends the work of all the United
Nations agencies — including the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
Nigeria, the United Nations Development Programme,
UN-Women, UNICEF, and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
international donors — that are actively working with
Nigeria to ensure the restoration of peace, security and
development in the north-east. However, Nigeria also
believes that better the coordination and coherence of
the work of these United Nations agencies in the region
would enhance efficiency in the work being done in
Nigeria. That would achieve better results and avoid
situations where agencies work at cross-purposes.
As we speak, all the service chiefs are in the
north-east. The number of military and paramilitary
personnel have been increased in the internally
displaced persons camps and in the north-east. We
recommit to ensuring that women and children enjoy
full rights, and that those who have perpetrated sexual
violence are dealt with in accordance with our national
laws and international obligations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Secretary-General to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I want to reiterate
my deep appreciation to the Council for giving us this
opportunity to speak on this issue. It is a critical one that
strikes at the core of human rights, which are women’s
rights. It is inhumane and strips women of their dignity.
It is a scar for life and often visits families beyond that
one person, and certainly many children that are born
as a result.
In answering the question that was put forward by
the representative of France, this trip in and of itself
was really also a response to what we felt was putting
life into the just texts that the Council has adopted in
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), but really
trying to explain better what it is that we would be
looking at in countries where we want to see prevention
and sustaining peace a reality and how to make the
investments of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development a reality.
I think that in this trip it was very clear that
both Sustainable Development Goals 16 and 17 were

S/PV. 8022

critical — that without strong institutions we cannot
make the demands of those aspirations that we have
for the Agenda. It is therefore important that we begin
to think of what sort of investments are going to be
needed up front if we are to really see many national
Governments responding to closing the gap between
the reality and the aspirations. I think we got keen
insights into that issue, just as we also did with respect
to partnerships, making many frameworks we have
between the United Nations and other institutions
a reality.
I think in that regard we were trying to walk the
talk and move very quickly into seeing how, with the
African Union, we could change the narrative in making
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063
a reality. What better entry point is there for looking
at the most vulnerable populations? Which are also
the largest populations? We talk about 50 per cent of
our populations, 50 per cent of our assets that need
investments, need protecting and need their human
rights. It was wonderful to get the response that we got.
This trip was the supposed to also include a trip
to South Sudan. We were not able to go there due to
unforeseen circumstances, but with this response we
will now be able to look not only at the African region
but at other regions as well, in order to draw together
these issues, give a comprehensive view and bring to
everyone’s continuous notice the complexities and
different ranges of context, not just in the conflicts that
we have seen in Africa but also across other regions.
It is critical when we do make these trips, as we felt
very strongly in both cases, that what we see and what
we come back with needs follow-up. We lose integrity
when we return from these trips and we cannot follow up
with the promises and the commitments that were made.
In particular, I would like to thank both Governments.
In Nigeria, we heard from young girls that they
faced a challenge. While they were appreciative of the
fact that they had a camp, security and a home, they
were totally devastated by the daily situation of having
to exchange sex for food. This fact made a very powerful
impression on us. How could we let that girl go back?
Well, fortunately for us, one of the recommendations
we made was, very simply, to change the policy. The
people dealing with the distribution of food in camps
should be women, not men. One should start with that
change, and in the course of our interactions with the
Nigerian Government we were able to get it agreed to.

17-2522525/26

S/PV.8022

Peace and security in Africa

Similarly, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we heard women talk about the need not so much for
more security from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo when they returned either into host communities
or their own communities, but for more microcredit. We
could see tents where we they were using coal as fuel
for their cookstoves, which was harmful for children.
Upon our return, we were able to ask those who were
involved with the clean cookstoves programme if
they could scale-up the programme across all the
camps where this was happening, and actually replace
the stoves.
I think that these are concrete things that make a
difference when we go on a field visit, we come back
and something happens. We were also able to expand
the microcredit for those women for that period. But
so much more is needed. So I hope that every trip we

26/26

10/08/2017

make will result in commitments that become a reality
in people’s lives.
Once again, I want to say that we will revert to
members of the Council. We are committed to attaining
zero gender-based violence, particularly in conflict,
and to holding Governments and, hopefully, all those
who perpetrate these crimes to account. It is important
that this be seen as a work in progress. People live in
different realities. I think we saw immense challenges,
but also many opportunities; and we believe that,
together, we can go much further.
I would just like to underscore our appreciation to
the Council for creating more opportunities to make
this work. Council members’ visits to many countries,
including Colombia and the Lake Chad basin, have
made it possible for us to raise our ambitions in terms
of what we do.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

17-25225
