S/PRST/2012/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6760th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “ Threats to
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council acknowledges the evolving challenges and threats
to international peace and security including armed conflicts, terrorism,
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and small arms and light
weapons, transnational organized crime, piracy, drug and human trafficking.
The Council has addressed, when appropriate, related to these challenges and
threats, illicit cross-border trafficking in arms, drug trafficking, trafficking by
non-state actors in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their means of
delivery and related materials, trafficking in conflict minerals and the
movement of terrorists and their funds, in violation of UN sanctions regimes
imposed by the Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN
Charter and other decisions taken under Chapter VII, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) as well as its other relevant decisions
(hereinafter — illicit cross-border trafficking and movement). The Council is
concerned that such illicit cross-border trafficking and movement contributes
to these challenges and threats. The Council recognizes that such illicit crossborder trafficking and movement often involves cross-cutting issues, many of
which are considered by the General Assembly and other UN organs and
bodies.
“The Council notes relevant international conventions such as the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances of 1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational
organized crime of 2000 and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations
Convention against Corruption of 2003 and the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism. The Security Council recalls
the United Nations Program of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons as
well as the International Tracing Instrument and the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
12-31999 (E) 250412

*1231999*

S/PRST/2012/16

“The Security Council reaffirms the benefits of transborder
communication, international exchange and international migration. The
Security Council notes, however, that the various challenges and threats to
international peace and security posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement have increased as the world has become more interconnected. The
Security Council notes that, in a globalized society, organized criminal groups
and networks, better equipped with new information and communication
technologies, are becoming more diversified and connected in their illicit
operations, which in some cases may aggravate threats to international
security.
“The Security Council reaffirms that securing their borders is the
sovereign prerogative of Member States and, in this context, reaffirms its
commitment to the Purposes and Principles of the UN Charter, including the
principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity. The Security Council
calls on all Member States to improve border management to effectively
constrain the spread of transnational threats. The Security Council reaffirms
that Member States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any
state, and shall also give the UN every assistance in any action it takes in
accordance with the UN Charter, and shall refrain from giving assistance to
any State against which the UN is taking preventive or enforcement action.
“The Security Council acknowledges that distinct strategies are required
to address threats posed by illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
Nevertheless, the Council observes that illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement are often facilitated by organized criminal groups and networks.
The Council further notes that such illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement, which in some cases exploits similar vulnerabilities experienced by
Member States in securing their borders, can be addressed by improving
Member States’ abilities to secure their borders. The Security Council further
acknowledges the importance of adopting a comprehensive and balanced
approach, as necessary, to tackle the conditions conducive to facilitating illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, including demand and supply factors,
and underlines the importance of international cooperation in this regard.
“The Security Council calls on Member States to fully comply with
relevant obligations under applicable international law, including human rights
and international refugee and humanitarian law, relating to securing their
borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and movement, including
obligations stemming from relevant resolutions of the Security Council
adopted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. The Security Council calls on
all Member States to fully respect and implement all of their relevant
international obligations in this regard.
“The Security Council encourages Member States and relevant
organizations to enhance cooperation and strategies, as appropriate, to combat
such illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
“The Security Council encourages Member States, as well as
international organizations and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, within existing mandates, as appropriate, to enhance efforts to
assist Member States to build the capacity to secure their borders against illicit

2

12-31999

S/PRST/2012/16

cross-border trafficking and movement, upon request and by mutual
agreement, in accordance with international law. The Security Council
commends the substantial efforts already underway in this field.
“The Security Council observes that several UN entities, including
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, already offer such assistance. The
Security Council acknowledges the importance of coherent, system-wide UN
action, in order to offer coordinated responses to transnational threats,
including through the use of best practices and exchange of positive
experiences from relevant initiatives elsewhere, such as the Paris Pact
Initiative.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to submit in six
months a report providing a comprehensive survey and assessment of the UN’s
relevant work to help Member States counter illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement, as defined in the second paragraph above.”

12-31999

3
