III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Aware that the best hope for arresting the pernicious spiral
of the arms race is by the provision of alternative means of
security for nations rather than through reliance on the balance of armaments or of deterrence.
Aware further that the rational alternative means for such
security is to move towards a halt in the arms race by
developing in a parallel way the measures and modalities
for collective security as mandatorily required by the Charter
of the United Nations,
Recalling paragraph 13 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. 79 in which
it is stated that genuine and lasting peace can only be created
through the effective implementation of the security system
provided for in the Charter and the speedy and substantial
reduction of arms and armed forces by international agreement and mutual example,
Considering that it is of essential importance to create a
climate of confidence in the United Nations which will open
the way to co-operation among Member States in fulfilling
the common and basic obligations under the Charter,
Noting with satisfaction the references to statements made
by representatives of a number of Member States, including
the two major Powers, in the First Committee during the
current session of the General Assembly. indicating pos:tive
attitudes towards effective use of the United Nations in
improving the international situation and preventing war.
Reaffirming its resolution 35/ 156 J, adopted by consensus, in which, inter alia, it recommended that the main
organs of the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security should give early
consideration to the requirements for halting the arms race,
particularly the nuclear-arms race, and developing the modalities for the effective application of the system of international security provided for in the Charter.
Reiterating its request to the permanent members of the
Security Council to facilitate the work of the Council towards carrying out this essential responsibility under the
Charter,
1. Calls upon all States to take prompt action for the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/156 J.
which would render effective the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and thereby be conducive to meaningful disarmament
negotiations;
2. Deems it necessary, as a first step in this direction,
that the Security Council take the required measures towards
the implementation of Chapter VII of the Charter, which
would reinforce the foundations of peace. security and order
through the United Nations and avert the growing threat of
nuclear conflagration.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

L
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/87 C of 12 December 1977.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to initiate a
study on the relationship between disarmament and international security,
Recalling also paragraph 97 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 79 the first
special session devoted to disarmament, in which it requested the Secretary-General, with the assistance of consultant experts appointed by him, to continue the study on

75

the relationship between disarmament and international
security,
Recalling further its resolutions 34/83 A of 11 December
I979, in which it took note of the progress report of the
Secretary-General, and 35/156 E of 12 December 1980, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to submit the final
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 81
transmitting the study prepared by the Group of Experts on
the Relationship between Disarmament and International
Security,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the study on the relationship between disarmament and international security;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the Group of Experts which assisted him in the preparation of the study;
3. Commends the study and its conclusions to the attention of all Member States;
4. Invites all Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 April 1982, of their views regarding the study;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the reproduction of the study as a
United Nations publication 81 and to give it the widest possible distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the study,
together with the views of Member States, to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

36/98.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolutions 33/71 A of 14 December
1978 on military and nuclear collaboration with Israel and
34/89 of 11 December 1979 and 35/157 of 12 December
I 980 on Israeli nuclear armament,
Alarmed by the increasing evidence regarding Israel's
attempts to acquire nuclear weapons,
Noting with concern that Israel has persistently refused
to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 82 despite repeated calls by the General Assembly
and the Security Council to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Recalling Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981) of 19
June 198 I,
Recalling the resolution adopted on 12 June 198 I by the
Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency 83 and resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 adopted on 26
September 1981 by the General Conference of the Agency,
in which the Conference, inter alia, considered the Israeli
act of aggression as an attack against the Agency and its
safeguards regime and decided to suspend the provision of
any assistance to Israel,
Recalling its repeated condemnation of the nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa,
" N361597. The study was subsequently issued with the title Relationship between Disarmament and lnremarional Securitv (United Nations
publication. Sales No. E 82.IX.4)
·
"' Resolution 2373 (XXII). annex.
" See GC(XXV)/643

76

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 84 transmitting the study of the Group of Experts to Prepare a Study
on Israeli Nuclear Armament,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report on Israeli nuclear armament;
2. Expresses its deep alarm at the fact that the report
has established that Israel has the technical capability to
manufacture nuclear weapons and possesses the means of
delivery of such weapons;
3. Also expresses its deep concern that Israel has undermined the credibility of the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards, in particular by the bombing of the Iraqi
nuclear facilities which were under Agency safeguards;
4. Reaffirms that Israel's attack on the Iraqi nuclear
facilities and Israel's capability constitute a serious destabilizing factor in an already tense situation in the Middle
East, and a grave danger to international peace and security;
5. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all forms
of co-operation with Israel in the nuclear field;
6. Calls upon all States and other parties and institutions to terminate forthwith all nuclear collaboration with
Israel;
7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective
enforcement action against Israel so as to prevent it from
endangering international peace and security by its nuclearweapon capability;
8. Demands that Israel should renounce, without delay,
any possession of nuclear weapons and place all its nuclear
activities under international safeguards;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the report on Israeli nuclear armament and to
distribute it to Member States. the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations, so that the international community
and public opinion may be fully aware of the danger inherent
in Israel's nuclear capability;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
Israeli military nuclear activity and to report thereon as
appropriate;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the report on Israeli nuclear armament to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear
armament''.
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/99.

Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the
stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space

The General Assembly,
Guided by the goals of strengthening peace and international security,
Expressing the common interest of all mankind in the
further exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes for the good of all States and in the interest of developing friendly relations and mutual understanding between
them,
Conscious of the danger which would threaten mankind
if outer space became an arena for the arms race,
84
A/36/431. The study was subsequently issued with the title Studv
on Israeli Nuclear Armament (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.82.IX.2).

Desiring not to allow outer space to become an arena for
the arms race and a source of strained relations between
States,
Taking into account the draft treaty on the prohibition of
the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space, 85
submitted to the General Assembly by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and the views and comments expressed
during the consideration of this item at its thirty-sixth
session,
I. Considers it necessary to take effective steps, by
concluding an appropriate international treaty, to prevent
the spread of the arms race to outer space;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to embark
on negotiations with a view to achieving agreement on the
text of such a treaty;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Conclusion of a
treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any
kind in outer space''
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 198 I

36/100.

Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear
Catastrophe

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the foremost task of the United
Nations, born in the flames of the Second World War, has
been, is and will be to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recognizing that all the horrors of past wars and all other
calamities that have befallen people would pale in comparison with what is inherent in the use of nuclear weapons
capable of destroying civilization on earth,
Reaffirming that the universally accepted objective is to
eliminate completely the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons through the cessation of their production, followed
by the destruction of their stockpiles, and that, to this end,
priority in disarmament negotiations should be given to nuclear disarmament,
Convinced that, as the first step in this direction, the use
of nuclear weapons and the waging of nuclear war should
be outlawed,
Solemnly proclaims, on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations:
I . States and statesmen that resort first to the use of
nuclear weapons will be committing the gravest crime
against humanity.
2. There will never be any justification or pardon for
statesmen who take the decision to be the first to use
nuclear weapons.
3. Any doctrines allowing the first use of nuclear
weapons and any actions pushing the world towards a
catastrophe are incompatible with human moral standards
and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
4. It is the supreme duty and direct obligation of the
leaders of nuclear-weapon States to act in such a way as
to eliminate the risk of the outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
The nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by
joint efforts, through negotiations conducted in good faith
and on the basis of equality, having as their ultimate goal
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.

" Official Records of th,· General Assembly, Thirtv-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 128, document A/36/192, annex.
