S/2019/485

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 June 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 10 June 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
By its resolution 2452 (2019), the Security Council requested me to present a
review of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA)
within five months of the date of adoption of that resolution. The Special Political
Mission, established pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 2452 (2019), is designed
to support the implementation of the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and Ports
of Hudaydah, Salif, and Ra’s Isa, as set out in the Stockholm Agreement (see
S/2018/1134), for an initial period of six months from 16 January 2019.
The Security Council decided further that, to support the parties in
implementing their commitments in accordance with the Hudaydah Agreement,
UNMHA should undertake the following mandate:
(a) Lead and support the functioning of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, assisted by a secretariat staffed by United Nations personnel, to oversee
the governorate-wide ceasefire, the redeployment of forces and mine action
operations;
(b) Monitor the compliance of the parties with the ceasefire in Hudaydah
governorate and the mutual redeployment of forces from the city of Hudaydah and
the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa;
(c) Work with the parties so that the security of the city of Hudaydah and the
ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa is assured by local security forces in accordance
with Yemeni law;
(d) Facilitate and coordinate United Nations support to assist the parties to
fully implement the Hudaydah Agreement.
Six months since the United Nations-brokered Stockholm Agreement between
the Government of Yemen and the Houthi movement, and five mont hs since the
adoption of resolution 2452 (2019), the situation in Hudaydah continues to remain a
focus of developments in Yemen.
Establishment of the Redeployment Coordination Committee mechanism
As indicated in my report of 28 December 2018 on the status of implementation
of Security Council resolution 2451 (2018) (S/2018/1173), the United Nations worked
with the parties to establish the Redeployment Coordination Committee envisaged in
the resolution. The mechanism brings together designated representatives from each
party and associated staff under the leadership of the Head of U NMHA in his role as

19-09592 (E)

140619

*1909592*

S/2019/485

Chair of the Committee. Building on the initial work carried out by the advance team, 1
as mandated by the Council, UNMHA has focused considerable efforts on building
relationships with and confidence between the parties to ensure the effectiveness of
the Committee as a mechanism for consultation and de-escalation. To this end, since
late December 2018, the United Nations has successfully convened four joint
meetings of the Committee to discuss and agree on the modalities for monitoring t he
ceasefire, the mutual redeployment of forces and the composition of local security
forces, while UNMHA has continued to monitor the compliance of the parties with
the Hudaydah Agreement and has provided political, mediation and operational
support to the Committee and its Chair.
Reaching agreement on all aspects of the related activities has proved
challenging and the original timelines envisaged in the Hudaydah Agreement have
slipped. The Yemeni parties, however, have recognized that the timelines were
ambitious and have agreed to revise them, in coordination with the United Nations.
Both parties have repeatedly reiterated their commitment to implementing the
Hudaydah Agreement.
Since the establishment of UNMHA, there have been two joint meetings of th e
Redeployment Coordination Committee, one from 3 to 6 February 2019 2 and another
on 16 and 17 February 2019, 3 as well as extensive bilateral engagement by the Chair
of the Committee with the parties to agree on the modalities for the redeployment and
the composition of the local security forces that will secure the city and the three ports
once redeployments are completed. As a cumulative result of these activities, the
parties agreed on a framework for phase 1 of the redeployment of forces from the
three Red Sea ports and from critical parts of the city associated with humanitarian
facilities. This process saw UNMHA share a detailed concept of operations for
phase 1 with the parties on 21 March 2019, which was eventually approved on
14 April 2019.
Given the position of both parties that there should be no gap between the
implementation of phases 1 and 2, UNMHA subsequently worked to develop a
proposal for phase 2 that would lead to the demilitarization of the city of Hudaydah.
UNMHA shared a first draft of a detailed concept of operations for phase 2 with the
parties on 21 April 2019, and consultations are ongoing to finalize that plan. The
composition of local security forces is particularly salient for phase 2. Because the
matter concerns broader political questions, my Special Envoy for Yemen is
facilitating negotiations between the parties with a view to reaching an agreement on
this outstanding issue, which will subsequently be implemented through the
Redeployment Coordination Committee with the support of UNMHA.
In order to hold joint meetings of the Committee and bilateral meetings with the
Government of Yemen, Committee representatives required UNMHA to conduct
complex frontline crossings, which were facilitated by both parties. Unfortunately, on
a number of occasions, incidents were alleged or transpired during the crossing
process, which eventually led to the suspension by the Houthis of such movements.
With frontline crossings suspended, the Chair of the Committee continued to engage
bilaterally with the parties. For meetings with the representatives of the Government
__________________

See my reports on the status of implementation of Security Council resolution 2451 (2018) for
the period from 21 to 28 December 2018 (S/2018/1173) and the period from 29 December 2018
to 4 January 2019 (S/2019/11), which describe the joint meetings of the Committee held on
26 and 27 December 2018 and from 1 to 3 January 2019.
2
See www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/note-correspondents/2019-02-07/note-correspondents-meetingof-the-redeployment-coordination-committee.
3
See www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/note-correspondents/2019-02-17/meeting-of-the-redeploymentcoordination-committee.
1

2/7

19-09592

S/2019/485

of Yemen to the Committee, he was required to travel outside of Hudaydah, either to
Aden or Riyadh. He continued to advocate a return to joint meetings.
UNMHA deployment and operations
Following the adoption of resolution 2452 (2019), the Organization has been
actively working to establish and sustain UNMHA. In response, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs has worked closely with the Department of
Operational Support, the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Safety
and Security, the Office of Legal Affairs, the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen and the United Nations country team in Yemen. These
efforts have been designed to enable UNMHA to establish its capacities across
substantive, support and security components in a safe and secure manner in
Hudaydah, while working in a complementary manner with other elements of the
United Nations presence in the country.
The above notwithstanding, the mission start-up process has not been without
difficulty. The complex, austere and evolving nature of the environment in Hudaydah
has presented challenges across administrative, logistical, operational and security
issues, requiring UNMHA to retain an agile, flexible and often innovative approach
to its activities.
To this end, UNMHA has drawn on the support of the Office of the Special
Envoy and other United Nations partners, including other missions, to make the best
use of facilities, personnel and assets to launch, establish and maintain its mandated
tasks.
The Mission has only just maintained its initial operational capability to deliver
on its mandate. This coincided with the slow start with which the parties have moved
forward with the implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement.
The success of UNMHA continues to depend on the full cooperation of the
parties to ensure its rapid deployment and sustained operations, particularly during
the process of onboarding sufficient personnel and attendant supporting resources. In
this regard, the Organization has encountered significant challenges with the de facto
authorities in Sana’a on a range of administrative and bureaucratic matters required
to enable such deployments. Most issues have been resolved on a case -by-case basis,
but the operating constraints for the Mission have resulted in the loss of invaluable
time. The Organization is pursuing all avenues to overcome systematically th e
difficulties encountered, in particular those related to receiving administrative
approvals (such as visas and residency authorizations and customs clearance for
strategic assets), to ensure the timely arrival of personnel and the establishment of
adequate mission support and security elements.
Critical to the continued success of the Mission is the immediate availability of
sufficient capacities to enable staff to support and execute the core functions of the
Mission with respect to leading and supporting the Redeployment Coordination
Committee process; the conduct of planning, monitoring and reporting tasks; and
implementation of coordination and coherence functions. Recognizing the imperative
for immediate deployment to execute these core functions, the Organization drew
upon military, police and civilian personnel from Headquarters and other existing
United Nations missions, deploying, with the approval of their contributing Member
States, personnel and assets on a temporary basis. These personnel, some of whom
remain in place currently, have enabled UNMHA to launch and sustain minimum
capability during the conduct of a generation process to bring on board new,
UNMHA-specific military and police personnel, who are now entering the Mission
in increasing strength.

19-09592

3/7

S/2019/485

Owing to the nature of the required tasks, the harsh operating environment in
Hudaydah itself and the requirement for secure and sustainable life support capacities,
a range of enabling assets and resources have also been positioned to facilita te the
safe conduct of the operation, particularly during these early stages.
This includes the provision of adequate on-site medical and casualty evacuation
capacities and modalities (augmenting the United Nations country team resources
already in Hudaydah and available across Yemen), suitably robust office space and
accommodation, air and ground transportation capabilities, sufficient personal
protective equipment and effective communications assets, along with required
personnel.
This sees the Mission currently operating from a maritime vessel secured in the
port of Hudaydah, while land-based facilities are brought up to appropriate security
standards. All patrol and support activities are conducted in armoured vehicles
equipped with emergency trauma bags and with trained personnel in each convoy. All
activities are planned and coordinated with the United Nations Designated Security
Official and the Department of Safety and Security, as appropriate, along with the
requisite authorities of each party to ensure appropriate local security provisions and
deconfliction, where necessary. The effective and safe functioning of the Mission is
a key priority for the Organization and, more importantly, for the people of Yemen
themselves, who see UNMHA as a ray of hope in the process of reaching a wider
peace in the country.
Current situation
Since entering into force on 18 December 2018, the ceasefire continues to hold
in Hudaydah governorate insofar as neither side has been observed attempting any
major offensive operations to seize new territory. Nevertheless, a pattern of incidents
persists in the main hotspots (including Hali, Durayhimi, Hays and Tuhayta ’ districts),
particularly using indirect fire and sniping, often resulting in retaliatory actions
between the parties. Exchanges of direct and indirect fire are also reported in the
critical frontline areas of the city of Hudaydah: al-Sha‘b (formerly known as al-Saleh)
and July 7, both in the Hali district; and around the airport, in the Hawak district.
These incidents notwithstanding, the Mission’s presence, including through the
conduct of monitoring and presence patrols across the city of Hudaydah and the ports,
is assessed as continuing to have a tangible calming and moderating effect, while also
actively playing a role in preventing escalatory activity through its liaison role. This
is evidenced by an overall reduction in violence, a decrease in the number of reported
civilian casualties, a growing number of returnees to the area and more observed
economic activity in Hudaydah since the establishment of UNMHA.
After several months of impasse, the Mission initiated a redeployment from the
ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa in early May, based on a previous offer from
the Houthi movement, with a view to kick-starting the redeployment process.
This was undertaken with the aim of facilitating the establishment of a leading
role for the United Nations in supporting the Yemen Red Sea Ports Corporation in
managing the ports and enhancing the monitoring role o f the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism in accordance with the Hudaydah Agreement.
The full implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement will play an important role in
ensuring effective humanitarian access into Yemen, where many millions co ntinue to
require life-saving assistance, the vast majority of which transits through Hudaydah.
In terms of operational activities on the ground, from 11 to 14 May 2019, Houthi
military forces redeployed from the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra ’s Isa. Their
movements were monitored by UNMHA in accordance with the Hudaydah
Agreement, and the Mission continues to conduct regular monitoring of the ports and
4/7

19-09592

S/2019/485

the surrounding areas, supported by elements of the Yemeni Mine Action Centre, who
are in place to address concerns with mines and explosive remnants of war. This
redeployment is significant as it is the first practical step on the ground towards the
broader mutual redeployments to be undertaken by both parties as agreed in the
concept of operations for phase 1, to which both Yemeni parties continue to express
commitment.
Additionally, as part of its mandated tasks, UNMHA has served as a liaison
between humanitarian actors and the military leadership of the parties in Hudaydah
to support planning, coordination and conduct of humanitarian tasks. For example,
on 26 February 2019, UNMHA facilitated a frontline crossing – in coordination with
both parties, who demined and removed obstacles to allow the passage of a
multi-agency humanitarian team – to the Red Sea Mills, where 51,000 metric tons of
grain are stored, enough to feed more than 3.7 million people for a month. This was
the first time since September 2018 that the United Nations had been able to access
this critical humanitarian facility.
In all these endeavours, close cooperation between the Office of the Special
Envoy and UNMHA has been critical to ensure coherence and coordination between
each operational and political step within a highly complex environment. The
continued lockstep coordination between the Office and UNMHA will be integral to
effective United Nations support to the parties going forward. In this regard, my
Special Envoy and the Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee continue
to work together and with the parties to finalize the outstanding negotiations to allow
for the full implementation of phases 1 and 2 of the Hudaydah Agreement, as well as
to resolve the issue of local security forces. Indeed, an agreement on local security
forces is a key determining factor to move forward with the implementation of
phases 1 and 2; without such an agreement, it will be extremely challenging to make
further progress.
In recent weeks, tensions and distrust between the parties have increased. The
parties have traded mutual accusations that the other seeks to abandon the Hudaydah
Agreement and undermine United Nations-led efforts to achieve peace. There have
even been allegations of bias against my Special Envoy.
Let me reiterate that the United Nations, acting pursuant to the Char ter of the
United Nations and with impartiality, will continue to do its utmost to support the
parties to deliver on their commitments, as set out in the Agreement. Success in this
regard will require the good will and flexibility of the parties to reach a sensible
compromise.
Outlook
Recent tensions and hardening rhetoric in the Gulf region threaten to implicate
Yemen, which risks deepening and prolonging the civil war. As I have stated
repeatedly, the war can only be solved through political dialogue .
The humanitarian costs of continuing the war – now in its fifth year – are too
high to allow the fragile gains achieved through the Hudaydah Agreement to be
squandered. Importantly, the port of Hudaydah, a vital lifeline, remains open and
operational for both humanitarian and commercial imports; however, maintaining the
international consensus and Security Council unity to prevent a battle for the city of
Hudaydah and the three Red Sea ports is of utmost importance.
The situation remains fragile, and the implementation of the Hudaydah
Agreement, although slow, is a litmus test for the readiness of the parties to further
engage pragmatically to achieve a negotiated political solution to end the conflict.
Allow me to emphasize that the responsibility for the full and timely implementation
19-09592

5/7

S/2019/485

of the Hudaydah Agreement lies squarely with the parties. Their political will remains
the main driver of whether the coming period will see further implementation of the
Hudaydah Agreement or a return to open conflict in Hudaydah and humanitarian
catastrophe. The Hudaydah Agreement itself provides the necessary latitude to
account for the main concerns of both parties, but it requires realistic and pragmatic
compromise within this framework to see its intent realized fully. I count on the good
will and flexibility of the parties to reach agreement on the outstanding issues in the
immediate future, and their commitment to continue to dialogue with both the Mission
and each other to achieve this. In this regard, the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and UNMHA will do their part to support the parties and
proceed with the full implementation of phases 1 and 2.
Even with the best of intentions, recent history has shown our collective
expectations will need to be tempered. If the parties reach agreement on local security
forces and approve the concept of operations for phase 2, meaning that full
implementation of phases 1 and 2 can commence, we can anticipate the need for a
lengthy commitment to complete fully the clearance of military manifestations and
likely even longer for the clearance of mines and explosive remnants of war.
Such complex tasks, requiring in the latter case adherence to internationally
recognized standards, will necessarily last beyond the length of time required for the
redeployment of military forces. Successful implementation and monitoring of each
of these steps can only serve to increase the confidence of the parties and the Security
Council in the viability of the Hudaydah Agreement and a broader political process,
which remains the ultimate goal.
As such, we should all recall that the negotiations required to reach this point
have been enormously exacting. The work of the United Nations has been made even
more difficult as a result of the challenges of organizing direct, face-to-face meetings
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and conducting such activities in the
context of the ongoing conflict outside of Hudaydah. The United Nations will
continue to play its part.
However, ultimately success depends on the willingness of the parties to follow
through with the implementation of their political commitments as contained in the
Hudaydah Agreement.
Observations
Based on the assessment of the United Nations, the mandate entrusted to
UNMHA by the Security Council in its resolution 2452 (2019) continues to be
achievable and appropriate for the situation on the ground. The proposed composition
and operational aspects of UNMHA set out in the annex to my letter dated
31 December 2018 to the President of the Council (S/2019/28), which were approved
by the Council, are also assessed as remaining valid, while requiring significant
flexibility in their application.
In essence, based on the time it has taken to reach where we are today, the
Mission has only just commenced the physical delivery of its mandate, having had to
spend considerable time establishing the necessary conditions, agreements and
mechanisms for the implementation of its mandate. With the stretching of the timeline
for the implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement, UNMHA has necessarily had to
adjust its planned activities and objectives accordingly. For the sake of the Yemeni
people, we all remain focused on achieving the most rapid progress possible, yet our
global experience in supporting the implementation of peace agreements at their
outset would advise patience and fortitude to stay the course. The progress made thus
far, and the absence of a return to open conflict, give sufficient reason to hope that
the parties will deliver on their commitments, and that a long-awaited pivot to peace
6/7

19-09592

S/2019/485

will be made. In this context, the expectations for the Mission remain high. Despite
slow progress and various obstacles, UNMHA has established itself effectively and is
functioning and delivering on its mandate.
Thanks to the commitment of troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Mission is scaling up to deploy additional monitors. The initial months since the
adoption of resolution 2452 (2019) have been utilized to develop relationships with
the parties, solidify vital procedures and processes, ensure that strategic assets are in
place, and enable the Mission to be best placed to respond to the redeployments when
they occur.
The Mission is focused on supporting the Redeployment Coordination
Committee to oversee the ceasefire, the redeployment of forces and mine action
operations, and on facilitating and coordinating United Nations support to assist the
parties to fully implement the Hudaydah Agreement. Furthermore, it serves as a
credible and effective conflict prevention tool at a critical entry point for humanitarian
assistance to Yemen and as an impartial arbiter of conditions on the ground. Through
these functions, UNMHA plays a key role in building the foundation for sustainable
peace in Hudaydah, upon which a wider effort to reach a negotiated political
settlement in Yemen can be based.
The conditions on the ground and resulting requirements of a United Nations
role in Hudaydah may evolve over time. This may present an opportunity for
adjustments and changes in how the Organization responds. With the understanding
that the Security Council intends to extend the mandate of UNMHA for a further six
months, I propose that another review of UNMHA be undertaken three months prior
to the expiry of its mandate, for consideration by the Council, to ensure that the
Mission remains appropriately configured and tasked to be able to respond to
evolving developments on the ground. Until that time, the United Nations will
continue its work through UNMHA, and through my Special Envoy, to reach a
negotiated political settlement to the wider conflict in Yemen.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-09592

7/7
