S/PV.8342

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8342nd meeting

Thursday, 6 September 2018, 9.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cohen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Marlin-Romeo
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (S/2018/795)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27717 (E)
*1827717*

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 9.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2018/795)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Haiti to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/795, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the United States, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening today’s meeting on Haiti. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
I am happy to present to the Security Council
the second of four reports (S/2018/795) requested
by the Security Council during the current mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which ends on 15 April 2019,
in accordance with resolution 2410 (2018). I will also
provide an update on developments in Haiti since the
report was published, on 30 August.
(spoke in English)
The report reviews the Mission’s work with
the Government, the United Nations country team
and external partners to prepare, in accordance
with resolution 2410 (2028), the transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in the
country beginning no sooner than 15 October 2019. The
focus of MINUJUSTH remains centred on mandate
2/18

06/09/2018

implementation, particularly in the priority areas
identified by the benchmarked exit strategy, which
weaves together a framework of the evolving conditions
under which the current United Nations configuration
can confidently transform into a non-peacekeeping
presence in the country. Following the report of the
Secretary-General of June 2018 (S/2018/527), which
presented the 11 benchmarks to the Council, this report
provides a measure of their implementation through
an assessment of 46 distinct indicators. To that end,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Mission have jointly engaged in an exercise to set up a
more comprehensive data-collection mechanism and to
track the progress of each indicator since the Council
took note of the benchmarks three months ago.
The visual infographics that are being distributed
to Council members are the result of that exercise. The
dashboard, which presents a diverse and representative
sample of the main areas covered by the benchmarks,
is not meant to replace the comprehensive overview
that the benchmarks in their entirety reflect, but rather
gives a quick, general overview of the progress made
thus far.
The traffic-light matrix included in annex I to
the report provides a more comprehensive picture
depicting the trend in the realization of each of the 46
indicators. Both visual aids tell the same story — there
has been some progress, albeit uneven, in most areas.
Nonetheless, several challenges remain and dedicated
intervention to spur progress is required for all targets
to be achieved by October 2019. Constant efforts
must be undertaken, for example, to ensure that the
development plan of the Haitian National Police is fully
implemented, so that both the professionalism and the
number of police officers continue to improve. As the
dashboard shows, the rate of officers per 1,000 citizens
has slightly dropped, to 1.32, for several reasons,
including resignations. Members can see the three
elements reflected on the visual aid, with regard to the
police. I mentioned the first element as an example.
The indicators are also a useful tool for the
Mission and highlight the areas in which more
focused strategies and renewed efforts are necessary
to address the thornier issues. Many of those will
require political, rather than technical, work to make
a difference. In that regard, it is important to point
out that, in consultation with the Haitian authorities,
MINUJUSTH has developed a political strategy that
seeks to help build momentum and strengthen political
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8342

buy-in from Haitian stakeholders, through a concrete
course of action within a clear timeline, in support of
efforts by the Haitian authorities to achieve key targets
under the benchmarks and in close cooperation with
other international partners.

Haitian National Police. Regrettably, armed gangs are
still well known for the pressure they exert on politicians
to negotiate access to areas under their control during
the election campaign period, and, in many cases, even
their attempts to influence elections in their favour.

One such critical area on which progress on several
benchmarks hinges is the adoption and promulgation
of key rule-of-law legislation. While the Mission
is engaged in providing support to Parliament to
implement a road map towards the adoption of the draft
penal code and the draft code of criminal procedure,
and is encouraging legislators to finalize and adopt
the draft law on legal aid, the drafting of legislation to
enhance police work and improve the functioning of the
penitentiary administration has yet to commence. I am
referring to the first visual aid pertaining to legislation,
covered in benchmark 1 and indicator 1.

The successful implementation of the Haitian
National Police 2017-2021 development plan, with
the support of MINUJUSTH, will enable the Haitian
Government to gradually continue to assume its
security responsibilities. Although an evaluation of the
first year of implementation of the plan, to be presented
to donors on 10 September, shows encouraging signs
of progress, it also reveals gaps that must be addressed
quickly to ensure that progress continues. They include
the lack of sustained efforts by national authorities
and international partners to provide the necessary
financial resources to support the full implementation
of the plan. In that regard, the ongoing commitment of
the country’s leaders and the international community
will be essential as the transition progresses.

Similarly, indicators, such as the availability of the
national action plan for human rights and human rights
obligations, shown on the previous slide, are covered
in benchmark 9 and indicator 1. The nomination of the
nine members of a Permanent Electoral Council, which
is the last visual aid on the dashboard, is covered in
benchmark 11 and indicator 1. The representation of
women in key State institutions, such as the Court of
Cassation and the Superior Council of the Judiciary,
have not been achieved. That slide refers to judicial
appointments, with three methods to monitor the
gender situation, covered in benchmarks 2 (a), 2 (b) and
2 (c). Targets on oversight and accountability bodies
are also lagging, especially those pertaining to judicial
inspection, covered in benchmark 5 and indicator 1.
They are critical to the strengthening of the judiciary,
and, once achieved, would ensure a speedier reduction
in the length of prolonged pretrial detention, on which
progress is so badly needed. It is covered in benchmark
1 and indicator 8.
(spoke in French)
With regard to security, while the number of
murders fell during the period under review, covered
in benchmark 6 and indicator 3, significant threats
persist, including an increase in gang-related crimes.
Armed gangs in Martissant and other areas south
of Port-au-Prince — covered in benchmark 6 and
indicator 5 — seeking to expand their illegal operations
and areas of influence in order to generate greater
resources and position themselves before the next
legislative elections, in 2019, remain a challenge for the

In close consultation with its national counterparts,
MINUJUSTH has developed an integrated security
transition plan, as requested by the Council. The
plan will guide the first phase of a responsible and
effective withdrawal of the United Nations police
presence in Haiti, in accordance with resolution 2410
(2018) — from seven to five formed police units
(FPUs), between 15 October and 15 April 2019. One
unit, with special weapons and tactics capacity, will
be transferred to Port-au-Prince, while two formed
police units will cease operations by early March 2019
in anticipation of the repatriation of their personnel
and equipment by the end of the same month. The
regions from which the FPUs will be withdrawn have
been selected on the basis of their respective levels of
stability, improved security situation, progress made
in achieving target indicators and the need to ensure
the smooth functioning of MINUJUSTH operations
until October 2019. Mitigation measures are being put
in place to accompany the withdrawal, in consultation
with the Haitian authorities.
Above and beyond clear, well-crafted plans, the
situation on the ground must be closely monitored.
Today marks exactly two months after the beginning of
the violence that broke out on the streets of Haiti amid
protests against the abolition of long-standing subsidies
for oil products, which has led to an increase of 38 per
cent in the price of petrol and diesel and 51 per cent in
that of kerosene. Such a flare-up in violence, not seen

18-277173/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

in Haiti for several years, highlights the volatility of
the current security situation. Since the July unrest, the
authorities have not sought to address the root causes
of the unstable social conditions, while the process by
Parliament to ratify the policy statement of the appointed
Prime Minister and the assumption of office by the
new Government remain pending. Resentment among
the people is fuelled by a steady stream of revelations
about the alleged benefits of State officials and the
debate surrounding the questionable use of PetroCaribe
funds over the past 10 years. The risk of major unrest
remains at a heightened level, given the combination
of political and socioeconomic triggers without losing
sight of the possibility of natural disasters during the
current hurricane season.
(spoke in English)
Time is of the essence to make concrete progress
on MINUJUSTH’s mandate implementation through
the 11 benchmarks acknowledged by the Council.
Together, MINUJUSTH, the country team, the
Government of Haiti and other partners will need to
redouble efforts to make up for the time lost because of
the challenges resulting from the events of 6 to 8 July,
given the time-bound nature of the mandate and the
transition process. Those are all challenges that must
be addressed by a fully functioning Government,
the forthcoming establishment of which presents an
invaluable opportunity to reset the dynamics among
national actors, reinvigorate the national sector-based
dialogue and catalyse the devising and adoption of a
new governance and stability pact. In that regard,
we welcome the announcement by Prime Ministerdesignate Jean-Henri Céant of the proposed members
of his ministerial Cabinet. A new Government and the
leadership of the newly appointed Head of MINUJUSTH
and Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, who is here with us today,
should create renewed momentum in our partnership
with Haiti, the strength of which is essential to the
achievement of our transition targets. Ms. La Lime,
who assumed her functions and began her in-briefing
in New York this week, will deploy to Port-au-Prince
next week. We hope that the Security Council and the
friends of Haiti will continue to provide strong support
for their endeavours.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
4/18

06/09/2018

I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Leona Marlin-Romeo,
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten.
Ms. Marlin-Romeo (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to express its sincere
thanks to Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita for her excellent briefing on
the situation in Haiti. We are pleased by the attendance
of Special Representative Helen La Lime. We warmly
welcome her appointment and wish her good luck in
executing her duties.
I am particularly pleased to be here today.
Sint Maarten, a small island developing State and
autonomous country in the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
is the proud home to more than 118 distinct nationalities.
One of the largest of those is the Haitian diaspora,
numbering more than 1,000 persons. With such strong
social ties, the events in Haiti are very much felt at
home. As part of the Caribbean region, we also share
some of Haiti’s vulnerabilities to natural disasters and
climate change. Today marks the one-year anniversary
of Hurricane Irma, the strongest Atlantic hurricane
on record. Let me commemorate here the people who
passed away or were injured, those who lost their
homes and livelihoods and those who today continue to
rebuild their lives — not only in Sint Maarten, but also
in neighbouring Caribbean countries. Throughout the
region, work remains under way to improve resilience
and ensure a full recovery from its devastating impact.
Our national recovery and resilience plan will include
institutional reform and capacity-building.
We are discussing the situation in Haiti today
against the background of the benchmarked two-year
exit strategy to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence. For that transition to happen successfully, a
further strengthening of the rule of law is paramount.
The rule of law is the bedrock of any just, prosperous
and peaceful society. It is an element of trust for both the
population and investors, and it helps cushion external
and internal shocks, which Haiti recurrently undergoes.
Sint Maarten, as a Caribbean country in the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, recognizes that challenge. Over the
past few years, Haiti has made significant progress in
difficult circumstances, but, as the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/795) indicates, substantial
work remains to be done.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
encourages the Government of Haiti to continue
institutional reform, strengthen rule-of-law institutions
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

and improve respect for human rights. That means
increased engagement by the Government with
MINUJUSTH in all those areas, but it also means
providing the necessary political, legislative and
budgetary support. One important dimension in that
regard is judicial reform. To that end, the Parliament
needs to swiftly adopt both the criminal code and the
code of criminal procedure.
The rule of law also requires effective and
accountable security institutions, in particular police and
correctional facilities. The outbreak of violence in July
serves as a reminder that the security situation in Haiti
continues to be fragile, and it could be challenged again
in the coming months. It is of paramount importance
that the Haitian National Police improve its ability
to manage such threats and shore up the trust of the
Haitian people in its performance. Particular attention
should be accorded to the reported increase in gang
activities and any perceived vulnerabilities following
the scaling down of the presence of formed police
units in two areas. We commend Haiti on recent steps
taken in cooperation with MINUJUSTH to increase the
capacity of its national police. In that regard, I would
also like to highlight two very positive developments:
the increasing number of women recruited and the
specialized office for sexual violence crime, which has
been embedded within the judicial police directorate.
With regard to sexual-based violence we welcome the
initiatives undertaken to increase awareness, although
the noted underreporting remains worrisome. It is
essential that perpetrators of those serious crimes
are prosecuted.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
thorough report of the Secretary General, which
transparently measures the level of progress made
with regard to the Mission’s mandate against the
previously elaborated benchmarks. We also appreciate
the capacity assessment, security transition plan and
mitigating measures that MINUJUSTH has drafted and
identified. All that should ensure a robust framework
for the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence, thereby leading to a responsible withdrawal
based on the situation on the ground. The Government
of Haiti, the Mission and the United Nations country
team should continue to work closely together towards
achieving that. The coming period will be crucial in
that regard. We wholeheartedly support the SecretaryGeneral’s urgent call to redouble efforts to ensure
attaining the benchmarks.

S/PV. 8342

As a close neighbour to Haiti, Sint Maarten and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly support
Haitian aspirations to achieving peace, justice and
development. The necessary foundations for that are
clear — a strengthening of the rule of law, including by
increasing the police, justice and corrections capacity, a
swift implementation of priority actions and increased
respect for human rights. To that end, the Government
of Haiti should take full advantage of the presence of
MINUJUSTH until its exit, and of the United Nations
country team thereafter. The Kingdom of Netherlands
will continue to support the United Nations-committed
work in Haiti.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for her
enlightening briefing.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is doing excellent work by
providing support to the Haitian authorities in a country
where the security, economic, social and environmental
contexts remain fragile. The protests that took place in
July, which prompted the Security Council to request
the parties to restore calm, have sorely tested the Haitian
National Police and proved the importance of pursuing
and stepping up efforts to achieve lasting stability
in Haiti, in particular by building the capacity of the
Haitian National Police, together with MINUJUSTH.
That awareness and, in particular, its translation into
action are even more important as we move towards
transition through an exit strategy that will begin on
the ground with the withdrawal of two police units by
15 April next year.
In that context, I would like to underscore three
points that are critical to consolidating the rule of law,
without which there will be no lasting stability.
First, with regard to the Haitian National
Police — one of the pillars of stability — we welcome
the strengthening of the national police force, which
now has more than 15,000 officers. In a volatile security
context, marked by the presence of criminal gangs in
several regions of the country, it is those officers who
are helping to build the rule of law on the ground. France
welcomes the support provided by MINUJUSTH in that
area, in situations that are at times dangerous, and calls
on the Haitian authorities to take full responsibility for
managing public disturbances ahead of the Mission’s
departure. In order to ensure the long-term effectiveness

18-277175/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

and resilience of law enforcement, France urges the
Haitian authorities to avoid politicizing the National
Police. As seen in the past, politicization would be
incompatible with the lasting stability for which we
and the Haitians are striving. It is essential to put in
place recruitment procedures based on professional
merit, neutrality and impartiality that meet rule-oflaw criteria.
Secondly, concerning justice, without which there
can be no political legitimacy, it is now up to Haiti
to pursue, in line with its national plan, all avenues
for improving the judicial system established by
MINUJUSTH, including issues related to the efficiency
of the criminal justice system and detention conditions
in prisons. It is therefore crucial to build the trust of the
Haitians in the capacity and willingness of the judicial
system to fight crime. At times it is said that this goal
can wait, on the grounds that priority should be given
to economic development. Nothing could be further
from the truth. Equitable and sustainable development
depends essentially on building the rule of law under
which all economic actors can enjoy the legal certainty
that encourages them to invest — that is, to build the
future of their nation. Furthermore, there can be no
economic development without resolute action to fight
corruption. France therefore encourages the Haitian
authorities to continue their efforts in that direction and
to do their utmost to bring those responsible to justice
and eradicate the problem.
Lastly, in connection with the issue of justice I just
addressed, it is essential to pursue efforts in the area
of respect for human rights in order to assure Haitians
of respect for their fundamental rights. That is a
prerequisite for the stability of Haiti and the well-being
of the Haitian people. France calls for continued efforts
to strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson for
Human Rights and to consolidate the implementation
of the 2014 strategic plan, in particular by appointing
a high-level focal point in the Government. France also
calls on Haiti to reduce the number of detainees held
in pretrial detention for more than two years, improve
detention conditions and launch fully independent
investigations into human rights violations committed
by law enforcement. It is also essential that transitional
justice mechanisms be put in place to shed light on
massive human rights violations committed in the past.
With regard to that and other issues, France expects the
Haitian authorities to redouble their efforts ahead of the
transition period and the drawdown of MINUJUSTH.
6/18

06/09/2018

The United Nations has taken action, as expected
by the international community, in particular after
the tragic earthquake in 2010. As we approach a new
phase in the relationship between Haiti and the United
Nations, France strongly encourages the Haitian
authorities to make the most of MINUJUSTH — now
headed by Ms. La Lime, whom I wish every success
in her work — in order to lay the foundation for a
successful transition.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Leona Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister
of Sint Maarten. I wish her a pleasant stay in New York.
Through you, Mr. President, allow me to extend our
sincerest thanks to the delegation of the United States for
having included this item on the agenda for the month
of September. We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
her detailed and informative briefing, as well as for her
important role and achievements in Haiti. My delegation
welcomes the appointment on 1 August of Ms. Helen
Meagher La Lime as the new Special Representative
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We trust that
her academic background and experience will greatly
assist her in her duties.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following developments in Haiti and notes the ongoing
efforts of its Government, the United Nations and
partners to address the country’s challenges and best
promote the sustainable development of Haitian society
as a whole. We are deeply concerned about the events
of early July — the street protests in Port-au-Prince and
other areas of the country as a result of an increase in
fuel prices. We deplore the fact that those protests led to
loss of life and caused considerable collateral damage.
The peaceful manifestation of dissent by citizens must
respect the laws of the country so that those involved do
not harm those who do not support them. In that regard,
we welcome President Jovenel Moïse’s praiseworthy
position and his initiative to eliminate subsidies on oil
products, as well as his subsequent appeal to citizens to
remain calm and return to their homes.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea commends the
visit in May by members of the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, who had
the opportunity to meet with President Moïse, other
political actors and representatives of civil society and
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

development agencies operating in the country. They
discussed socioeconomic issues, development priorities
and the rule of law, inter alia. We are confident that
such meetings will serve to promote the sustainable
development that the Haitian people need.
We note the valuable work of the legislature, as
evidenced by its adoption of key bills, such as that of
access for persons with disabilities to buildings and
facilities; the establishment of a fund for persons with
disabilities; as well as the creation, organization and
functioning of the National Council on Legal Aid,
among others. We believe that the vision to better
integrate persons with disabilities demonstrates that the
political will exists to extend the development of Haiti
to all social strata. Similarly, we welcome the support
of UNICEF for the construction of a juvenile court,
which will open before the end of the year. We believe
that it is a good justice initiative that will strengthen
the rule of law.
We commend the United Nations for its enhanced
efforts to eradicate cholera in Haiti. There has been a
steady decline in the number of cholera cases since the
end of 2016, and that trend should continue for the rest
of the year.
I wish to conclude by expressing my support
for, and gratitude to, the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti for its efforts. I call on all State
institutions in Haiti — the Government, Parliament,
the courts, the national police and civil society — to
collaborate closely with President Jovenel Moïse and
to support him in his reform agenda with a view to
promoting the sustainable development of Haiti, which
absolutely requires upholding the law, respect for human
rights, good governance, respect for State authority and
the strengthening of Haiti’s legal institutions.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her objective
and comprehensive briefing and for her valuable
contribution to today’s deliberations. We also commend
her able team for its effective work. We welcome the
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten and the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to the Chamber.
Back in April, the Security Council voted to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for one year (see
S/PV.8226). We would like to take this opportunity
to commend the Mission’s work in launching a
number of important projects and initiatives, inter

S/PV. 8342

alia, supporting the rule of law, contributing to the
continuing development of the Haitian National Police
and protecting human rights.
Kazakhstan commends the efforts undertaken
by President Moïse and his Government to promote
stability, security, economic development and social
changes in the country. The Haitian Government’s
reiterated call for the need to more closely align
international development assistance with those
national priorities is commendable.
At the same time, while recognizing the significant
progress achieved in improving the political and security
environment, some key issues have yet to be addressed
in a number of priority areas, such as fighting against
cholera, the severe overcrowding of prisons, enacting
anti-corruption measures and ensuring financial and
economic stability, food security and the stabilization
of the humanitarian situation.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s observation
in his latest report (S/2018/795) that the violent events
of July underscored the importance of building broadbased political support to implement key economic
reforms, which are basic prerequisites for the long-term
stability of Haiti.
Against that background, the joint efforts of the
international community to achieve progress will
be essential to consolidating the stability gains and
establishing a strong foundation for long-term political
stability, security and development. Kazakhstan
encourages the Government to foster greater
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
the Caribbean Community and the Organization
of American States, with a view to identifying and
leveraging new opportunities for partnership.
As the United Nations system prepares for a
smooth and effective transition towards sustainable
development, we also call for the different United
Nations entities on the ground and the Headquarters
to continue working as One United Nations through a
more integrated and coordinated approach.
In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
Government, the Mission, the United Nations country
team and all international and regional partners must
continue to work together to plan for the transition
and beyond. It will be essential to anticipate, address
and mitigate all challenges that may emerge from

18-277177/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
comprehensive and illuminating briefing of Ms. Bintou
Keita. We would like to welcome the appointment
of Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti and wish her every success. We also welcome
the Prime Minister of Sint Maarten.
Three months ago, we adopted resolution 2410
(2018), which extends the Mission’s mandate until
April 2019 and lays the groundwork for ensuring the
transition to a post-peacekeeping presence by the
United Nations system in the country. To that end,
we wish to stress the importance of the goals and the
46 indicators proposed by the Secretary-General to
monitor the progress and effectiveness of the transition
promoted by the Mission, the Government of Haiti and
the United Nations country team.
However, we believe that much remains to
be done to achieve an effective an transition. The
violent demonstrations in July and the subsequent
resignation of Prime Minister Lafontant, as noted by
Ms. Keita, reflect the volatility of the situation and the
precariousness of the balance required for the political,
economic and social consolidation of the country.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Jean Henry
Céant as the new Prime Minister. We look forward to
his prompt ratification by Parliament and the formation
of a new Government. We also stress the need for
Parliament to speed up the process of adopting the
criminal code and the criminal procedural code, as
well as the urgency of constituting the Permanent
Electoral Council.
In the area of security, on the one hand, we are
concerned about the increase in gang-related violence
and violent protests; on the other, we highlight the
important programmes to reduce communal violence,
and in particular the work of mobile teams and the
implementation of quick-impact projects.
We also stress the importance of the Mission’s
support for the national police. However, we are
concerned about reports of human rights violations by
law enforcement agencies and the lack of investigations,
which favours impunity and limits access to justice. We
8/18

06/09/2018

hope that the completion of the first annual evaluation
of the strategic development plan of the national police,
carried out with the assistance of the Mission, will
make it possible to improve capacities to defend and
promote human rights.
In the justice sector, we are concerned about the
persistence of prolonged pretrial detentions and prison
overcrowding. We therefore appreciate the growing
number of legal cases and the Mission’s assistance
with the penitentiary system. We also welcome the
appointment of the Ministry of Justice as the new
focal point for human rights, and we hope that it
will soon be formalized. We also look forward to the
speedy ratification of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, which has been pending since its signature
in 2013.
We consider it essential to remedy the problems
of overlapping functions with the Ministry of Justice
and to speed up the appointment of judges in order to
ensure the efficient functioning of the justice system.
We believe that the draft strategic plan of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary should serve those objectives.
Additionally, we would like to highlight the
renovation of the headquarters of the unit to combat
sexual crimes, thanks to Norway’s cooperation, as
well as the increase in the number of investigations.
To that end, we emphasize that due attention to
victims and access to justice require psychological and
medical assistance.
Those are some of the areas in which the
Government of Haiti needs to redouble its efforts in
order to achieve the goals set within the framework of
the Mission’s exit strategy.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s commitment
and support for the efforts of the Haitian people and the
Government to build sustainable peace.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/795) on the discharge of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), pursuant to the relevant
recommendations set out resolution 2410 (2018). We
thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for her detailed briefing
on recent developments in Haiti and the activities of
MINUJUSTH during the period under review.
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Côte d’Ivoire is very concerned about developments
in Haiti, characterized by the recent social protests that
led to the loss of human life and significant material
damage. My country condemns those unfortunate
events, which undermine the rebuilding process
and exacerbate the living conditions of the Haitian
population, which aspires to peace, stability and
development. In the light of the Secretary-General’s
report, my delegation will focus on three issues — the
sociopolitical situation, the economic situation and the
exit strategy.
On the political front, the situation in Haiti remains
worrisome due to the persistence of socio-political
tensions. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on all stakeholders
to act with restraint and respect the rule of law. It also
urges them to engage in an inclusive political dialogue
to address the major challenges facing the country. In
that regard, it welcomes the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in providing
consensual responses to the social challenges raised by
the rising price of oil.
My delegation also welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Jean Henry Céant as Prime Minister in early
August. It looks forward to the approval of his
appointment by Parliament, as well as the formation
of a Government whose mission will be to lead Haiti
towards the consolidation of peace and stability.
My delegation believes that the achievement of
these objectives should take into account the following
aspects: the strengthening of cooperation between the
executive branch and Parliament; the fight against
corruption; reform of the texts governing political
parties; the need for the Government, the various
political parties and members of civil society to
overcome their political differences; the adoption of
a governance or stability pact, which should result
from the national sector-based dialogue and encourage
all relevant actors and institutions to support the
implementation of agreed political, economic and
social objectives.
My country also calls on the international
community to support all efforts to promote dialogue
in Haiti in order to create conditions favourable to
the holding of peaceful, credible and transparent
parliamentary and local elections in October 2019.
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Haitian authorities to fulfil their
obligations with a view to guaranteeing the success of
the electoral process.

S/PV. 8342

With regard to the difficult economic situation in
Haiti, my delegation urges the Haitian authorities to
take appropriate measures to create a climate of trust
between the population and national institutions and to
reassure investors in order to mobilize the financing
necessary to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. To that end, the Government of Haiti should
adopt legislative reforms and implement programmes
and projects that address the immediate and long-term
needs of the population.
Finally, under the post-crisis strategy, my
delegation welcomes the commitment of MINUJUSTH,
the United Nations country team and all other partners
working with the people and Government of Haiti to
build peace, stability and development of Haiti. My
delegation MINUJUSTH welcomes, in that regard, the
actions successfully carried out by the Government
of Haiti with the support of MINUJUSTH, including
the mitigation measures taken to accompany the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission, prevent a
security vacuum and ensure a smooth transition in the
departments concerned with the strengthening of the
capacities of the Haitian National Police, as well as the
intensification of the community violence reduction
programme; the finalization of the security transition
plan in anticipation of the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH,
taking into account the risks and national capacities to
respond adequately to security needs; the development
of the joint resource mobilization strategy to support
the implementation of strategic priorities, taking into
account the requirements of transition planning.
My delegation also welcomes the results achieved
with respect to respect for the rule of law and the
promotion of gender and human rights, including
the improvement of the detention conditions of the
prison population.
The success of the MINUJUSTH exit strategy
will inevitably involve close cooperation and the
harmonization of priorities among the various
stakeholders to build and consolidate Haitian public
institutions. My delegation therefore calls on the
Government of Haiti to collaborate fully with the
United Nations so as to ensure the success of the
previously identified priority tasks in order to achieve
a smooth and efficient transition without a United
Nations peacekeeping presence.
In that regard, my country urges the Haitian
authorities to take all measures necessary to meet the

18-277179/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

persistent challenges, including the capacity building
of the Haitian National Police and the pursuit of reform
in all rule-of-law sectors, including human rights and
criminal justice reforms. It also encourages the Haitian
authorities to take steps to implement the principle of
accountability for the perpetrators of proven violations
of human rights.
In conclusion, my delegation congratulates all
United Nations staff who work tirelessly to strengthen
peace and development of Haiti. We wish Ms. Helen
Meagher La Lime, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of MINUJUSTH,
every success in her new duties.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her briefing on
the latest events in the Republic of Haiti and on the
activities of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We also welcome the
Prime Minister of Saint Maarten.
We regret the events that occurred during the
month of July, which confirm the importance of
and the obvious link that exists between economic
development and stability, and highlight the failure of
structural adjustment prescriptions that do not take into
account local realities or the effect they can have on the
population, in particular on the poorest sector — which,
instead of benefiting from such measures, is stripped
of what it has — and that undermine the economic,
political and social stability of the country .
We believe that, in light of these facts, it is of the
utmost importance that Haiti work in pursuit of political
consensus with a view to promoting its economic
development. In that understanding, we reaffirm our
commitment to that brotherly country and call on the
international community to continue working to meet
the remaining challenges, mainly with respect to
the security sector and the rule of law. Such support
must be made in consultation and close coordination
with the Government of Haiti, in strict respect for its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We also commend the positive progress in the
aforementioned areas and welcome the appointment of
Jean Henry Céant as Prime Minister of the Republic
of Haiti. We underscore the renewed commitment of
the Government to consult with all sectors in order
to form a new and inclusive Government, focused on
10/18

06/09/2018

fighting poverty and developing agriculture, energy
and infrastructure. To that end, there must be greater
alignment of external cooperation with Government
priorities, keeping in mind the scope of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Likewise, it is important to strengthen the State’s
capacities to face natural disasters, with respect to which
we commend such humanitarian actors as UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination Team for their coordinated assistance in
this area. We call on the international community and
donors to provide financial support to consolidate the
humanitarian response plan.
We appreciate the progress made in the struggle
against cholera through the new approach of the
Secretary-General. The United Nations and its
Members have a collective responsibility to ensure its
full implementation. In that understanding, we call on
the international community to work and to fulfil its
commitments, as well as to provide cooperation to the
Republic of Haiti in the construction of sound sanitation
and health systems. Cholera remains a critical problem
that affects not only sanitation and access to water, but
also all areas of development and stability in Haiti that
remain priorities for Haitians, as highlighted during the
Security Council’s visit in June 2017.
Regarding the progress towards the benchmarks
and their results, we reiterate that these must be worked
out in strict compliance with the MINUJUSTH mandate
in the areas of rule of law and security, in accordance
with resolution 2350 (2017).
We commend the work of the Mission regarding its
community violence reduction programme, involving
women and young people at risk in activities that
provide them with the tools and capacities to generate
income and encourage the community to engage in
dialogue. We encourage the Mission to pursue this
work, which has proved to be useful in the reduction
of crime, complements the interventions of the Haitian
National Police, and promotes community dialogue
and confidence in the work of the Haitian police and
institutions of the rule of law.
We welcome the support provided to governmental
institutions in the areas of justice, human rights and
security, and we commend the Mission’s work on
sexual exploitation and exploitation. We encourage
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

MINUJUSTH to maintain these efforts under the
principle of zero tolerance for those responsible
for such crimes, who, if found guilty, should be
punished accordingly. We reiterate our concern about
the issue of children without paternity as a result of
sexual abuse perpetrated by MINUSTAH personnel,
and we note that the Mission has undertaken a project
that aims to cover tuition and lunch for children of
victims of those abuses.
We emphasize that there can be no development
without peace and no peace without development.
In that regard, we believe that the international
community must pool efforts and increase synergies
with the Government, when necessary and within the
framework of the MINUJUSTH mandate, to achieve
the main objective, which is to sustainably maintain
peace, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In conclusion, we welcome the appointment of
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as Special Representative
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. We wish her success in her
functions, and we are confident that she will perform
them impartially, within the framework of her
mandate. We reiterate our call to the Secretariat to take
geographical representation into account when making
appointments to the organization’s senior management.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for both her briefing
and the handout on benchmarks; it is particularly
useful. We talk a lot about benchmarks in the Security
Council when it comes to peacekeeping missions, but
we do not always analyse performance against those
benchmarks as clearly as she has done here. I therefore
thank her very much for that.
Like other speakers today, we continue to appreciate
the support that the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) has offered to the
Government of Haiti in its efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and further develop the Haitian National Police.
We also welcome the progress that the Mission has
made as it works towards its two-year exit strategy, and
in particular we welcome the joint transition planning
with the Government, the United Nations country team
and external partners.
I endorse all the points that have already been
made today by the representatives of France and the
Netherlands when it comes to strengthening the police,

S/PV. 8342

improving justice and increasing respect for human
rights. I would also echo the points made just now
by the representative of Bolivia about the importance
of tackling sexual violence in Haiti, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. But let me just make three
additional points.
First, it is very clear that the political and security
situation in Haiti remains extremely fragile, as evidenced
by the recent events in July, and the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/795) points to an increase in gang-related
violence and raises human rights concerns linked to the
police. We would therefore encourage the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative and MINUJUSTH
to closely monitor such risks to security and stability
over the coming 12 months, in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government, to avoid backsliding into
conflict. With regard to the governance or stability
pact that the report mentions, we strongly encourage
the Haitian Government to advance the sector-based
dialogue that the report has addressed to support the
identification of priority steps to agree on the pact as
an urgent priority.
Secondly, regarding the benchmarks and the
MINUJUSTH transition, as I said, we welcome the
detailed assessment of progress in the report, but we
share the concerns that progress against the benchmarks
has been uneven. I was particularly struck by the details
on the benchmark about the number of police officers
per one thousand citizens. When the Security Council
visited last June, I remember there was a particular
focus on increasing the number of police officers, and
at that point there was some optimism that the number
would go on increasing. Given the centrality of that
particular indicator, it is very concerning that, over a
year since the Council’s visit, the performance on that
indicator is actually worse. We now have just over 12
months before MINUJUSTH is expected to leave Haiti,
which leaves little time to make sure that the transition
is a success. As we have said before, Haitian ownership
and delivery of those critical reforms is essential if the
transition is to be successful. We therefore believe that
it is vital that all parties, and especially the Haitian
authorities, intensify their efforts to ensure that those
benchmarks are met.
Thirdly, and finally, we urge the SecretaryGeneral to be realistic and clear about the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system and
to support the United Nations to fill the gaps identified
in the capacity and capabilities of the United Nations

18-2771711/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

country team, which will be key to a successful
transition. On issues such as the development of draft
legislation, which will clearly require longer-term
support beyond the MINUJUSTH mandate, we wonder
if it may be worth considering whether it already makes
sense to transition that work to the United Nations
country team. We note that the forthcoming United
Nations strategic assessment mission, due in February,
will be critical to facilitating the timely planning and
implementation of the transition, and we look forward
to the report of that assessment mission.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. China also thanks Assistant SecretaryGeneral Keita for her briefing.
China has taken note of the recent violent events
in parts of Haiti, which reflect the existing fragile
security situation to a large degree and the need for
political stability and economic development to be
further consolidated. China hopes that the parties in
Haiti will promptly resolve their differences through
inclusive political dialogue and consultations. The
Haitian Government should continue to increase its
efforts to develop the economy, improve people’s
livelihoods and fully implement the Haitian National
Police strategic plan to create favourable conditions
for the thorough improvement of the situation in the
country. The international community and countries of
the region should also pay more attention to the issue
of Haiti and support its consolidation of peace and
stability and its efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
China appreciates the recent work of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and Deputy Special Representative
Diallo. We welcome the appointment by SecretaryGeneral Guterres of Ms. Meagher La Lime as the Special
Representative for Haiti and Head of the Mission. We
hope that Ms. Meagher La Lime will start to work as
soon as possible after taking over to help the Haitian
Government strengthen its police force and take up
in earnest the responsibility of maintaining national
security and stability. China is willing to work with
other members of the Security Council to contribute to
the early achievement of lasting peace and sustainable
development in Haiti.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her very useful and
12/18

06/09/2018

informative briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We welcome the appointment of Ms. Helen Meagher La
Lime as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of MINUJUSTH. We wish her and
the Mission every success in their efforts to assist the
Government of Haiti in strengthening the rule of law,
reinforcing the Haitian National Police capacities and
engaging in human rights monitoring.
We agree that the violent events that took place
early July in Port-au-Prince and other Haitian cities
reflect the ongoing volatility of the situation in Haiti
and the need to ease the daily hardships faced by the
Haitian people. Poland strongly encourages all parties
to abstain from the use of violence to achieve political
goals, to respect the rule of law and to find a consensual
solution to the problems the country is facing. It is
extremely important to build broad political support
to implement key economic reforms, which are basic
prerequisites for the long-term stability of Haiti.
Poland welcomes the appointment by President
Moïse of Mr. Jean Henry Céant as the new
Prime Minister. We look forward to the formation of
a new Government that will continue to lead Haiti
towards the consolidation of peace and stability. It is
worth emphasizing that the Government of Haiti has
taken steps to reform the criminal code and the code of
criminal procedure, fight corruption in the civil service
and strengthen the justice sector. The improvement
of the capacity of the Haitian National Police is also
remarkable. Those efforts may lead to major political
stabilization and respect for the principles of the rule
of law.
We welcome the contribution of MINUJUSTH to
improving public security by building the capacities of
the Haitian National Police in a wide range of police
work and providing equipment and operational support.
We are also pleased to note the role of MINUJUSTH in
the improvement of the Haitian justice system.
When considering the situation in Haiti, it is
essential not to forget that the conditions of the precarious
political situation and the fragile economy often lead to
the creation of an environment in which guarantees of
human rights may turn out to be ineffective and where
fundamental rights may be exposed to the risk of abuse
and violation.
As underlined in the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/795), much remains to be done to ensure
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

a smooth and effective transition to a non-peacekeeping
presence in Haiti in the coming year. Haitian institutions
still need the support of the international community.
We should not limit the United Nations presence in Haiti
excessively or too early, bearing in mind the fragility of
the situation and the vastness of the work to be done
by the Haitian authorities. We need to assure Haitian
society that the Security Council will work closely to
find the best way to build long-term stability and to
strengthen the rule of law in the country.
Poland welcomes the benchmarked exit strategy
and transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti. MINUJUSTH is a crucial actor in
that process, helping the Government of Haiti to meet
those benchmarks by providing technical expertise and
financial assistance.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/795) and Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her informative briefing this morning. Let me echo
colleagues in their appreciation for the way in which
she presented progress made in her charts this morning
as well.
Sweden commends Haiti for the progress made
in its consolidation of democracy and stability. At
the same time, the events of the past few months have
also shown that the situation remains volatile. There
is a strong need for broad-based political support for
key reforms.
The mandate of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is well aligned
with the priorities set out by President Moïse, including
the rule of law and respect for human rights, as well
as improving economic development, infrastructure,
resilience and security. We hope that the new
Government will strive with renewed energy to achieve
progress on those priorities, and we hope to see results
soon, such as the adoption of a new criminal code and a
new code of criminal procedure.
The benchmarks presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report will help those efforts by linking
progress made in core areas of the Mission’s mandate
with other key aspects for stability in the country.
Those include socioeconomic development and fighting
corruption. The Mission is one of the first to make a
transition from traditional peacekeeping in an era of
sustaining peace. A continuously successful transition
would therefore be important not only to Haiti, but also

S/PV. 8342

to the wider United Nations system in demonstrating
its capacity to support countries emerging from
internal strife.
We welcome the appointment of Helen Meagher
La Lime as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti at this key juncture of
the transition phase. Securing a smooth and effective
transition will be one of the main tasks in the coming
months, and we give the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General our full support.
It is important that the Mission continue to pay close
attention to gender aspects in its policies and strategic
development. Supporting women’s participation in
political processes is particularly important, as are
measures to improve women’s security and protection
against sexual and gender-based violence. The
Mission needs to maintain a strategic focus and clear
gender-budgeting. Ensuring that there is adequate
information-gathering, monitoring and reporting,
and coordination on those matters, is also key. In that
regard, let me thank Ms. Bintou Keita for the genderdisaggregated data and the comprehensive gender
analysis of the benchmarks that she presented to us in
her briefing today.
Given the lack of progress in some of those areas,
we are worried about the report’s conclusion that
the capacities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team to work on gender issues are limited. As
more and more tasks are given to the country team, the
international community must step up to ensure that
the team has the resources to take them on.
Much has been achieved by the Haitian people
in recent years. Now it is important to keep up the
momentum for reform. Longer-term stability and
sustainable development require the continued
commitment of all parties. Sweden will remain a
committed partner for Haiti as the country makes
further progress towards the consolidation of peace,
democracy and the rule of law.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her valuable briefing on the situation in
Haiti and the role of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). I would
also like to thank Ms. Susan D. Page, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUJUSTH, for her efforts in leading the Mission in

18-2771713/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti. We wish the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. La Lime, all the best in her new
tasks. I also welcome the presence and participation
of Ms. Leona Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister of Sint
Maarten, in this meeting.
I would like to focus on three main aspects: the
political, security and humanitarian situations.
First, with regard to the political situation, we
followed the latest address of His Excellency President
Moïse in the aftermath of a wave of violent protests
in many parts of Haiti after the elimination of all
Government subsidies on fuel. The address ushered in
a number of political reforms and initiatives that helped
to reduce tensions, including accepting the resignation
of the national Government and calling for national
consultations with all active political parties in Haiti
to form a new Government and to combat all forms of
corruption. The President also focused on advancing
the national economy by adopting a number of reforms
related to rationalizing Government spending and
promoting public investment without prejudice to the
basic needs of Haitians.
I would like also to commend the efforts of Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Diallo and his good offices, in cooperation with the
diplomatic corps in Haiti, in order to support the rule
of law and stability in the country. We also welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister, Jean Henry
Céant, and we hope that he will enjoy the confidence
of the Parliament. We look forward to the adoption of
necessary measures to implement the required priorities
and reforms in all fields.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
given its important impact on all other aspects in
Haiti, we welcome the significant improvement and
the decrease in documented crime rates. However, we
call on the national authorities to take full advantage of
the expertise of MINUJUSTH in that respect in order
to develop and increase the efficiency of the Haitian
National Police and to maintain the progress achieved
in security and stability while strengthening State
judicial institutions, ending impunity and preventing
corruption in accordance with the timeline stipulated
in the exit strategy of MINUJUSTH. In that regard, we
look forward to the strategic assessment to be submitted
next March.
Thirdly, pertaining to the humanitarian situation,
there is no doubt that despite recent developments,
14/18

06/09/2018

the situation in Haiti remains fragile. There is a need
for increased cooperation between the people, the
national Government, civil society organizations and
the private sector, on the one hand, and the United
Nations and donors, on the other, which would help
Haiti to successfully survive this critical and very
important stage in its modern history. With hard work,
there is still time, despite a potentially difficult start, to
achieve political stability and sustainable development
by adopting short-term plans to meet the needs of the
people along with critical mid- and long-term plans.
I would like to highlight a number of elements
that should be taken into consideration to improve the
humanitarian situation in the country, including, first,
implementing the United Nations approach to cholera,
which has helped to considerably reduce the rate of
transmission; secondly, assisting national institutions
in building capacity to prepare for the hurricane season;
thirdly, accelerating the implementation of reforms
in the national judicial system; fourthly, addressing
overcrowding in prisons; and fifthly, engaging Haitians
in human rights awareness-raising programmes
organized by MINUJUSTH.
In conclusion, I would like to commend
MINUJUSTH on its efforts to build on the gains that
have been achieved in Haiti in the past few years and to
promote security, stability, and long-term sustainable
development by supporting the work of the Government
in the area of the rule of law.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing on the situation in
Haiti and on the work of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti. We are also grateful for
the very useful and enlightening presentation on the
achievements of the Mission.
We must acknowledge the objectivity of the
alarming assessments in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/795) that the already fragile security
situation has recently been undergoing new trials,
notably the mass protests being staged around the
country. Regrettably, the political life of the country has
been marked by disagreement between the legislative
and executive branches, the resignation of the Prime
Minister and the Government and setbacks in the work of
Parliament, all of which have considerably undermined
the prospects for post-conflict peacebuilding in Haiti.
We have to note that the humanitarian situation remains
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

dire. More than 1 million people are in urgent need of
food assistance but fewer than half of them are actually
receiving it. And to that can be added the fact that the
humanitarian response plan is only 10 per cent financed.
These events in no way help the Mission in
preparing to withdraw from the country. We have also
seen that the gradual transfer to the Haitian National
Police of responsibility for maintaining law and order
is in difficulties and is going on at a time when criminal
groups are increasingly active. These are all problems
that the Government and people of Haiti will have to
solve on their own in the near future as they assume
their national responsibility.
We welcome the efforts of the country’s leadership
to ensure stability and develop a system of State
governance that relies on their own strengths. It will
be crucial to ensure that the work of the legislative,
executive and judicial branches of Government are well
coordinated. And much remains to be done on the part
of United Nations personnel, whose task is to provide
maximum assistance in the process. For our part, we
support Port-au-Prince and affirm that Russia will
continue to ensure that the ultimate outcome of the
Security Council’s work will be a genuine normalization
of the situation in Haiti, along with stronger sovereignty
and self-sufficiency.
We would once again like to draw the Council’s
attention to a very important point that for reasons that
are unclear has been left out of our discussion. Once
again, in spite of the fact that a significant portion
of the Secretary-General’s report is dedicated to the
subject of combating sex crimes and assisting their
victims, it contains no information about similar crimes
committed by representatives of non-governmental
organizations accredited by the United Nations. I would
like to remind the Council that we drew attention to
the issue in our statements on 3 and 9 April (see
S/PV.8220 and S/PV.8225). In the context of the stated
United Nations policy of zero tolerance for such terrible
crimes, we have no right to ignore flagrant examples.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/795) pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018). We are also grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Keita for her briefing on the most
recent developments in Haiti and on the activities of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), based on the report.

S/PV. 8342

We note that we meet against the backdrop of
the violent events that happened in July and that
reflect the serious socioeconomic difficulties that
Haiti continues to face. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral about the need to find a consensus solution to
some of those challenges within the framework of the
existing constitutional dispensation. It is important to
ensure that the Government of Haiti continues to make
progress towards adopting a governance pact to support
the implementation of agreed political, economic and
social objectives in order to enhance the confidence
of the Haitian people in their institutions. We believe
that strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, ensuring political stability and improving
socioeconomic conditions are the key elements
needed for Haiti’s greater security, stability and future
prosperity. The recent events in Port-au-Prince and other
Haitian cities underscore the importance of attaining
them. We welcome President Moïse’s appointment
of a new Prime Minister and we look forward to the
formation of a Government that will continue to lead
Haiti towards the consolidation of peace, stability and
sustainable economic development.
Ethiopia recognizes the important contribution
of MINUJUSTH, as well as the wider international
community, in support of ongoing efforts to promote
dialogue, advocate respect for the rule of law and
foster stability in the country through enhanced
communication and dialogue at all levels. There is
no doubt that much remains to be done to ensure a
smooth and effective transition to a non-peacekeeping
presence in Haiti in the coming year in accordance
with MINUJUSTH’s mandate. We therefore concur
with the Secretary-General’s assessment regarding
the redoubling of efforts to ensure progress against
the benchmarks that will inform the future drawdown
of MINUJUSTH. We welcome the appointment of
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as the new Special
Representative and Head of MINUSUSTH. She will
have the important responsibility of overseeing progress
while working closely with Haitian stakeholders and
the United Nations country team. We wish her every
success and commend all of the Mission staff for their
dedicated efforts in carrying out their mandated tasks.
In conclusion, I reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly people and Government
of Haiti as they continue striving to consolidate the
progress made in recent years, and our confidence in the

18-2771715/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

Haitian people’s determination to persist and succeed
in their quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing and the very helpful graphics that she circulated
today. We warmly welcome Helen La Lime and wish her
every success with her new mission. We look forward
to continued progress from the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), together
with its road map towards the planned drawdown of
operations by October 2019.
This past July represented a critical test for both the
Government of Haiti and MINUJUSTH, with both the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and the United Nations
formed police units confronting violent protests and
riots. During a time of political instability, the Haitian
National Police, with the support MINUJUSTH, acted
to protect the civilian population and refrained from
actions that would have further inflamed the situation.
Those efforts prevented a prison break from the national
penitentiary, which would have made an extremely
volatile situation in downtown Port-au-Prince even
more complex. The continued professionalization
of the Haitian National Police demonstrates the
progress made towards achieving the Mission’s exit
strategy benchmarks, and will make possible the
on-schedule transition of tasks and responsibilities
to the Government of Haiti, in coordination with the
United Nations country team. However, it is essential to
protect those hard-won gains, and MINUJUSTH has an
important role to play before drawing down.
First, more progress must be made in the fight
against corruption. No one should be above the law,
and we call on the Government of Haiti to work
with MINUJUSTH and international partners to
strengthen its justice-sector institutions, including its
anti-corruption bodies, and to promote judicial reforms
to combat impunity and strengthen the rule of law.
Secondly, it is imperative that corrupt officials or any
other individuals implicated in human rights violations
be held accountable for their actions. Thirdly, we must
also caution against the politicization of the police.
The Government of Haiti must prioritize the continued
development and professionalization of its National
Police and ensure that the institution remains apolitical.
Finally, the Government of Haiti and its civil society
and international partners must continue to address
16/18

06/09/2018

human rights concerns, such as those involving sexual
exploitation and abuse, violence against women and
girls, high rates of prolonged pretrial detention and
trafficking in persons.
While there is much to accomplish, we acknowledge
the HNP’s steps to improve its response to public
demonstrations and reinforce its inspectorate general to
investigate reported police abuses, as well as progress
made in advancing human rights activities through the
Haitian Government’s Directorate of Civil Protection.
The United States looks forward to the scheduled
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti by October 2019 and the assumption
of those responsibilities by the Government of Haiti.
I will now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for having invited the delegation of the Republic
of Haiti to have its views and comments heard before
the Security Council with regard to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/795) of 30 August on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). I welcome the presence of Ms. Leona
Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister of Sint Maarten among
us, and am grateful for her statement. I would also like
to especially thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou
Keita for her excellent presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
My delegation notes with the utmost interest the
Secretary-General’s observations concerning results,
progress, trends and salient facts in the political,
economic, social and humanitarian areas during
the reporting period in the light of the set goals and
established benchmarks. The evolving political
situation in Haiti over the past three months, especially
with regard to the fears of destabilization caused by the
unrest of 6 to 8 July following the announcement of an
increase in gas prices, has rightly become a centre of
attention. Those events, which reflected an irrefutable
expression of public frustration in the face of real
socioeconomic difficulties, were certainly a major test
for the country.
However, the political stability of the country,
which had been won through such hard work, was not
called into question — nor were the democratic gains
or the many achievements of recent years. No one can
18-27717

06/09/2018

The question concerning Haiti

deny that the country was rigorously put to the test, but
the crisis was overcome. The nation recovered quickly.
The institutions of the Republic demonstrated their
maturity. State authority is today restored, and public
order is being maintained. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the support of the international community,
and in particular that of the Security Council as
expressed in its press statement on Haiti of 12 July
(SC/13419).
In the wake of the July events, the President of
the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, fully
aware of the challenges of the situation, spared no
effort to restore peace to the restive neighbourhoods
and peace of mind. Accordingly, following an extensive
and painstaking process of national consultations,
he appointed a new Prime Minister from among
the opposition — Mr. Jean Henry Céant. The latter
has been entrusted with forming a national unity
Government enjoying the full confidence of Parliament
and the legitimacy necessary to confront the urgent
economic problems facing the country and pursue
the reforms needed for strengthening the rule of law,
consolidating democratic gains and achieving longterm institutional and political stability. The next
Government will be tasked, inter alia, with organizing
the next parliamentary elections, to be held in October
2019, and scaling up the fight against corruption, while
vigorously pursuing the structural reforms essential to
reviving sustainable growth and development.
In that regard, the Secretary-General’s call on all
actors in the national political arena to work together
for the common good was welcomed with special
interest by the Haitian authorities, as was his call for the
adoption of short-term measures to meet the immediate
needs of the Haitian people and alleviate the difficult
situation that they are facing. My delegation hopes that
that appeal will also find the broadest possible response
from all international community partners, while
seeking, in that regard, greater awareness of the extreme
vulnerability of the population in the context of official
development assistance, in particular opportunities
providing essential support for implementing structural
adjustment programmes.
Extreme poverty, as we well know, carries with it
the inherent risk of creating instability, as the Security
Council has repeatedly emphasized. A coherent and
integrated strategy for sustaining peace is predicated
upon an understanding of the close link between the
three pillars of security, development and human

S/PV. 8342

rights. In that regard, my delegation believes that
immediately improving the living conditions of the most
disadvantaged segments of society is one of the most
pressing challenges facing the country today. The Head
of State has made it a top priority, as it is an essential
and unavoidable condition for maintaining a stable
political environment, as the report judiciously notes.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s review of
results and progress in the light of the objectives and
benchmarks that have been set, I would like to make
a brief comment. My delegation is aware of the delays
in a number of targets, but the most important thing
to remember is that, despite the enormous difficulties
encountered, despite the July crisis and despite the
limited resources available, sustained efforts are
recorded daily in most targeted areas, be it in the
strengthening of the rule of law, the justice system and
the National Police, or in the protection and promotion
of human rights.
Many indicators bear witness to these efforts
and ongoing measures. Let me cite a few on a purely
indicative basis: the appointment of the Civil Protector
and the strengthening of the capacities of the Office
for the Protection of Human Rights; the stability of the
security environment; the significant decrease in the
level of violent crime; a decrease of about 25 per cent
in cases of mob rule; the increased efficiency of the
judicial system; the ongoing adoption by the legislature
of a new criminal code and a new code of criminal
procedure; the improvement of the penitentiary system
and conditions of detention; the steady increase in the
proportion of women in the police force, where the 10 per
cent threshold is about to be reached; the intensification
of the fight against corruption, as illustrated by the
referral of the PetroCaribe case to the Superior Court of
Audits and Administrative Disputes for the necessary
follow-up; and the launch of the sector-based estates
general of the nation, with the prospect of adopting a
pact for stability and economic and social progress.
Much certainly remains to be done, as the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out, to bridge the gaps and catch
up with the delays, but the consolidation of the rule
of law and stability is on track. That is the essential
thing. This is, as we all know, a long-term process.
Whatever happens, the public authorities intend to
make every effort to achieve the hoped-for results and
targets, in particular the continued strengthening of
the justice system and police forces, the substantial
improvement of the penitentiary system, and the

18-2771717/18

S/PV.8342

The question concerning Haiti

promotion and permanent defence of human rights. The
Haitian authorities are firmly committed to ensuring
that everything will be done to prepare in the coming
months for a smooth transition from MINUJUSTH
to a United Nations presence that is more focused
on peacekeeping.
In appointing the new Haitian Prime Minister, the
President of the Republic reiterated his determination
to implement, together with the Government, the
structural reforms necessary to enabling the country
to cope with recurrent crises, such as that from which
it is emerging, and to meet the complex challenges
that it still faces in terms of development. The shock
wave unleashed by the events of July — regardless of
their magnitude and the public perception of political
volatility that they generated — must not obscure
one fact that my delegation considers to be essential,
namely, the irreversibility of the democratic gains of
the Haitian people and their very real and sustained
progress towards the consolidation of the rule of law.
The President of the Republic and the new Haitian Prime

18/18

06/09/2018

Minister are in agreement with all sectors and actors of
the nation that these achievements must be entrenched.
At this crucial turning point in national life, the
Haitian people and Government hope to be able to count
on the solidarity of the international community, and in
particular on the support of the United Nations system,
for the establishment of a new cooperation pact that
is better adapted to the real needs of Haiti, within the
framework of a genuine strategy for the perpetuation of
peace, which, in order to be viable, necessarily entails
the speedy improvement of the living conditions of
the poorest strata, vigorous and sustained growth, the
economic and social modernization of the country, and
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the Goal of eradicating poverty by 2030.
In conclusion, I offer my warmest congratulations
to the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, who
was appointed on 1 August. I convey my best wishes for
success to her and her mandate in Haiti.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

18-27717
