General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

268

37/107.

Provisions for a unit of account and adjustment
of limitations of liability adopted by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade

Law
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that many international transport and liability
conventions of both a global and a regional character contain
limitation of liability provisions, wherein the limitation of
liability is expressed in a unit of account,
Noting that the amount fixed in such a convention as the
limitation of liability may become seriously affected over
time by changes in monetary values, thereby destroying the
intended balance of the convention as adopted,
Believing that a preferred unit of account for many conventions, particularly for those of global application, should
be the special drawing right as determined by the International Monetary Fund,
Being of the opinion that the conventions should, in any
event, contain a provision which would facilitate adjustment
of the limit of liability to changes in monetary values,
Taking into consideration any preferential agreements
between the States concerned,
Noting that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law has adopted a provision for a universal
unit of account for expressing monetary amounts in international transport and liability conventions and two alternative provisions for adjustment of the limits of liability in
such conventions, 23
1. Recommends that, in the preparation of future international conventions containing limitation of liability provisions or in the revision of existing conventions, the unit
of account provision adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should be used;
2. Recommends further that in such conventions one of
the two alternative provisions for adjustment of the limitation ofliability adopted by the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should be used.
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/108.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 24
Emphasizing the duty of States to take all appropriate
steps, as required by international law:
(a) To protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions, as well as of missions to international intergovernmental organizations,
(b) To prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives, as well as on representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations,
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
violations of, and failures to respect, the inviolability of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, and
about the serious threat presented by such violations to the
maintenance of normal and peaceful international relations,
which are necessary for co-operation among States,

,, Ibid., para. 63.
N37/404 and Corr. I, Add. I and Add. I/Corr. I and Add.2-5.

24

Expressing its sympathy for the victims of illegal acts
against diplomatic and consular representatives and missions
as well as against representatives and missions to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations,
Noting that only a small number of States have so far,
in response to the call by the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth and thirty-sixth sessions, become parties to the relevant
conventions concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives,
Convinced that the reporting procedures established under
General Assembly resolution 35/168 of 15 December 1980
and further elaborated in Assembly resolution 36/33 of 13
November 1981 are important steps in the efforts to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Desiring to maintain and further strengthen those reporting procedures,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives as well
as against missions and representatives to international
intergovernmental organizations and officials of such
organizations;
3. Urges States to observe and to implement the principles and rules of international law governing diplomatic
and consular relations and, in particular, to take all necessary
measures in conformity with their international obligations
effectively to ensure the protection, security and safety of
all diplomatic and consular missions and representatives
officially present in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their territories
illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations that
encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration
of acts against the security and safety of such missions and
representatives;
4. Recommends that States should co-operate closely,
inter alia through contacts between the diplomatic and consular missions and the receiving State, with regard to practical measures designed to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives and with regard to exchange of information on
the circumstances of all serious violations thereof;
5. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the instruments relevant to the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives, inter alia the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, 25 the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 26 and the respective
optional protocols thereto, as well as the Convention of 1973
on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents; 27
6. Calls upon States, in cases where a dispute arises in
connection with a violation of the principles and rules of
international law concerning the inviolability of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives, to make use of
the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
good offices of the Secretary-General;
7. Invites:
(a) All States to report to the Secretary-General serious
violations of the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives;
(b) The State in which the violation took place-and,
where applicable. the State where the alleged offender is
"United Nations. Treatv Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
26 Ibid .. vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
27 Resolution 3166 1XXVlll), annex

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

present--to report as promptly as possible on measures taken
to bring the offender to justice and eventually to communicate, in accordance with its laws, the final outcome of the
proceedings against the offender, and on measures adopted
with a view to preventing a repetition of such violations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States, upon receipt, the reports received by him pursuant
to paragraph 7 above, unless the reporting State requests
otherwise;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite States
to inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General, when a serious violation has been reported pursuant to paragraph 7
(a) above, to draw the attention, when appropriate, of the
States directly concerned to the reporting procedures set
forth in paragraph 7 above;
l l. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on the
state of ratification of, and accessions to, the instruments
referred to in paragraph 5 above, as well as the reports
received and views expressed pursuant to paragraphs 7
and 9 above, and invites him to submit any views he may
wish to express on these matters;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
107th plenary meeting
16 December /982

37/109.

Drafting of an international convention against
the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial integrity of States and self-determination of peoples,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and developed in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 28
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV)
of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973
and its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well
as Security Council resolutions 405 ( 1977) of 14 April 1977,
419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and 507 (1982) of28 May 1982, in which the
United Nations denounced the practice of using mercenaries, in particular against developing countries and national
liberation movements,
Recalling in particular its resolution 36/76 of 4 December
1981, by which it renewed the mandate of the Ad H oc
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries, composed of thirty-five Member States,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on its second session, 29
21
29

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 43 (N37/43 and Corr. I).

269

Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary
to fundamental principles of international law, such as noninterference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process
of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of foreign
domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter,
Taking account of the fact that, although the Ad Hoe
Committee has made substantial progress, it has not yet
fulfilled its mandate,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration, at the earliest
possible date, of an international convention against the
recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
l. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
and the progress made, especially during its second session;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall continue
its work, with the goal of drafting, at the earliest possible
date, an international convention against the recruitment,
use, financing and training of mercenaries;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in the fulfilment
of its mandate, to consider the suggestions and proposals
of Member States, bearing in mind the views and comments
submitted to the Secretary-General and those expressed at
the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly during
the debate in the Sixth Committee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee; 30
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its third session any up-to-date
and relevant documentation on the subject;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it may
require for the performance of its work;
6. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
third session for four weeks, from 2 to 26 August 1983;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries' ' .
107th plenary meeting
16 December 1982

37/110.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important
means of ensuring co-operation among States and an important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration of
multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive development of international law and its codification, forms
an important part of the work of the United Nations and of
the international community in general,
"'Ibid., Thirty-seventh Se,·.,·ion, Sixth Committee, 9th-15th, 53rd and
56th meetings.
