S/PV.7444

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7444th meeting

Thursday, 14 May 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Jakubonė. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/296)

15-14092 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1514092*

S/PV.7444

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2015/296)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of South Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/296, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Ms. Margrethe Løj and His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Olguín Cigarroa, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Chile, in his capacity as
representative of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on South Sudan (S/2015/296), published on
29 April. I will focus my briefing on developments
since then and on some of the major challenges facing
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
at this time.
The security situation further deteriorated during
late April and May, with significant military action
in Unity, Jonglei and Upper Nile states, in complete
disregard of the cessation of hostilities agreement. That
is very worrying, as it has had a devastating effect on
the civilian population in those areas. Furthermore,
an increasing number of reports indicate widespread
human rights abuses, including murder, rape and the
2/8

14/05/2015

harassment of civilians, including women, children
and the elderly, as well as the destruction of civilian
property and livelihoods.
Unity state currently constitutes the most serious
situation, where we have reports of Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) advances and fighting as they
push into southern Unity state towards Koch, Leer and
Adok. That has necessitated that most humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations evacuate
their staff, further aggravating the suffering of a large
number of civilians. The flow of internally displaced
persons (IDP) into the UNMISS camp in Bentiu — some
2,400 so far in May — and the general displacement of
innocent civilians has continued.
I have issued a statement expressing concerns
about the reports of serious human rights violations and
reminding the parties of their obligations to abide by
international human rights and humanitarian law, and
to take all measures to ensure the safety of civilians and
guarantee the safety of international aid organizations,
United Nations personnel and assets.
In addition to the continuing clashes between
Government and Opposition forces, fighting between
Dinka and Shilluk militias, both affiliated with the
SPLA, occurred in Malakal, Fashoda and Akoka,
in Upper Nile state. The origins of the tension lie in
a historic land dispute, but this has developed into a
situation that has gotten out of hand. That has also led
to the reversal of the trend in Malakal, which until
recently saw the return of people to the town and the
re-opening of local markets. UNMISS assisted the
Government in sending a senior delegation led by the
Shilluk King from Juba to Malakal to mediate and
contain the conflict. Consultations between the two
parties are still ongoing, but the situation remains
tense, with potential for further clashes.
The fighting and tribal tensions in Upper Nile,
Unity and Jonglei states are being felt inside the
civilian sites protected by UNMISS. Not only are more
IDPs arriving, but incidents of ethnic, political and
tribal clashes have grown during the past two months.
The most recent incident occurred in Juba from
10 to 12 May, when widespread fighting between Nuer
Mayom and Nuer Mayendit IDPs led to two deaths and
over 60 people injured. The UNMISS force and formed
police units were able to restore order; however, tensions
continue to grow. Although many of the Mayom IDPs
left the camp, citing their inability to live with the rest
of the IDP, UNMISS has since been able to promote
15-14092

14/05/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reconciliation, which has led to the return of some of
the IDPs.
Outside of the traditional conflict zone of
the greater Upper Nile region, UNMISS is also
paying close attention to repeated occurrences of
intercommunal violence in other states involving
cattle-raiding incidents and revenge attacks in which
women and children are often targeted. Lakes state in
particular needs our attention, as the level of violence
and casualties in the first three months of this year
surpassed that associated with the fighting between
the SPLA and the Opposition. UNMISS continues to
explore ways to support efforts to end the violence and
foster intercommunal reconciliation.
Against the backdrop of the prevailing insecurity
and the significant increase in violence, the
humanitarian situation is one of deepest concern.
Over 2 million people remain displaced, with over
1.5 million internally in South Sudan and over 500,000
in neighbouring countries. Over 2.5 million people
face severe food insecurity, especially in the greater
Upper Nile region, and this figure will most likely
increase significantly. UNMISS continues to provide
support to humanitarian agencies to enable them to
meet the primary needs of those at risk. UNMISS has
provided force protection to relief convoys being used
to preposition humanitarian and relief supplies ahead of
the onset of the rainy season.
As of 6 May, UNMISS had provided protection
to nearly 120,000 displaced persons in seven sites,
including about 53,000 in Bentiu and 34,000 in Juba,
and now nearly 29,000 in Malakal following the latest
fighting in the area. UNMISS and humanitarian
partners have invested substantial resources to improve
living conditions in Bentiu and Malakal ahead of
the rainy season. In Bentiu, despite severe physical
constraints and limited financial and engineering
resources, UNMISS and the International Organization
for Migration have almost completed the construction
of a new site with the necessary drainage to prevent
flooding.
However, I should also highlight the unsustainability
of those protection sites in the longer term. As recent
events in Juba have shown, the longer the camps exist
in their current form, tensions within the camps will
increase. We are therefore experiencing a multitude
of challenges at the sites, including crime, gangrelated violence and disturbances based on ethnicity.
Furthermore, it is critical that all humanitarian actors

S/PV.7444

do their utmost to provide services to people in need
all over the country, and not only in the UNMISS
protection-of-civilian sites. Attention must also be
given to ensuring that those sites do not become
magnets that attract people looking to avail themselves
of the services available in the camps, rather than those
needing physical protection.
The arrival of additional troops has permitted
UNMISS to expand its reach, including through the
establishment of forward operating bases, proactive
patrolling and providing protection and reassurance
to vulnerable civilians beyond UNMISS premises.
Capacity and resource constraints, as well as deliberate
obstruction by the parties, however, limit protection
activities by UNMISS military personnel, in particular
in hard-to-reach areas.
With regard to human rights, I continue to be
shocked by the low level of respect for human life in
South Sudan. UNMISS continues to receive reports
of gross violations of human rights, indicating the
unsafe conditions faced by civilians in many parts of
the country. In the greater Upper Nile area, UNMISS
investigated allegations of civilians killed in hostilities
in Malakal, Akoka and Fashoda during April. We are
also closely monitoring the aggressive posture of the
SPLA towards internally displaced persons sheltering
in the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu, where
several people have been killed or injured. We will of
course also do our utmost to investigate what has been
happening in Unity state during the recent fighting.
On a more positive note, to date 1,757 children
linked to the Cobra Faction have been demobilized.
During my meeting with him on 28 April, the Chief
Administrator and former Commander of the South
Sudan Democratic Movement/Army Cobra Faction,
David Yau Yau, assured me of his continued support to
secure the release of the remaining child soldiers in his
area. But as important as the release of child soldiers
is, it is equally important to support vocational training
and livelihood-related efforts to ensure that they do not
relapse into joining another armed group. That effort
will need donor support.
Despite assurances of cooperation and support at
higher levels, we continue to experience restrictions
and obstruction on the ground. I therefore urge
the Government and the Opposition to renew their
commitment to facilitate the work of the United Nations
in South Sudan. In that respect, I am seriously concerned
by the continued incidence of unlawful arrests,

15-140923/8

S/PV.7444

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

detentions and abductions, including the targeting of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. As stated
in the Secretary-General’s report, three World Food
Programme national staff went missing on 1 April in
Upper Nile state and have still not been found. The
situation of the five United Nations staff I referred to
in my statement in October (see S/PV.7282), including
two missing persons and three in detention, remains
unchanged.
UNMISS continues to provide support and
assistance to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism through the Joint Technical Committee,
both in Juba and in the field locations. Five IGAD teams
have deployed to the states, and UNMISS is providing
logistical and force protection support to facilitate their
work. On 7 May, UNMISS uniformed strength stood
at 11,302 military personnel, 1,103 police officers,
including 492 formed police unit personnel. I wish to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries for
their continued support. I urge them and other Member
States to help equip and accelerate the deployment of
UNMISS personnel and resources.
While the Mission has no mandate to facilitate the
peace process, we are directly affected by the lack of
progress in reaching a peace agreement. We had high
hopes for a breakthrough earlier this year, and we are
extremely disappointed by the parties’ inability to reach
a compromise. There is no alternative to silencing the
guns and concluding a comprehensive peace agreement
in order to turn South Sudan towards the path of peace
and stability. I have consistently conveyed that message
to all interlocutors in South Sudan, including President
Kiir and Opposition leader Mr. Riek Machar. The untold
suffering of the people of South Sudan must stop. Every
day without a political agreement contributes to further
deterioration of the situation on the ground, leading to
greater displacement and human misery and risking
regional peace and security.
The economic situation in South Sudan is
deteriorating, particularly in view of the decrease in
oil revenues, heavy expenditure on defence and the
inability of the Government to secure external financial
support. The gap between the official and unofficial
exchange rates of the United States dollar to the South
Sudanese pound has widened and inflation is rising.
The situation will continue to worsen if conflict
continues and external assistance is not forthcoming.
The international community must find ways to support
4/8

14/05/2015

the South Sudanese people to create an environment
that eliminates the drivers of conflict and permits
development. Enhanced support in critical areas such
as health, education and food production will be
essential to curtail the worsening economic situation
in South Sudan — not only to prevent the collapse of
the country’s social fabric but also to prevent insecurity
from spreading to areas not directly affected by the
overall conflict. We cannot wait for a comprehensive
agreement before focusing on those long-term
development imperatives.
In my recent meeting with the Women’s
parliamentary caucus, I was greatly encouraged by the
women’s yearning for peace and by their demand for
South Sudanese leaders to rise above personal political
ambition for the sake of future generations and to create
a more cohesive nation. As they said, “Please help us
dry the tears of the women of South Sudan.” I therefore
call on the Council, regional leaders and all friends of
this young nation to remain fully engaged to encourage
the necessary compromise that will turn public
statements of commitment to peace into action on the
ground. UNMISS, together with its partners, remains
committed to facilitating peace and security, delivering
humanitarian assistance and laying the foundations
for long-term development. The girls and boys and the
women and men of South Sudan deserve no less.
The President: I thank Ms. Løj for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Olguín Cigarroa.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for me to address the members of the Security
Council on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan. In accordance with
sub-paragraph 16 (f) of that resolution, and based on
the Council’s decision that the Committee should report
on its work within a period of 60 days and whenever
subsequently necessary in the view of the Committee,
I would like to give a brief overview of the work that
has been undertaken since the resolution was adopted,
on 3 March.
On 20 March, one day after the President of the
Security Council issued a note announcing the election
of the Chair of the 2206 Committee and the election
of the representatives of Malaysia and New Zealand as
Vice-Chairs, the presidency distributed a copy of draft
guidelines, a draft note verbale and a draft press release
for feedback from delegations in accordance with

15-14092

14/05/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sub-paragraph 16 (e) and paragraph 17 of resolution
2206 (2015).
In those paragraphs, respectively, the Council
decided that the Committee would establish the
necessary guidelines to facilitate the application of the
measures imposed and called on all Member States to
inform the Committee within 90 days following the
adoption of the resolution with respect to the measures
they had implemented in compliance with the provisions
of paragraphs 9 and 12 of the resolution, namely, the
travel ban and the freeze on assets.
The draft guidelines, the draft note verbale and
the draft press release were considered in an informal
meeting held at the Permanent Mission of Chile on
24 March. The draft note verbale and the draft press
release were officially approved at the first official
meeting, held on 1 April. The Committee guidelines
were approved on 20 April following a no-objection
procedure.
With regard to the appointment of the Group of
Experts, I wish to report that,, on 15 April the Committee
distributed a letter from the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs that contained a list of
five candidates, including experts on humanitarian
affairs, finance and human resources, weapons, armed
groups and regional affairs. On 22 April, a letter was
sent to the Assistant Secretary-General indicating
that the Committee had no objection to the proposed
candidates. The appointment letter from the SecretaryGeneral was published on 27 April as a document of the
Security Council (S/2015/287). It is expected that the
Group will be in New York between 18 and 22 May to
conduct consultations and to meet with the Committee
on 22 May, before travelling to the region to begin
gathering, considering and analysing information in
accordance with its mandate.
With respect to other meetings, on 28 April the
Committee attended an information session held
by the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), after which it issued a press
statement. On 8 May, the Committee was briefed by
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Following that meeting, a press statement
was issued in which the members of the Committee
acknowledged that, in accordance with the provisions

S/PV.7444

of sub-paragraphs 7 (d) and 7 (e) of resolution 2206
(2015), persons and entities could be subject to possible
economic sanctions and travel prohibitions for actions
such as attacks on civilians, including women and
children; acts of violence, including assassination,
rape or other forms of sexual violence; and the use
or recruitment of children by armed groups or armed
forces. The Committee looks forward to ongoing
cooperation with INTERPOL, UNMAS and both
Special Representatives as it carries out its tasks.
At the right time, the Committee also intends to
meet with the representatives of South Sudan and other
States in the region in order to exchange views on the
sanctions that might be imposed in compliance with
sub-paragraph 16 (g) of resolution 2206 (2015).
I also wish to take this opportunity to remind
Member States that, in compliance with paragraph 17
of resolution 2206 (2015), the Committee looks forward
to receiving, within the 90-day limit and no later than
3 June, reports regarding the travel ban and asset
freeze. In that regard, I ask the members of the Council
to practice what they preach.
Before concluding, I wish to indicate that although
in recent weeks significant progress has been made
regarding the establishment of the Committee and
the Panel of Experts, the Committee is fully aware
of the grave humanitarian and security situation in
South Sudan. I note that in resolution 2206 (2015) the
Security Council reiterates its intention to impose
the appropriate sanctions to respond to this situation,
which may include an arms embargo and the listing
of senior officials responsible for acts or policies that
threaten the peace, security or stability of South Sudan.
This, in order to encourage the Government of South
Sudan and Opposition forces to form a transitional
Government of national unity, take effective and
comprehensive measures to compel the forces under
their control, directly or indirectly, to put an end to
military operations, acts of violence and violations of
human rights and to allow full access to humanitarian
assistance.
The Chair recalls that, on 24 March, the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union noted the
adoption of resolution 2206 (2015). At the same time,
it recalled its earlier pronouncements on the issue of
sanctions against those undermining the quest for
peace, violating international humanitarian law and
obstructing the efforts of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. The Chair also notes the statement of

15-140925/8

S/PV.7444

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Chairperson of the African Union of 12 May, which
highlights the importance of the
“effective implementation of sanctions against all
those undermining the quest for peace, violating
international humanitarian law and obstructing the
efforts of peacekeepers on the ground, in line with
the United Nations Security Council resolution of
3 March 2015.”
In that regard, paragraph 5 of resolution 2206
(2015) emphasizes the willingness of the Council to
impose targeted sanctions in order to contribute to
achieving an inclusive and sustainable peace in South
Sudan. The Council entrusted to the Committee the
task of gathering and reviewing information on persons
and entities who may be responsible for, or complicit
in, or who may have participated, either directly or
indirectly, in acts or policies that threaten the peace,
security or stability of South Sudan, in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 7 of resolution 2206 (2015).
In that regard, I wish to echo the call the Council
makes in paragraph 19 of the same resolution, which
urges all parties and all Member States, as well as
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to cooperate with the Panel of Experts. It also urges
all Member States to guarantee the security of the
members of Panel of Experts and their unhindered
access, in particular to persons, documents and sites,
so that the Panel of Experts can properly perform its
mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Olguín Cigarroa for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me an opportunity to once again
address the Security Council on an issue of great
significance to my country. This being my first time to
address the Council under your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
leadership of the Council for the month of May, and to
pledge our support and cooperation with you and your
team. I would also like to commend your predecessor
for successfully leading the Council during the month
of April. I also want to express our appreciation for the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in South Sudan, whose commitment,
dedication and cooperative approach have gained her
wide admiration in the country and internationally.
6/8

14/05/2015

We have listened with obvious interest to the
statement of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) on the progress of their work. We pledge our
cooperation with the Chairman, his Committee and the
Panel of Experts.
The frequency with which I address the Council
is, needless to say, due to the grave crisis situation in
my country. It is an honour I wish I did not need. This
is a situation that confronts us with a dilemma. On
the one hand, as I have often said, although we do not
always agree, we realize that the Council’s sustained
preoccupation with our country’s situation emanates
from the concern of the international community
about the tragic conflict in the country and its dire
humanitarian consequences. We are sincerely grateful
for that concern. On the other hand, however, it raises
many issues on which we have genuine differences of
opinion.
There can be no doubt about our common interest
in restoring peace, security and stability in our country.
We are all aggrieved by the death and suffering of our
innocent people. Our differences therefore do not lie
in the overriding goal of peace and the need to protect
civilians, but in the methods of achieving them. For
instance, the many allegations of gross violations of
human rights and humanitarian law can be debated.
In any situation where such allegations are made there
are different perspectives, and therefore controversies.
Moreover, it has been our principle not to be in denial
nor to be defensive about allegations of human rights
violations. As people who believe in the ideals of human
rights, we have a common interest in fighting violations
of human rights, while at the same time the details can
create different perspectives on what actually happens
on the ground.
On the other issue — namely, on sanctions and other
punitive measures — if they were certain to facilitate
and accelerate the achievement of peace, there would be
no controversy over them. Our position has been that,
rather than promote peace, they are likely to harden
positions and generate confrontation. That would
undermine the necessary cooperation on the peace
process. We believe that the international community,
both as a whole and as concerned individual members,
has the moral authority and the leverage to exert
pressure by engaging the parties constructively, rather
than by antagonizing them through threats of punitive
actions.

15-14092

14/05/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We also believe that the efforts of the Government,
in particular President Salva Kiir, for the cause of peace
are not being adequately recognized and rewarded.
For a democratically elected leader confronted with a
rebellion aimed at overthrowing him to have moved
so fast from the outbreak of the rebellion to engage
his adversaries in a dialogue for peace and to make
the major compromises President Kiir has made is
remarkable. Granting amnesty to those waging war
against the State, inviting them to return and join the
political process, even restoring them to their former
positions in the leadership, not to mention agreeing to
form a transitional Government of national unity and
to share power with them, might strike some people
as encouraging impunity, but they indicate a serious
commitment to the quest for peace.
We acknowledge that pursuing peace requires
engaging the warring parties with a degree of
objectivity, impartiality and parity. But rights and
wrongs, although never one-sided, are also never equal.
The risk with moral equivalency is that the wrongdoer
is equated with the wronged, and that cannot be a basis
for finding a truly just solution.
We remain deeply appreciative of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) mediation efforts.
Indeed, the speed with which those efforts were
undertaken soon after the outbreak of hostilities in
December 2013 was quite impressive. Since then,
IGAD’s efforts have received sustained support
from the African Union, the United Nations — in
particular the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) — and a wide array of other international
partners. However, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative and other United
Nations bodies indicate that the challenge is formidable
and calls for a redoubling of efforts. It is very painful
to read the details of pervasive violence in the country,
especially in the three most affected states. While some
may see the glass as half-empty and others as half-full,
restoring peace must be a top priority for the parties
and international partners.
As I see it, history is about to repeat itself. The IGAD
initiative in the early 1990s that eventually culminated
in the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement began
with a very promising declaration of drinciples. With
time, the process began to stall as regional partners
began to differ among themselves. The process was then
reinforced and reinvigorated by the friends of IGAD,
who evolved into an IGAD partners forum, with the

S/PV.7444

troika of Norway, the United Kingdom and the United
States playing a leading, and ultimately successful,
role. It is now widely acknowledged that the IGAD
mediation process is being severely challenged and is
showing signs of exhaustion. It needs to be reinforced
and reinvigorated. The fact that the principle of IGAD
+ 5 is being seriously considered is an encouraging
sign, but it needs to be acted upon and even more needs
to be done, and urgently.
We are also encouraged by what appears to be an
increasing willingness to offer more capacity-building
support in some critical areas in the new order of
priorities for UNMISS, especially in the security sector.
We have always said that, while it is understandable
that the United Nations needed to reorder its priorities
in the light of the current situation of conflict, capacitybuilding need not be viewed as a means of empowering
the Government to be repressive or oppressive, but
should be seen as a way of developing more responsible
and responsive institutions of good governance that
are capable of protecting the civilian population
and ensuring their general welfare. We have been
receiving very positive reports about the cooperation
of the leadership of the police force with UNMISS.
We welcome the prospects for increased collaboration
to enhance the protection role of the security forces,
particularly the police. Related to police services is the
prison system, which desperately needs reform. Equally
important is the judicial system and the qualification
of the judges, especially in the light of the call for
accountability. Those are some of the priority areas that
call for capacity-building and support from the United
Nations.
Finally, while the sanctions regime now appears
to be in place and about to be operationalized, we still
strongly advocate constructive engagement between the
international community and the parties, in particular
the Government. A great deal can be done through
positive collaboration, while confrontation carries risks
that can be counter-productive. Although war cannot be
ended overnight by the actions of one side, I trust that
an agreement on specific actions that the Government
could take, with clear benchmarks, could encourage
cooperation with the international community. A
great deal of international goodwill has already been
invested in South Sudan. It would be tragic if that were
to dissipate, thus denying the people of South Sudan,
who have already suffered from decades of devastation,
the protection, assistance and development support they
so desperately need.

15-140927/8

S/PV.7444

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

14/05/2015

I now invite Council Members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

8/8

15-14092
