Re1olution1 adopted on the reporh of the Third Committee

importance of acbieving full respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution VIII of the Intemational Conference on Human Rights of 11 May 1968, entitled
"The importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights", 37 in which the Conference, inter alia,
condemned the racist régimes in southern Africa for
their policies and defiance of tbe resolutions of the
United Nations,
Further recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on tbe
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and its resolutions relating to decolonization,
especially in southem Africa,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and
its purposes and principies, including respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms and particularly tbe
right to self-determination,
Considering that the subjugation of peoples is a
serious violation of the main objectives of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling the resolutions of tbe Security Council
and the General Assembly relating to the occupation
of territory, the granting of independence and the right
to self-determination,
Concerned at the increasing conflict arising from
the non-implementátion of these resolutions,
Concerned also at the continued violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries and
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of their
peoples,
1. Reaffirms the right of all peoples under colonial
and foreign rule to liberation and self-determination;
2. Confirms tbe principies contained in resolution
VIII of the International Conference on Human Rights,
wbich supports the liberation movements in southem
Africa and elsewhere in their legitimate struggle for
freedom and independence;
3. Calls upon ali Governments concemed to abide
by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations relating to decolonization, territorial integrity and tbe
right to self-determination;
4. Notes the efforts of the Security Council to implement these resolutions;
5. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa and other organs of
the United Nations to secure the implementation of
thése resolutions;
37 Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 9.

61

6. Appeals to all States and organizations to provide
appropriate assistance to peoples struggling for their
freedom and independence;
7. Decides to review at its twenty-fifth session the
progress in the implementation of resolution VIII of
the Intemational Conference on Human Rights and the
relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
on the subject.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2594 (XXIV). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees38 and having heard
bis statement, 39
Noting with appreciation the results obtained by
the High Commissioner in the accomplishment of bis
humanitarian task of international protection of refugees within bis mandate,
Noting further the progress acbieved in the search
for permanent solutions to the problems of refugees
who are the High Commissioner's concem, and the
constant efforts being made by the High Commissioner,
in co-operation with United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote the voluntary repatriation,
the integration in countries of asylum or the resettlement in other countries of those refugees,
Recognizing the importance of the intermediary role
of the High Commissioner in bis relations with Govemments and the constructive character of bis humanitarian action,
Noting with satis/action the increasing role of government financing of the High Commissioner's assistance
programme owing to the growing number of contributing
countries and to the substantial increase in certain contributions,
Expressing its appreciation of the adoption, under
the aegis of the Organization of African Unity, of the
Convention Goveming the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa, on 10 September 1969, as well
as of the accession of an increasing number of countries
to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
of 1951 40 and the Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees of 1967, 41 and expressing the hope that the
present trend of increasing accessions to the Convention
and the Protocol will continue,
l. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide intemational protection and assistance to refugees wbo are bis concem,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions, in particular those relating to the new groups
of refugees in Africa, and with the directives of tbe
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue bis
efforts to achieve, by closer co-operation with the
38 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/7612) and S11pplement No.
12A (A/7612/Add.l).
.
39 _lbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Third Committee, 1723th
meetmg.
40United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2s.-s.
1
41 See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fir&t
Session, Supplement No. JJA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part
one, para. 2.

General AHembly-Twenty-fonrth Session

62

specialized agencies and other members of the United
Nations system, a speedy and satisfactory solution to
the refugee problems;
3. Urges Governments to continue to lend their
support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian task,
particularly by providing the necessary means to enable
the financia! targets, established with the approval of
the Executive Committee, to be reached.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

l. Decides to give priority to the consideration of
this item at its twenty-fifth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session with all
the relevant information available concerning the draft
Declaration on Freedom of lnformation and the draft
Convention on Freedom of Information.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2597 (XXIV).

2595 (XXIV). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights
é

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2062 (XX) ·'of 16 December 1965, 2333 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and
2437 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 relating to the
creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
·
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1237
(XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the establishment of a
United N ations High Commissioner's Office for Human
Rights and the amendments submitted thereto by the
United Republic of Tanzania, 42 and Council resolution 1238 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 on the question
concerning the implementation of human rights through
a United N ations High Commissioner for Human Rights
or sorne other appropriate intemational machinery,
N oting also the views expressed in the current general debate on that question,
Considering that there has not been sufficient time
at its twenty-fourth session to complete the consideration of this matter,
1. Decides to give the highest priority to the consideration of this item with a view to the possibility
of concluding such consideration at its twenty-fifth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session with an
analytical study relating to Economic and Social Council
resolution 1237 (XLII) and the amendments thereto,
and Council resolution 1238 (XLII) on this subject.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2596 (XXIV).

Freedom of information

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2081 (XX) of 20 December
1965 in which, inter alía, it decided to basten the conclusion, among other instruments, of a convention on
freedom of inforrnation,
Recalling further its resolution 2448 (XXIII) of 19
December 1968 by which it decided, pending completion .of the draft Convention on Freedom of Information, to give priority at its twenty-fourth session to
the consideration and adoption of the draft Declaration
on Freedom of lnformation,
Regretting that, despite this decision, it has not been
possible to do so owing to the heavy programme of
,;,,-1,rK :J thc t vé'nty-fourth session,
42 Jbid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 61,
document A/6699, annex Ill.

Respect for human rights in
armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Rea{firming its resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19
December 1968 by which it recognized, inter afia, the
necessity of applying the basic humanitarian principles
in all armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General, 43
Noting also the relevant resolutions concerning human
rights in armed conflicts adopted at the XXIst International Conference of the Red Cross,
Considering that there has not been time at its
twenty-fourth session for consideration of the itero
entitled "Respect for human rights in armed conflicts",
Recognizing that the study requested in resolution
2444 (XXIII) should be continued with a view to
~ncluding further _data and developments, thus facilitatmg the presentatton of concrete recommendations for
the full protection of civilians, prisoners and combatants
in all armed conflicts and for the prohibition and limitation of the use of certain methods and means of
warfare,

I. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study initiated under General Assembly resolution 2444
(X~l11), giving special attention to the need for protection of the rights of civilians and combatants in
confli~ts which arise from the struggles of peoples under
colorual and foreign rule for liberation and self-determin~tio? a~d to t~e better application of existing
humarutanan mtemattonal conventions and rules to
such conflicts;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult and
co-operate closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross in regard to the studies being undertaken by the Committee on this question;
~- Requests Member Stat~s to extend all possible
ass1stance to the Secretary-General in the continuation
of the study requested in paragraph l above;
4. Decides to transmit the report of the SecretaryGeneral to t_he Commission on Human Rights and to
the Econom1c and Social Council for their comments
to be submitted to the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session;
. 5. pecides to give the highest priority to this questton at 1ts twenty-fifth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit a further
report on this subject to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session.
1835 th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
43 A/7720.
