S/PV.8522

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8522

nd meeting
Wednesday, 8 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alfassam
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 1 May 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/364)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-13471 (E)
*1913471*

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 1 May 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/364)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/364, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 May 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the fifty-fifth report of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Before I start, I would like to take a
moment to remember Lord Paddy Ashdown, who
passed away in December. As High Representative,
Lord Ashdown led the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina through a critical period,
implementing key provisions of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and building and strengthening
the institutions crucial to reintegrating the country and
its people. Lord Ashdown was quoted as saying about
Bosnia and Herzegovina when he left, “It is a place
we cannot leave behind”. He showed that to be true
until the very end of his life: even just days before his
passing, Lord Ashdown remained a vocal advocate for
2/25

08/05/2019

the country and a champion of multilateralism in an
increasingly complex world.
Last November (see S/PV.8392), I reported to the
Security Council on how the 7 October general elections
had defined the political events of the previous months.
Now, seven months on from those elections, the process
of building coalitions and appointing Governments
continue to dominate the political dynamic in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. While the Republika Srpska
and some Federation cantons moved swiftly to
form Governments, regrettably there has been no
appointment of a State-level Council of Ministers or
a Federation Government. Nevertheless, concrete
discussions among parties on a state-level coalition
appear to be more advanced now, as confirmed in my
contacts with key political players before my departure.
The international community expects a new Council of
Ministers to be formed as quickly as possible, focused
on a forward-looking agenda of reforms.
Over the past six months, we have continued to
see a positive consensus across the political spectrum
on the need for the further integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the European Union. This was
reflected in February, when the Council of Ministers
finalized the follow-up responses to the European
Commission questionnaire, and in March when the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chair Milorad
Dodik personally delivered the answers to Brussels.
As Council members know, there were almost 4,000
questions and, accordingly, 4,000 answers.
Despite this positive political step, we have also
seen a continuation of divisive and destabilizing
rhetoric, sometimes from the very same leaders who
profess a commitment to the country’s European Union
(EU) path. This inconsistency poses a serious challenge
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. While Presidency Chair
Dodik has worked with his fellow Presidency members
to find agreement on several important issues, he
continues to speak against the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to threaten the future secession of
Republika Srpska and to assert that Republika Srpska
is a State, for example most recently saying that “we are
already separated. It just has not been proclaimed yet.”
He has also stated that if Kosovo becomes a Member
of the United Nations, Republika Srpska would declare
independence. To illustrate his intentions, he has on
more than one occasion displayed a map of Serbia
joined with Republika Srpska and a part of Montenegro
as a single State.
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

It is my duty to warn the Council of potential
developments, but I would also ask its members
how they might react if a regional representative in
their own country made such explicit statements and
declared part of their country an independent State?
The secessionist rhetoric and the long-standing policy
of challenging the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
unfortunately become a constant over the past several
years. I therefore believe that we should push back on
these negative trends more decisively.
In addition to separatist statements from some
Republika Srpska political representatives, the
main Croat parties persistently reject the judgments
of international courts concerning their wartime
leadership and seek to revive the structures of that
period’s para-State. To be clear, they are rejecting the
judgments of an international court, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was
created by this very body, the Security Council, in a
unanimous vote in 1993.
Also, earlier this year the main Bosniak party
announced its intention to launch an initiative to
challenge the name of Republika Srpska before the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, which
predictably led to further threats of secession. In this
context, I must stress that the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina establishes that the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina consists of two entities, the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. The
international community remains unwavering in its
commitment to the territorial integrity and fundamental
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am grateful to
Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron for organizing
the recent Berlin meeting of Balkan leaders affirming
the international community’s resolve in this regard.
In contrast to statements from the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency Chair challenging the
statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina and supporting
the independence of Republika Srpska, I must
acknowledge with pleasure that President Vučić of
Serbia has continued to express respect for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,
most recently at the opening of the Mostar fair on
9 April and following the recent Berlin conference.
Another issue that recently emerged and has raised
tensions is the possibility of reserve police forces being
created in the entities. In April, the Republika Srpska
National Assembly moved forward with legislation to

S/PV. 8522

create a reserve police force, whose purpose has been
variously explained as a response to public security
challenges associated with migration or to respond to
natural disasters. This move, interpreted by some as
an attempt to build an alternative military force, raised
grave concerns in the Federation. In response, the
competent parliamentary committee in the Federation
has said it would do the same.
The issue has also been seen in the light of
the previous controversy over the disproportionate
purchases of long-barrel weapons by the Republika
Srpska police. Recently, a member of the main board
of the ruling party in the Republika Srpska wrote
that the reserve police is “a replacement for the army
of Republika Srpska”. The current political discourse
related to reserve police forces in the entities, which
began with the unilateral steps taken by the Republika
Srpska, does not contribute to peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the contrary, it has
generated a negative spiral of mistrust and unhealthy
competition. If the current dynamic escalates further,
it could create tensions and divisions, destabilizing
the country.
Bosnia needs fewer weapons and fewer people in
police uniforms, not more. We must do all we can to
prevent a police arms race. Instead, authorities at all
levels should work towards better cooperation in order
to maximize public security and a safe environment for
all citizens. Immigration, refugee and asylum policy are
the constitutional responsibilities of state institutions,
and their capacities should be reinforced. This would
be an appropriate example of better cooperation, and
I have made that clear in my public statements. Given
the region’s recent past, these matters deserve the
continued attention of the Council.
All that I have described today is occurring against
a backdrop in which the political leaders continue to
shirk their obligations with respect to the rule of law,
particularly and persistently failing to respect binding
decisions of the State judiciary. I have previously
mentioned the unimplemented decisions of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court in the Ljubić case
and on the electoral system of the city of Mostar, the
latter of which has prevented the organization of local
elections since 2008. It is inconceivable that a major
city in any country that aspires to join the European
Union and to be the cultural capital of Europe has not
held local elections for over a decade!

19-134713/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

On the other side, the Republika Srpska authorities
continue to refuse to respect judgments of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina State Court and Constitutional
Court concerning the registration of defence property
and the 9 January “Republika Srpska Day” holiday.
Additionally, the authorities of several Federation
cantons have failed to take necessary steps to ensure
the equality of Serbs in those cantons. According to
the cantonal constitutions, Serbs do not exist in those
cantons. The Constitutional Court has therefore said
that this must change.
I must also highlight the failure of the authorities to
implement decisions of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdić and Finci and related cases, which
leaves in place a system that discriminates against a
significant number of citizens to exercise their right to
stand for public office. They can all vote but they cannot
be elected. This is a group of some 300,000 people.
It is now 24 years since Dayton and almost 10 years
since the European Court of Human Rights first ruled
on this issue, and representatives of minority groups
still cannot run for the state Presidency or the House
of Peoples. For this group of citizens, one of the most
sacred principles of civilization, égalité, has not existed
for a quarter of a century. This is unacceptable, and
the authorities must act without delay to remedy
the situation.
In the context of the rule of law, I must also report
that, following the recent decision to increase the
sentence imposed on Karadžić, we have again heard
denials of the genocide committed in Srebrenica, even
though it has been confirmed by two international
tribunals, one being the ICTY, established by this organ.
We have also witnessed efforts over the past six
months to curb freedom of expression and dissent. In
December, the Republika Srpska authorities broke up
the months-long daily protests in Banja Luka over what
activists alleged was a cover-up in the suspicious death
of a young man and have impeded attempts to organize
new protests. As the authorities have expressed
intentions to amend legislation related to public
gatherings and the work of journalists, the international
and non-governmental organization communities have
spoken out against actions that would limit democratic
rights and freedoms. In this context, I welcome the
fact that the Republika Srpska authorities have taken
steps to reflect such concerns with regard to the Law
4/25

08/05/2019

on Public Peace and Order, and I encourage continued
dialogue on related initiatives.
My intention today is to illustrate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina still requires the attention and unified
approach of the international community. We have long
taken it for granted that the great progress the country
has made since 1995 is somehow irreversible, but it is
important that we recognize backsliding when it occurs
and acknowledge that our mission is not yet complete.
The Office of the High Representative is in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to ensure that the Dayton Peace
Agreement, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution, is respected and that the substantial
reforms enacted to implement it are not only maintained
but completed. That functionality is a logical
precondition for the country to meet the challenges
ahead, including the integration aspirations supported
by all major political parties.
For my part, I continue to focus on fulfilling my
mandate in accordance with annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is imperative to insist
that the authorities remain focused on full compliance;
otherwise we risk encouraging further rollback of the
reforms. At the same time, I cannot govern in place
of the elected leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Only they can take the steps necessary to move to the
country forward.
I therefore invite the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to make sincere efforts to overcome
their differences and finally move forward with the
appointment of the state and Federation executive
authorities, and work with the authorities of the
Republika Srpska and the cantons to fully implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement. Additionally, I implore
the leaders to abandon the destabilizing and divisive
rhetoric rooted in the past and to take strides to keep the
country moving forward on the path to the European
Union, in the interest of all the citizens who they
represent. It is of particular importance to establish a
positive socioeconomic environment and ensure the
rule of law in order to curb the exodus of brilliant young
people, the country’s most important natural resource.
Citizens of Bosnian and Herzegovinian origin are
now sitting in the Parliament of Austria, in the House
of Lords in the United Kingdom and in at least one
state legislature in the United States. Outstanding
young people like them who have remained in Bosnia
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and Herzegovina represent hope for change and the
future of the country. That is why I am ending with an
optimistic tone, and also with Lord Ashdown’s quote
that I mentioned at the outset: “Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a place you cannot leave behind.”
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We wish to express our appreciation for the
informative briefing by High Representative Inzko on
the latest report of his Office on the political, security
and humanitarian situation in the country (S/2019/364,
annex).
We welcome the progress made between the
parties in discussions on the State-level Government,
as well as the international community’s support for the
parties. South Africa concurs with the views expressed
by the High Representative as we look forward to the
formation of a new Council of Ministers as soon as
possible. We remain concerned, however, about the
continued disagreement between the political parties,
which has the potential to undermine the fulfilment of
the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. We encourage all parties
to exercise restraint and refrain from provocative,
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric that could weaken the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.
The Security Council, in its support of the parties
concerned, should promote an environment that is
conducive to dialogue and cooperation and that would
ease the challenges and hardships faced by the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to reiterate that
a new coalition Government should be formed soon
so as to allow the country and its people to implement
the 5+2 agenda in its entirety, which would enable
its assumption of full sovereign responsibility and
authority over its domestic and international affairs.
Recent human rights developments are of concern
and have the potential to exacerbate the tensions
between the parties. Such developments could have
negatively implications for local communities and
the broader region. Any country wishing to achieve
sustainable peace must respect international human
rights law and the relevant Council resolutions. In that

S/PV. 8522

regard, South Africa calls on all parties to respect the
rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin
the political structures in the country, guided by
international norms and standards.
The political impasse is not sustainable. Political
dialogue is critical to resolving outstanding issues.
In that regard, we call for inclusive, consultative and
constructive dialogue among all stakeholders, including
the different ethnic groups and entities, youth and
women, as well as among the various Bosnian structures
through the Office of the High Representative, the
European Union and the United Nations.
In the spirit of finding a long-term, peaceful
solution for all, we encourage all parties to recommit
to the full implementation of their obligations under
the Dayton Agreement. Political will and national
ownership are essential to moving the process towards
long-term peace, stability and reconciliation.
In conclusion, the support of the international
community for the Government and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is critical to achieving
security, stability and an inclusive democracy in the
country and in the region.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
introducing his twenty-first report to the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2019/364, annex).
We would also like to pay a fitting tribute to Lord
Paddy Ashdown, former High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for all his efforts to bring
peace to that country, and to extend our condolences
to the family of that illustrious servant in the cause
of peace.
My delegation welcomes the submission, by
the Bosnian authorities to the Commission of the
European Union, of the finalized official replies to
the 665 questions required for the review of Bosnia’s
application for membership in the European Union. This
is a clear demonstration of the Bosnian Government’s
willingness to pursue its efforts to initiate reforms in
the areas of the rule of law, the independence of the
judiciary and fundamental rights. Those reforms will
undoubtedly drive the country’s political, economic
and social transformation and improve its chances of
joining the European Union.

19-134715/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

My delegation welcomes the adoption by the Central
Election Commission and the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina of electoral reforms that will
put an end to institutional dysfunction. In addition,
my country welcomes the decision of the Srebrenica
Municipal Assembly to build a monument dedicated to
peace to commemorate the tragic events that occurred
in that city in July 1995.
In spite of those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the persistence
of political tensions, particularly with regard to
the difficulties encountered in the formation of the
Council of Ministers since the general elections of
7 October 2018. Continued delays in the formation
of the Government could further complicate the
complex economic and social challenges facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
My delegation believes that the search for peaceful
solutions to intercommunal disputes in the country
must become a demand shared by all Bosnian political
actors. In that context, it calls on them to refrain
from all discourse and actions likely to compromise
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its integration into the European Union. My
delegation therefore notes with concern the adoption
by the Parliament of the Republika Srpska of a law on
public security. The law, which allows for the creation
of a reserve police force, could undermine relations
between the central State and the Republika Srpska.
For that reason, Côte d’Ivoire urges the Parliament of
the Republika Srpska to postpone the creation of the
police force.
In conclusion, my country invites the Security
Council and the neighbouring countries of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to remain engaged in the pursuit of peace
and stability in that country and in the Balkans. We
support the efforts of the High Representative for the
full implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his
valuable presentation and for his efforts to consolidate
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in recognition
of the importance of national ownership in this
complex process.
In effect, by reaffirming the validity of the 1995
General Framework Agreement for Peace, we recognize
the role of the Office of the High Representative in
6/25

08/05/2019

supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the five
objectives and two conditions — the 5+2 agenda — it
seeks to bring about the conditions that will ensure its
full autonomy. In that regard, we reiterate the priority
that both the Federation and the Republika Srpska
maintain their commitment to the implementation
of the Agreement, while recognizing the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Accordingly, we welcomed the advent of more
positive economic prospects at the beginning of the
year, as well as the Government’s reaffirmation of its
willingness to advance on the road towards European
integration and maintain close coordination with the
European Commission.
We continue, however, to note with concern the
limited progress in the implementation of the 5+2
agenda and the lack of commitment to support State
institutions and the enforcement of their decisions.
Given that situation, we must continue to emphasize
the need to strengthen the rule of law and build
inclusive institutions. We welcome the formation of
the Government of the Republika Srpska and call on
the Federation to take ownership of it, as well as work
together for the appointment of the Council of Ministers.
Peru believes that it is imperative that the entities
respect the Constitution and the State institutions and
their competencies at all levels. Republika Srpska must
comply with the provisions of the Agreement with
regard to the registration of military property, and
the cantons of the Federation must harmonize their
constitutions with the Federation constitution. The
rule of law also entails fostering access to justice and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. In
particular, we are concerned about measures affecting
the freedoms of speech and the press as well association
and peaceful protest. In that regard, Peru also believes
that it is necessary to strengthen capacities to combat
organized crime and corruption. To that end, we believe
that, together with the establishment of a special
prosecutor and court department for fighting those
crimes, it is necessary to improve the legitimacy of, and
the population’s trust in, their institutions.
Political leaders shoulder the responsibility to
lead the peacebuilding process and encourage political
dialogue and reconciliation. In that regard, we regret
and reject language and initiatives that foster division
and hatred, such as xenophobic, secessionist and
revisionist narratives and initiatives. Conversely, we
welcome proposals that promote reconciliation, such as
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the decision to build a peace monument in Srebrenica,
and we encourage greater participation by women and
young people in those national political processes.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
parties’ full cooperation with the High Representative
and the European Union-led Operation Althea, for
which we reiterate Peru’s full support in fulfilling their
respective mandates.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
China has maintained a consistent position of
respecting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity,
while respecting the choice of its people in charting
the way forward for their country and supporting the
various ethnic communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
living in harmony and seeking common development.
China congratulates Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
October 2018 holding of general elections and the
country’s recent successful holding of the twentysecond Mostar International Trade Fair.
We welcome the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to promote national reconciliation and socioeconomic
development. We look forward to seeing all parties
in the country work together to form a cabinet as
soon as possible, actively reinforce the political
process, search for consensus through dialogue and
consultations, comprehensively implement the Dayton
Accords and accord further attention to, and support
for, the country’s socioeconomic development so
that they can collectively benefit from the peace and
development dividends.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. Maintaining peace, stability and
development in the country and ensuring harmony
among the various ethnic groups are in the interest
of the international community in the large and small
countries of the region. With regard to the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the international community
should listen with an open mind to the positions and
concerns of all parties and take a balanced and prudent
approach. While advancing the reform process, the
international community should duly consider the
specific characteristics of the country and its level
of resilience, focus on helping people overcome their
challenges independently and as they see fit, and step
up support for the country’s economic development.

S/PV. 8522

China welcomes the positive efforts of High
Representative Inzko to move Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political process forward. We hope that the High
Representative will work according to his mandate and
contribute to the implementation of the Dayton Accords.
We also hope that the European Union-led Operation
Althea will continue to strengthen engagement with
the parties concerned to help maintain the security and
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. China stands ready,
together with the rest of the international community, to
do its part in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve
lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina for his very objective and detailed
briefing and report (S/2019/364, annex) and for all the
efforts that he and his team have made to support peace
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He continues
to have our full support. I would also like to echo the
tribute that he made to Lord Ashdown, who played a
vital role in galvanizing international action during
the conflicts that followed the breakup of the former
Yugoslavia. We will not forget his personal contribution
to the stability and security of the region.
I think that the High Representative brought out
very clearly for us in his briefing the major challenges
with regard to the rule of law, the backsliding against
different commitments and the many risks to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s future. I believe that his briefing
really brought home to us the need for the Security
Council to remain highly focused on the situation in
Bosnia, as well as the continuing importance of his role
and that of the Office of the High Representative, which
remains the final authority concerning the civilian
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That includes the United Kingdom’s
support for the use of the Bonn powers, if the situation
requires, as well as continuing support for the European
Union-led Operation Althea and its executive mandate.
He has our full support.
The previous time that we met to discuss this
issue (see S/PV.8392), elections had just taken place.
However, seven months later, the process of Government
formation is still not complete. While we welcome
the swift progress made in the Republic of Srpska,
we share the disappointment of the representatives
of South Africa and Côte d’Ivoire that the State-level
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, the
Federation entity Government and four of the 10

19-134717/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

cantonal Governments have not yet been appointed.
We also urge political leaders to engage constructively
on Government formation at all levels so that they
can begin to implement reforms that benefit all of
their citizens.
Once again, when we met previously, many Council
members, including the United Kingdom, urged those
in positions of responsibility to refrain from spreading
divisive sentiments and act in the interests of all citizens.
It is once again extremely disappointing that the divisive
nationalist rhetoric, which dominated the election
period, has persisted. As the High Representative
indicated, such divisive nationalistic rhetoric makes
politics difficult and compromise elusive. It does not
serve the citizens whom they are elected to represent,
nor does it encourage the peace and stability for which
we hoped for many years.
It is particularly of concern that some authority
figures have attempted to use their position to undermine
State institutions and intimidate Bosnian citizens, such
as through announced changes to the criminal code of
the Republic of Srpska, which the High Representative
highlighted in his report. We fully support the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board’s commitment
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’ fundamental structure as a
single sovereign State, composed of two entities. The
spread of nationalistic sentiment is indicative of the
wider political environment, in which the democratic
sphere is gradually being eroded. Laws on public
assembly fall short of international standards across
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, recent moves
to make those even more restrictive in the Republic
of Srpska were particularly alarming. The freedoms
of expression, peaceful assembly and the media
are fundamental elements of a healthy functional
democracy. Unnecessary and antagonistic legislative
changes serve only to undermine democracy and
move Bosnia and Herzegovina further away from the
international standards and democratic norms that it
needs to meet in order to progress.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made,
including the appeals judgment of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on the case
of Radovan Karadžić. That judgment is an important
result for international justice that sends a powerful
message that those who carry out atrocities will be held
accountable for their actions and sentenced accordingly.
It is therefore simply appalling that political leaders
and sections of society continue to deny not only the
8/25

08/05/2019

judgments of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism but also the
genocide in Srebrenica, despite the conclusive finding
of genocide by both international tribunals and national
courts. It is deplorable that political actors are willing
to put their political pursuits ahead of justice for victims
and peace for all.
We also commend the submission of the
answers to the follow-up questions of the European
Commission questionnaire, and we welcome the
public commitment of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the European path, as declared in
a joint statement in December. Bosnia must now
demonstrate its commitment to European-Atlantic
integration, including to the rule of law, democracy
and human rights. To ensure that this is successful, the
implementation of difficult but essential reforms are
necessary, as are efforts on socioeconomic reforms,
which provide more opportunities for the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and therefore help arrest the
flow of people leaving in search of a more prosperous
and stable future elsewhere.
Although there has been some progress, as I
have just mentioned, towards long-term peace and
prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is clearly
still a very long way to go. I think, therefore, that it
would be useful for the Council to hear further from
the High Representative about what more we and the
international community could do to enhance the
rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina and encourage
reconciliation. We look forward to hearing from him.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin lnzko for his objective
briefing and presence here today. We express our
deep appreciation for him personally and lend our full
support to his Office in maintaining stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We recall that the High Representative has
been equipped by the international community with
instruments commensurate with his responsibility:
the Bonn powers, which should be used if the situation
requires. We also reiterate that there are clear conditions
set by the Peace Implementation Council for the closure
of the Office of the High Representative, namely, the
5+2 agenda. Although those are well within the realm
of possibility, they have regrettably not yet been met.
To start our assessment of the current situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a positive note, we commend
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the continued support of the political leadership of the
country for European integration, as evidenced by
the submission of over 650 responses to the European
Commission questionnaire. It is a genuine sign that
the European course is strong and remains unchanged
after the elections. We believe that it would also be
beneficial if the same level of united commitment were
shown with respect to fulfilling the conditions for
the activation of the membership action plan, so that
the stability to come with the European integration is
eventually anchored in transatlantic security.
Many of the pertinent issues will be voiced in a
common European Union statement to be delivered
later during this meeting. Poland fully aligns itself
with that statement. Allow me, however, to underscore
the following issues that are of particular concern and
deserve to be raised in this forum.
Seven months after the elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina there is still no Government, neither State
nor Federation. We call on the political parties to forge
ahead with the Government formation with a sense
of urgency. It is of the utmost importance to set aside
minor political considerations and implement the will
of the people by creating a strong executive. Every day
that the provisional measures are prolonged, the trust of
the electorate further erodes.
Moreover, there are unrelenting threats to the
territorial integrity of the country posed by both
words and actions. In fact, the distinction between
words and actions is often rendered meaningless. The
repeated open calls for secession are actions, in and of
themselves, that defy every letter of the Dayton Peace
Agreement and pose a direct threat to peace, as does
defying State institutions and the judiciary and usurping
the prerogatives of the central Government by entities,
in addition to the creation of de facto armed forces by
organizing police reserves with long-barrel arms. We
have seen in history what such a mix of pernicious
rhetoric with under-the-radar armaments may lead to.
We know how it may end if unchecked.
There is also the issue of the rule of law. It is a
prerequisite for citizens’ trust in State institutions and
the mortar that holds the societal structure together.
Political elites, if they wish to be worthy of their
name, must do everything in their power to uphold
and promote the rule of law, stamp out corruption and
fight organized crime. They cannot act and be seen as
defenders of narrow vested interests.

S/PV. 8522

Lastly — and I want this point to reverberate
especially strongly — we find the continuous attempts
to rewrite history unacceptable. The recent decision
of the Republika Srpska to appoint a commission to
reopen the interpretation of the events of the Srebrenica
massacre is only latest such example. Let it be stated
clearly: there is no room for reinterpretation. Survivors
have been heard and evidence gathered, studied and
accepted. Perpetrators have been brought to justice
by international and domestic courts. The shedding
of responsibility is corrosive and closes the door
to reconciliation.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland is vitally
interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
united, prosperous and modern democratic country,
strongly anchored in Euro-Atlantic structures. We have
been with Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning,
and we will continue our active support as we have
done thus far.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
commend the convening of this meeting and extend our
gratitude to Mr. Inzko for having presented his report
(S/2019/364, annex) today. We take this opportunity to
express that we greatly appreciate his personal efforts,
as well as those of his Office, to fulfil his mandate as
the highest authority in the civilian implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement for the well-being of the
citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Today we would like to add our voice to the sorrow
of the international community over the passing last
December of Lord Paddy Ashdown. We commend his
timely contributions as High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina from 2002 to 2006.
The Dominican Republic acknowledges the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, we look forward to
full compliance with the objectives and conditions
for the definitive closure of the Office of the High
Representative, known as the 5+2 agenda.
With regard to the elections, we look forward to the
completion of the process to form the new authorities
to lead the country. In that regard, we urge the political
representatives to ease their positions, for there is
no time to lose. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs its
authorities to be focused on carrying out the necessary
reforms, strengthening the rule of law and building a
future of shared opportunities for which the country

19-134719/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

yearns, while consolidating unity in diversity, peace
and sustainable socioeconomic development.
We note with interest the efforts of the authorities
to comply with the judgments of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court as they move steadily
towards integration with the European Union — this
time delivering the 655 official answers to the European
Commission follow-up questions — which shows that
when wills are unified, adversities take second place.
The Dominican Republic supports the mandate and
management of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. In that regard, it regrets that
certain sectors in Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
issue revisionist statements and positions on the conflict
in Srebrenica and try to ignore the cases of genocide
that have already been confirmed by the sentences
of the international tribunals. We believe that, after
an exhaustive judicial process in both national and
international courts, such acts undermine the process
of national reconciliation and promote impunity, ethnic
confrontation and hostility.
We note with concern the conflict generated by an
announcement last January by an important political
party in Bosnia that disputed the name of Republika
Srpska before the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although legal action has not materialized,
the announcement brought the political negotiations to
a standstill and warnings of secession were intensified.
In that context, all should promote unity and not lose
sight of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a single
sovereign State that is constitutionally composed of the
two entities of Republika Srpska and the Federation.
We therefore invite all parties to refrain from any
unilateral exercise that could stall or prejudice the
process of reconciliation and consolidation of peace in
the country.

08/05/2019

also call for action to be taken to implement Federation
legislation adopted in 2014 to combat corruption and
organized crime.
Finally, the Dominican Republic would like to take
this opportunity to call on all those involved to join forces
in support of the Office of the High Representative and
the European Union-led Operation Althea in order to
create a strengthened Bosnia and Herzegovina that will
enable an atmosphere of inclusion; the reconciliation
of ethnic and religious diversity; guaranteed access
to justice; accountability; the security of civilians and
effective policies to combat violence; the struggle to
reduce poverty; and the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to join the members of the
Security Council who have preceded me in welcoming
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and thanking him for his report
(S/2019/364, annex) on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and we commend
the commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, within his mandate, to promote the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
recognize the efforts made by all Bosnians over the past
decade to achieve national unity and sustainable peace.
Therefore, we believe it is important to highlight two
points in Mr. Inzko’s report that we believe are crucial
in that context.

We would like to especially highlight the initiative
of the Srebrenica Municipal Assembly, which adopted,
by a large majority of representatives of Bosnia and
Serbia, a decision to build a monument to peace in
Srebrenica. That is a very positive and exemplary
development, designed to act as a symbol of unity for
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First, we note with concern that six months after
the general elections of October 2018, it has not
been possible to form a Government. As the report
underlines, those delays — in the formation of the
Federation Government and of the State Council of
Ministers and the appointments of some cantonal
governments — both reflect and can have an impact
on the divisions and tensions that exist between the
different ethnic groups in the country.

We call for continued efforts to ensure a system
for the independent administration of justice; for
transparency in Government institutions; and for
continued advocacy to ensure respect for the crucial role
played by the press in a free and democratic society. We

Secondly, we would like to encourage a focus
on pre-emptive and peacekeeping initiatives. In that
regard, we encourage the Bosnian people to continue
their efforts towards commitment to the rule of law and
respect for the judiciary and its binding decisions.

10/25

19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We encourage the continued development of efforts
and solutions, especially with regard to the electoral
system in the city of Mostar, where no local elections
have been held since 2008. For those reasons, we call
on the parties to work together to strengthen the rule
of law, continue efforts to contain and eliminate ethnic
divisions, crime, corruption, violent extremism and
terrorism, and intensify their efforts to implement the
5+2 agenda, which are necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.
On the other hand, we are greatly encouraged by
the positive achievements and developments during
the reporting period, such as the progress on economic
reform and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s continued
engagement in the process of Union European
integration. Those advances are an indication that
only by working together with a view to the future can
stability and prosperity be achieved.
To conclude, we cannot but regret the divisive
rhetorical statements that are jeopardizing all the
achievements and efforts made by the parties towards
reconciliation between the different ethnic groups and
communities. We consider that there is still much to
do, so that we must continue to work towards a vision
of a common future that will help to foster a lasting
national unity.
In that regard, we encourage the parties to put ethnic
divisions behind them, refrain from divisive rhetoric and
focus their efforts on creating favourable conditions for
the achievement of national reconciliation and lasting
peace in the country with a view to creating a united,
prosperous and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his informative
statement and his most recent report (S/2019/364,
annex) on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. He can be assured that he
has our full support in carrying out his mandate and
efforts aimed at assisting the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome the challenges they are facing.
We commend the efforts to maintain stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the unity of the country with
all of its ethnic and cultural components. We recognize
and appreciate the important role of the Multinational
Stabilization Force led by the European Union. In
that regard, we welcome the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the progress achieved

S/PV. 8522

in the implementation of some obligations related to
the Euro-Atlantic integration processes, responses
provided by the national authorities with respect to the
European questionnaire and the adoption of a series
of tax laws, which allowed for the completion of the
review by the International Monetary Fund. All of those
achievements will undoubtedly have positive effect
on security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the region, which will encourage the country to
implement the necessary reforms in order to integrate
into its European environment.
Two decades since it was signed, the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains the cornerstone of institutional
stability and the solid reference point for peace in the
country. We are therefore concerned about the escalation
of inflammatory rhetoric and divisive statements. We
call upon all political leaders to place the national
interests of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
above all other considerations and to move away from
narrow political and ethnic interests that undermine
prospects for stability and progress. We also call
upon them to constructively engage in implementing
the results of the elections held in October last year,
including the establishment as soon as possible of
a State council of ministers and a Federation entity
Government. Undoubtedly, that will have a positive
impact on the political process. In addition, efforts
must be intensified so that the Parliament can adopt
new laws to ensure that judicial authorities are not left
without the tools needed to address organized crime,
corruption, terrorism and extremism, which are a direct
threat to the rule of law and hinder efforts aimed at
achieving economic and social development, as well as
efforts aimed at integration with the European Union.
According to the report, such events are occurring
at a time when limited progress is being made
on the implementation of five objectives and two
conditions before the closure of the Office of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we reiterate our full support for the Office of
the High Representative as provided for in the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We call upon the High Representative to
step up his efforts to fully implement the plan.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait underscores
the importance of respecting the unity, stability and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also underscore the need for all parties to respect the

19-1347111/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

national Constitution of the country, as well as all the
judgments issued by the judicial authorities so as to lay
the groundwork for stability in the country. We call
upon all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make
the necessary efforts in order to implement the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and to respect the
mandate of the High Representative, as outlined by
annex X of the Agreement and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).
First of all, I would like to thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
briefing, which paints a bleak picture of the current
situation in the country. The implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains incomplete; its work remains
essential. In that respect, any refusal to grant access
to official information and documents at the Office of
the High Representative, as mentioned in his report
(S/2019/364, annex), is a matter of concern to us. We
recall that all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are required to cooperate fully with the High
Representative, in full compliance with the letter of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The High Representative’s report illustrates the
scant progress made. The reconciliation process has
deteriorated in recent years. A change of attitude is
apparent in the rhetoric on war crimes. Those are all
important signs of a setback, and we must monitor them
closely. The process of forming a new Government drags
on at the national level and at the level of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on the country’s
political leaders to overcome their differences and
assume their responsibilities so that they can continue
to implement the many reforms the country needs.
We deplore the fact that the implementation of
several recommendations made in the past to improve
the electoral process in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained a dead letter. The Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina recognizes three constituent peoples.
At the same time, we reiterate that the principle of
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination must be
fully guaranteed. Any political or legislative solution
concerning the electoral process must be in line with
the case law of the European Court of Human Rights.
12/25

08/05/2019

Strengthening the rule of law remains one of the
main challenges. It is imperative that the authorities
implement urgent reforms to strengthen the independence
and impartiality of the judiciary and intensify the fight
against corruption and organized crime.
The human rights situation remains at the
centre of our focus. We are deeply concerned about
the increasing number of statements that deny the
genocide in Srebrenica, glorify war crimes and their
perpetrators and spread hatred. Such statements are
incompatible with European Union membership and
must give way to reconciliation efforts. It is important
that the reconciliation process be widely supported in
society and include civil society organizations, young
people and women. We strongly condemn attacks
on journalists. We also recall the need to respect the
freedom of assembly, without any discrimination.
We are concerned about the adoption at first
reading by the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska of a law providing for a police reserve unit.
That development is part of a broader framework of
secessionist rhetoric and only increases tensions. It is
not conducive to a climate of reconciliation.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm commitment
to the mandate given by the Council to the European
Union-led Operation Althea mission, which plays an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment. We will also continue to offer our
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to EuroAtlantic integration. As a member of the European
Union, Belgium supports the aspirations of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to one day become a member of the
European Union, as a united and sovereign country.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his informative
brief, which shows that the current situation clearly still
requires the attention of the Security Council.
Ten days ago, on 29 April in Berlin, President
Macron, together with Chancellor Merkel, reaffirmed
France’s commitment to contributing to the stability
of the Western Balkans. This re-engagement in the
region is focused on economic and social development,
security, justice and defence — four pillars of a French
strategy presented in advance of that meeting with the
leaders of the Western Balkans. Bosnia has its rightful
place in this French strategy, which supports the actions
of the European Union. It is to that European future that
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the political authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
turn their attention. My country therefore welcomes the
replies sent to the European Commission in February
rather than reopening the wounds of the past. Three
points deserve the full attention of the Council.
First, it is time to put an end to the declarations
aimed at undermining the authority of the decisions
taken by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was succeeded
more than a year ago by a residual mechanism. France
strongly condemns the advocacy of crimes and war
criminals, regardless of their community of origin.
National and international justice has done outstanding
work to identify those responsible for the atrocities
committed during the conflict. All initiatives aimed at
challenging or reinterpreting ICTY decisions — I am
thinking in particular of those relating to the Srebrenica
genocide — are likely to undermine the country’s
cohesion. We call on all political actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to favour a constructive approach to
strengthen this cohesion, without which the country
will not be able to meet the challenges of development
and the construction of the rule of law.
As such, the formation of a new Government must
be a priority. Instead of being the subject of sterile
polemics, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity should be the basis for national
consensus. The improvement of the well-being of the
entire population is at stake.
Secondly, it is urgent to strengthen and consolidate
the judicial system. Let us not forget that the rule of
law and respect for human rights are not luxuries to
which only prosperous countries can lay claim. On
the contrary, it is the condition for fair and sustainable
economic and social development, the vitality of civil
society and the stability of institutions. France calls on
all political movements to respect the competences of
the central State, in particular in the field of defence,
and the decisions taken by national and international
judicial bodies, including the Constitutional Court. The
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions
suffers from the refusal, often motivated by political
calculations, to comply with the decisions taken by the
courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My third and final point is that the European
perspective requires more than a redoubling of efforts
to adopt the reforms that the country sorely needs. In
this regard, France associates itself with the statement

S/PV. 8522

to be delivered by the European Union delegation to the
Council. The prospect of integration into the European
Union, when the time is right and the conditions are met,
is an extension of the European Union’s massive and
multifaceted engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea,
mandated by the Council, is a testimony to this
support. Beyond this support, it is the responsibility
of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
adopt bold reforms to make progress in European
rapprochement. Those reforms in the economic and
social fields can give new opportunities to the younger
generations and encourage them to contribute to the
country’s development.
Stable institutions, a prosperous country and fair
justice are within Bosnia and Herzegovina’s reach. Its
leaders must rise to this historic challenge in a spirit of
compromise and political courage. France stands with
Bosnia and Herzegovina’ to build this future and make
progress in European rapprochement.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his leadership and for
his presence in the Chamber today.
The United States reiterates its strong support for
the Office of the High Representative’s mandate as
the final authority on the interpretation of the civilian
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords and
reaffirms, as other speakers have also done, that the
option to use the Bonn powers remains a legitimate right
of the High Representative. We welcome the progress
made towards Government formation following the
October elections, urge the new parliamentarians
in the Federation and the new entity Government
in Republika Srpska to begin the hard work of
implementing reforms, and encourage the Presidency
to agree on policy priorities allowing formation of the
State-level Government.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has several opportunities
on the immediate horizon to achieve its goals and
strengthen its relationship with the Euro-Atlantic
community. We are pleased that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is completing the necessary steps towards
European Union candidacy. Separately, in December
NATO allies agreed to allow Bosnia and Herzegovina
to submit its first annual national programme, proving
that progress towards Western integration is possible
by making difficult but necessary reforms. We

19-1347113/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

encourage the country’s leaders to take advantage of
this opportunity soon.
While there are opportunities, many challenges
remain. Nationalist rhetoric exacerbates divisions
among the three constituent peoples. There are calls
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
from some who wish to see the country less stable, less
secure and more divided. A common characteristic
among those who seek division is their resentment
of authorities or institutions that prevent them from
exploiting the country’s tumultuous political landscape
for personal gain.
The United States is concerned about recent
rule of law developments in the Republika Srpska
that are inconsistent with democratic norms and a
European future. We are also troubled by the lack of
local elections in the city of Mostar since 2008, as
the High Representative has pointed out. The United
States encourages greater engagement on the part of
his Office on resolving these and other issues and to
facilitate confidence-building and collaboration among
stakeholders. Expanding cooperation, strengthening
the rule of law, making institutions more functional,
and tackling corruption are vital steps to ensure a
bright future for the country.
The United States looks forward to a time when the
Office of the High Representative is no longer essential,
but the current state of affairs indicates that we are not
there yet. Only when the 5+2 conditions established
by the Peace Implementation Council are met can we
in the international community confidently say that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have fully implemented
its responsibilities under the Dayton Peace Accords
and can responsibly take care of its own affairs. When
it becomes clear that State-level institutions are viable
and respected, international supervision through the
Office of the High Representative will no longer be
required. Until that day, the United States will continue
to fully support Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office
of the High Representative in realizing the Security
Council’s vision for the country as a peaceful, stable
and multi-ethnic democracy fully integrated into the
Euro-Atlantic community.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to start
by paying tribute to Paddy Ashdown, one of Mr. Inzko’s
predecessors who did a fantastic job in in the country
at the time. I would also like to pick up the quotation
that Mr. Inzko used: “Bosnia is not a place we can leave
14/25

08/05/2019

behind.” In this respect, I thank him for his work and
his commitment to the country. When we look around
with regard to envoys — just a few weeks ago, we lost
the longest-serving envoy, Matt Nimitz, who held his
post for 20 years — I think Mr. Inzko has been in his
office for 10 years, which gives him another 10 years
to finalize what the representative of the United States
said before with regard to the High Representative’s job.
Germany remains committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and to its European
perspective. Our commitment was reflected in the
conference that we held in Berlin last week, to which my
French colleague just referred. In this respect, and also
with regard to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I would at this stage like
to commend Serbia. I was very critical of Serbia and
its Foreign Minister the last time we had a discussion
on Kosovo (see S/PV.8459), but as has been mentioned
again here today and I want to highlight, despite all
the secessionist rhetoric we get out of Banja Luka,
President Vučić has clearly committed himself and his
country to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Returning to our commitment to the Balkans, we,
together with our French partners, conducted an Arria
Formula meeting on small arms and light weapons
in the Balkans. Of course, the police arms race
that Mr. Inzko alluded to runs totally counter to our
intention and that of the international community of
limiting small arms and light weapons in the country.
To return to our commitments, Germany supports
UN-Women, which does the very important work of
supporting those who survived sexual violence during
the 1992-1995 war. The efforts that it is supporting there
reflect the substance of resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
two weeks ago, which has a survivor-centred approach.
With regard to current issues, particularly the
formation of the Government, the rule of law, corruption
and socioeconomic reforms, the exodus of young people
that Mr. Inzko mentioned is very upsetting. I do not want
to go into detail, as I can align myself in general with
what was said by the representatives of the European
Union, the United Kingdom, Poland, Belgium, France
and others. The representative of the United Kingdom
asked Mr. Inzko what more we can do. I would ask the
same question and also turn it around to ask what else
Mr. Inzko can do. The Bonn powers were mentioned,
and I would like to ask Mr. Inzko to what extent the
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bonn powers can be used. There has been discussion
around the table of nationalistic rhetoric, revisionism
and the police arms race. What else can be done? The
entire judiciary system is also in a deplorable state. We
need to know what else can be done about that, because
it is key. There is also a problem with ensuring respect
for international law and international rulings. In that
context I have heard that a dormitory in Republika
Srpska has been named “Karadžić”. What can be done
to get rid of that?
Finally, I would like to know what can be done in
general to increase women’s participation at the various
levels of the various Governments. There are so many
Governments in Bosnia that we should have more
women in them.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Unfortunately, the report of the High
Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2019/364,
annex) under discussion is far from an impartial
assessment of the situation in the country, contrary to
what its author, Valentin Inzko, would have us believe.
What we see is an effort to use every possible means
to justify maintaining elements of the international
protectorate of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to prove
that the Office of the High Representative is still
needed at the current stage of the Bosnian settlement.
The entire structure of the report is subordinated to that
dubious aim and that has continued to have a negative
impact on the substance of its content.
First of all, Mr. Inzko continues to settle personal
scores with the leaders of the Bosnian Serbs and Croats
by blaming them without justification for all of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s problems. Our substantive dialogue
with their leaders, including a meeting in Belgrade
on 17 January between President Putin and Milorad
Dodik, the Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, testifies to the exact opposite, which is
that all of the responsible Serb and Croat politicians
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are committed to the 1995
Peace Agreement. However, they are also determined
to ensure strict compliance with the Agreement’s
provisions relating to the inviolability of the
decentralized architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the equality of its three constituent peoples.
The equality guaranteed by the Dayton Peace
Agreement has recently been increasingly attacked by
various Sarajevo actors, and that is the main reason

S/PV. 8522

for most of Bosnia’s problems. However, Mr. Inzko
stubbornly refuses to acknowledge that, only in
passing and uncritically mentioning some of the most
reprehensible examples of the undermining of equality.
They include the idea announced by the Bosniaks of
disputing in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitutional
Court the name of Republika Srpska, which is Dayton
terminology, and their reluctance to meet the Bosnian
Croats halfway on the issue of amending the Election
Law to afford sufficient guarantees that only legitimate
representatives of the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be approved for its
highest offices.
Much has already been said of Mr. Inzko’s
affection for the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European and transatlantic integration, which does not
correspond to the High Representative’s mandate and is
detrimental to his direct responsibilities related to the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda. As a result, there
has been no progress in that direction in the past few
years, and a good deal of the resources for the Office
of the High Representative have been wasted, for all
practical purposes. We are waiting for Mr. Inzko to
finally start giving proper attention to winding up the
Office of the High Representative, both in his reports
and, most importantly, in his practical work.
I want to address the issue of the relationship
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and NATO
separately. I would like to underscore that even the High
Representative has been obliged to acknowledge and
document the existence of substantive disagreements
on the issue of the country’s further rapprochement
with NATO. Banja Luka has consistently opposed it,
finding it unacceptable that it would transform Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s border with militarily neutral Serbia
into a new geopolitical dividing line. That simply
cannot be ignored, and attempts to bring Sarajevo
closer to NATO, in violation of the Dayton principles
of consensus on external policy decisions, threaten to
undermine all the work on the reform front and have
other destructive consequences.
We cannot help noticing that Mr. Inzko’s report
contains a whole series of negative comments about
measures aimed at fully equipping and staffing lawenforcement bodies for two of the constituent entities.
This is puzzling, because the High Representative,
of all people, should know that all the measures he
describes comply fully with existing law. Furthermore,
they represent a reaction to the massive increase in

19-1347115/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the past few years in risks related to migration and the
terrorist threats that accompany them. Unfortunately,
those topics are not adequately reflected in the High
Representative’s report.
The attitude to the creation in Republika
Srpska of independent international commissions
for investigating the crimes committed between
1991 and 1995 against members of all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s peoples in Srebrenica and against Serbs
in Sarajevo also seems extremely biased. The High
Representative straight out makes the a priori claim
that their ability to contribute to bringing justice and
reconciliation between the national groups would be
minimal. We think that is an unacceptable approach.
We want to emphasize that the establishment of the
commissions was the direct result of obvious gaps in
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which we have expressed our
justifiable concerns about many times. We hope that
the experts from 12 countries on the commissions
will be able to recreate a comprehensive picture of
inter-ethnic and inter-religious crimes in Srebrenica and
Sarajevo, since many of them fell outside of the scope
of the International Tribunal’s activity. We also suggest
holding off on any conclusions until the commissions
issue their findings.
We would also like to draw attention to some quite
important procedural aspects. We first call on the High
Representative to accurately reflect in his reports the
work being done by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council and to make sure that citations
from communiqués and statements are accompanied
by clear information about the countries that did not
support them, if there are any. The Russian delegation
did not approve the Steering Board communiqué of
5 December 2018 for a number of serious reasons. We
believe that the text’s unsupported negative assessments
of the 7 October general elections in Bosnia, its
one-sided discussions of war crimes and condescending
attitude to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency only
undermine the Steering Board’s authority. We hope that
this international mechanism will remain focused on
formulating consensus-based, long-term approaches to
the settlement in Bosnia so that the High Representative
will not have to disguise the real state of affairs.
We once again note with regret that Council
members had only a few days to study the High
Representative’s report before discussing it in the
16/25

08/05/2019

Council. We would have liked to have had more time
to familiarize ourselves with it. We want to point out
that all our colleagues who are interested in a deeper
understanding of what has happened in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can read the informative and very useful
report of the Government of Republika Srpska, which
covers the period from November 2018 to April of
this year and fills in many of the gaps in the High
Representative’s report.
The Russian position on the stabilization process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to be based
on ensuring all parties’ strict adherence to the Peace
Agreement, the active promotion of an intra-Bosnian
political dialogue, the socioeconomic development
of the country and its entities and the preservation of
cultural diversity. We are convinced that the time for
the external protectorate over Bosnia and Herzegovina
is gone forever, and that the Office of the High
Representative, with its extraordinary Bonn powers,
has become an impediment to the country’s future
democratic progress. We think it is vital to continue
reducing the budget and staffing of the Office,
which is fully in keeping with the concept of local
ownership approved by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council more than 10 years ago.
We believe that the key issue for Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be the completion of the
formation of a new Council of Ministers at the central
level, and of Governments at the level of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and four of its ten cantons,
which should be based on a strong parliamentary
majority and focused on pursuing the incremental
reforms, which include improving the work of the
pan-Bosnian judicial authorities, including the
removal of foreign specialists from the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and enhancing the
effectiveness, professionalism and impartiality of the
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. However, it will
be crucial to ensure that the Bosnians themselves agree
independently on the content of all such reforms. That
is the only way to ensure that future solutions will be a
viable step forward for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
implementation of the Dayton accords.
We repeat that the continued external pressure on
Republika Srpska and the Bosnian Serb leadership,
primarily through illegitimate, unilateral restrictive
measures, is unreasonable and counterproductive.
Such actions, and the negative anti-Serb rhetoric of
a number of Western colleagues, have been visibly
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

worsening the political atmosphere in the country,
stirring up internal disagreements and hampering the
building of inter-ethnic trust. We would like to believe
that all the participants will soon acknowledge the
inappropriateness of those restrictions at the current
stage of the Bosnian settlement.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize Russia’s
desire to develop a mutually beneficial dialogue with
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a basis of respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the
broad powers provided for in the Peace Agreement for
the two entities and the equal rights of the country’s
three constituent peoples. We sincerely wish the
Bosnian parties every success in building a coalition
and gradually resolving all the outstanding issues.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
Like others, I want to thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his important briefing. We assure
him of our support. Unlike our German colleague,
I hope it does not take another 10 years for him to
complete his job. We would like to see more progress.
My statement will focus on three key messages. The
first is making progress on the five objectives and two
conditions. My delegation attaches great importance
to reaching those targets in order to underpin longerterm stability. We will need the strong and relentless
commitment and dedication of all stakeholders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve those targets. As
many others have done this morning, we therefore
encourage the country’s authorities to make progress
on the five objectives and two conditions. That also
means that everyone should focus on full compliance
with the General Framework Agreement for Peace.
My second point is on the establishment of the
rule of law. Indonesia is pleased to see meaningful
progress, as shown by the Parliament of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s adoption of numerous new laws at many
levels. Nonetheless, enforcing those laws is still the key
factor. We support the High Representative’s view on
the necessity of maintaining the rule of law, particularly
with regard to the many unimplemented court decisions.
We also share his concern about the limited progress
made on the anti-corruption measures that have not yet
been implemented. The rule of law should be respected
in order to preserve and further strengthen the basic
structure of democracy. We believe that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find its own way to democracy, but

S/PV. 8522

the bedrock of democracy is the rule of law. No country
can maintain a compass or moral guidance without it.
That brings me to my third point, which is unity.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is undeniably multi-ethnic
and multicultural, but we must focus on what make us
stronger together, not on what divides us. Coming from
Indonesia, which has more than 1,200 ethnic groups
and more than 650 languages, and whose people live
on 17,000 different islands, we have found strength,
stability and prosperity in being together. Unity is
important. Although the differences are real, we must
act together for a better future. Progress will be a
long way off in Bosnia and Herzegovina until there is
unity in the country. I believe that it is time to move
forward. As an example and as mentioned by the High
Representative, local elections in Mostar should be held
immediately to ensure the participation of all people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in determining their future
as a country. For Indonesia, the priority is clear. The
people’s interests must be put first.
I would like to conclude by once again expressing
our long-standing support for the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a view to reaching a
lasting solution that can accommodate the needs of all
stakeholders and, most importantly, the needs of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We underscore the
critical need for respecting the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, together with a shared sense of
ownership and belonging among the people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ms. Đurbuzović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May, and to wish you and your delegation
every success.
We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of the fifty-fifth report (S/2019/364, annex)
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering
the period from 16 October 2018 to 15 April 2019.
While it is apparent that numerous challenges lie
ahead on our path towards full-fledged integration
into the European Union (EU), our commitment and
dedication to facing and overcoming those challenges

19-1347117/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

remain firm. Having fulfilled the requirements for
the next step of the process, we hope that we will be
in a position to achieve candidature status for EU
membership by the end of this year, after the European
Commission finishes its analysis and presents its
conclusions to the Council of the European Union.
We thank the European Union and its member
States for their commitment to the EU perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and other Western Balkan
States. We are grateful to the EU for its active support
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European path and would
like to urge both the EU and its member States to
strengthen that support further. For our part, we have
intensified efforts in a number of areas relevant to
achieving that goal, which include the implementation
of the reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a
matter of priority, as well as our continuing work to
strengthen the rule of law and good governance.
The fostering of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries of the region on issues
of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s foreign policy. The cooperation of
Western Balkan States within the framework of the
Berlin process remains a key driver of their integration
into the European Union and of stability in the region.
Currently, Bosnia and Herzegovina presides over
the South-East European Cooperation Process, the
Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional Initiative and
the Western Balkans Fund, which aim to promote
regional connectivity and collaboration. We are firmly
convinced that those initiatives and forums greatly
contribute to peace and stability in the region.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan and the
strategy for preventing and combating terrorism for the
period from 2015 to 2020 are being implemented.
The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to process individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, in addition
to security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization led by national stakeholders, such as
religious communities, educational institutions, civil
society organizations and the media.
18/25

08/05/2019

In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s rule of law
and security institutions made progress during the
reporting period in combating organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs, corruption and money-laundering.
With regard to processing war crimes in domestic
courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity
is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex and
multinational State. In that regard, implementing the
national strategy for processing war crimes, regardless
of the national or religious origin of the perpetrators
and victims, is essential for reconciliation and longterm stability.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute
actively to international peace and security by
deploying its military and police personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
approximately 45 personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.
With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy, like those of other countries of the region,
has been increasingly dependent on global economic
performance. Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy continued to improve on a modest scale, with
a growth rate of 3.1 per cent in 2018. Infrastructure
projects, on the other hand, are being implemented at a
slower pace. The unemployment rate dropped by 2.1 per
cent in 2018 in comparison to 2017.
Our focus and top priority in economic reform
programmes remains the creation of a legal framework
to improve the business environment and job creation
for young people. Currently, the main concern is the
significant outflow of young, skilful and educated
people, which could have a very negative impact on
future economic development. Massive investments in
infrastructure, health care and education are needed
to reverse that trend. We would be grateful for more
foreign direct investment in those projects and a wider
engagement of international financial institutions
in order to achieve greater success in tackling that
burning issue.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has also started a very
important planning, monitoring and evaluation process
in the field of social and economic development that
is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. One of the areas of concern is the
situation of illegal migrants. The international migrant
crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge to the
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

States of the region and their economies. During the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced
a significant increase in refugees and migrants, most
of whom crossed the border illegally. According to
the most recent data, the number of illegal migrants
detected in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2018 is close to
24,000, most of them undocumented.
In response, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities
have undertaken a set of comprehensive measures,
including in the humanitarian and security areas. In
that context, we would like to reiterate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been implementing its strategy in the
area of migration and asylum, together with its plan
of action for the period from 2016 to 2020, which sets
out Bosnia and Herzegovina’s policy on migration and
asylum in accordance with the highest European and
international standards.
As the question of illegal migration is a crossborder issue, we are also exploring possibilities for
improved cooperation with police agencies within
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as intensified
cooperation with neighbouring countries and the EU.
We therefore welcome the European Commission’s
decision of 29 April on financial support for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities in handling migration
and strengthening its capacity for border management.
The European Union-led Operation Althea has been
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many years. It is
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has enjoyed respectable and fruitful cooperation with
Operation Althea, particularly in the areas of capacitybuilding and the training of its armed forces.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for its
citizens, as well as our gratitude to our international
partners for supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on
that path.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania, and the European Free Trade
Association country of Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.

S/PV. 8522

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and assuring him of the European Union’s
continued support. I also welcome the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank her for her statement.
The European Commission will soon release its
opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for EU
membership. The Council of the European Union will
then pronounce itself on the next steps to be taken. That
will be a historic moment for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
path towards integration in the European Union, based
on the values of peaceful coexistence, prosperity and
diversity for its member States and citizens.
Seven months have passed since the holding
of the country’s general elections in October 2018.
We commend the rapid formation of the executive
institutions in the Republika Srpska entity and in seven
of the 10 cantons of the Federation entity, as well as the
formation of the parliamentary institutions at all levels.
We welcome, after the adoption of an ad hoc domestic
solution, the formation of the Federation entity — the
Federation House of Peoples — and, as a consequence,
the state-level House of Peoples.
Nevertheless, we are concerned about the slow
progress made towards the formation of Governments
at the State and Federation levels. The prolongation
of caretaker Governments seriously hinders the
implementation of reforms. Internal party politics and
a lack of willingness to compromise should not block
the legitimate aspirations of the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to advance towards European Union
integration. We urge all political leaders to assume
their responsibilities and proceed without further delay
to the formation of Governments for the benefit of the
whole country and its people.
The European Union has repeatedly stated that
election-related issues, including provisions for holding
local elections in Mostar and holding elections for
the Presidency in Bosnia and Herzegovina, should
be addressed as soon as possible, while taking into
account the situation in the country and respecting the
European standards and decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European
Union underlines that no legislative or political steps
should be taken that would make it more challenging
to implement the European Court for Human Rights
Sejdić-Finci ruling and related rulings.

19-1347119/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In that respect, the European Union underlines
that it expects the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
to rapidly advance the reforms needed to advance
on the country’s EU path in line with its citizens’
expectations. The European Union insists on the need
for the authorities to urgently resume its reforms and
work towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular
with regard to the independence and impartiality of the
judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime,
countering radicalization and addressing irregular
migration, as well as the independence of the media,
the safety of journalists, promoting young people’s
employment and education, and ensuring the adoption
and the full and effective implementation of a new set
of socioeconomic reforms.
Progress in the field of the rule of law and
fundamental rights is key for the country to advance
towards the European Union. We therefore call upon the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to urgently align
legislative initiatives and law enforcement practices
with European and international standards.
Taking into account the political and security
situation on the ground and the importance of
maintaining a safe and secure environment, the
European Union reiterates its firm commitment to the
executive mandate entrusted to the European Union-led
peacekeeping operation Althea by the Council.
(spoke in French)
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been clear about its
willingness to one day become a member of the European
Union, an aspiration that we support. In that context,
we welcome the statement made by the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in December 2018 that
reaffirms that the country’s accession to the European
Union remains a strategic priority for the entire country.
We reiterate the EU’s unequivocal commitment to the
European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
single, united and sovereign country. We call on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain
from any secessionist and provocative rhetoric and any
action that could destabilize the country and prevent it
from addressing its real challenges.
The European project was built on reconciliation
among peoples. The armed conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has brought suffering and destruction to
all communities. The denial of genocide by elected
officials or any revisionism promoted by the elected
Parliamentary Assembly offends our conscience and is
20/25

08/05/2019

incompatible with the prospect of integration into the
European Union.
(spoke in English)
We expect the institutions and political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to uphold the commitment to
lasting reconciliation in a true European spirit, guided
by the aspiration of the vast majority of their fellow
citizens to join the European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start
by joining other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko. I would also like to
thank him for his briefing today and his comprehensive
report (S/2019/364, annex).
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and I would
like to add several remarks in my national capacity.
Croatia never misses the opportunity to participate
in debates on Bosnia and Herzegovina in this Chamber,
which is a sign of the respect and importance that we
attach to our neighbour. It cannot be overstated — Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina are neighbouring and
friendly countries, sharing more than 1,000 kilometres
of border. Croatia is Bosnia and Herzegovina’s first,
and still its only, EU neighbour and is one of its top
trade and investing partners.
Among the main reasons why Croatia has attached
the utmost importance to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and will continue to do so is that Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are one of the three constituent peoples
and that Croatia, as a signatory to the Dayton-Paris
Accords, has a special responsibility towards them and
their country, Bosnia and Herzegovina. For all those
reasons, Croatia ascribes the greatest importance to
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The prosperity and well-being
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore of strategic
significance for Croatia.
For today’s discussion, I wish to focus on three
major points: stability and functionality, equality and
electoral reform, and European integration.
A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which moves ahead with determination
on its European path and in which full institutional
equality among its three constituent peoples and all
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

its citizens is guaranteed, should play an invaluable
role in upholding the stability of South-East Europe
and contributing to the stability of the European
Union as a whole. At previous Council meetings on
that matter, Croatia cautioned that political impasse
and divisive rhetoric pose the risk of derailing Bosnia
and Herzegovina from the path towards much-needed
reforms and undermine the very functionality and
stability of the country.
The responsibility remains with the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to take ownership of political
reforms. Bosnia and Herzegovina must prove that it
knows how to and that it is able to organize its political
life effectively and that it will, in a spirit of compromise,
build the consensus of all political stakeholders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is particularly important
for a country aspiring to one day become a credible
member of the European Union.
The European path and the reasonable expectations
of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit
from much-needed reforms and advance towards
European Union integration must not be held hostage to
partisan politics and politicizing. In that sense, we echo
the European Union’s position that urges all political
leaders to assume their responsibilities and proceed
without further delay to the formation of Governments.
The elections of last autumn were held in a very
complex political environment. Not only was the
election campaign rather heated and divisive but the
legal loopholes and inconsistencies with the country’s
Constitution, which were not fixed in time for the
elections, created legal uncertainties and once again
opened the door to electoral engineering. We consider
that ignoring the aim and spirit of the Dayton Peace
Accords remains counterproductive and dangerous and
we hope that a legal solution will be found in the future
with a view to ensuring the legitimate representation
of the political representatives of all three constituent
peoples in the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As one of the constituent peoples, Croats feel that
such electoral engineering has deprived them of their
legitimate representative in the Presidency. We cannot
pretend that nothing happened and a solution should be
actively sought. In this very Chamber, we have already
expressed on an earlier occasion our deep concern
regarding that adverse development and its important
political ramifications. It is therefore of key importance
to embark on the election law reform without any delay

S/PV. 8522

in order to avoid similar situations in the future. Not
doing so or failing to take action would be much too
damaging for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Consensus
should actively be sought among all three constituent
peoples in that regard.
We stress, once again, that the urgent adoption
of electoral reform, following the rulings by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Ljubić case and in the case of the city of Mostar,
is necessary and of paramount importance for the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ensuring equality
through the proportionate and legitimate representation
of the constituent peoples at all levels of Government is
essential for preserving the stability of the country. The
time to act is now; delays will only deepen the problem.
Next year, municipal elections are scheduled to
be held in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All necessary
improvements of the electoral process must be
accomplished before that. We truly hope that the people
of Mostar will be in a position to go to the polls and
stand in the elections. In that sense, the year 2019
does not have to be a part of the negative cycle; on the
contrary, it provides an opportunity for the country
to enhance its functionality for years to come. The
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains one
of the most important issues in its European and EuroAtlantic integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves
a secure and prosperous future and can rely on Croatia’s
continuous and staunch support.
Our goal is to see Bosnia and Herzegovina fully
entrenched on its European path. That is the best catalyst
for addressing the internal outstanding issues and
providing a safeguard to ensure further democratization
and reforms. Strengthening institutions and ensuring
the freedom of media and an independent, impartial
and efficient judiciary are of the essence.
In conclusion, Croatia stands ready to render its
full support and assistance. A bilateral agreement on
European partnership is not only a token of political
support from Croatia, but also provides a substantial
framework for technical work and expertise. We extend
our full support to Bosnia and Herzegovina and hope
it finds internal strength and wisdom in overcoming
internal hurdles so that it can proceed more efficiently
and firmly on the European integration trajectory
and spare no effort in fully developing its vast yet
untapped potential.

19-1347121/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

08/05/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.

to develop ever better relations and cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Milanović (Serbia): All-round cooperation
with neighbours is among the most important foreign
policy priorities of Serbia. As a key function of regional
stability and prosperity, such cooperation plays a pivotal
role in Serbia’s relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its efforts to bring about regional reconciliation.

The Western Balkans is changing. Reconciliation,
stabilization and European Union (EU) integration are
the order of the day. To continue along that path, we
need to strengthen regional confidence, just as the two
entities and three constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is also home to a large number
of Serbs, need to do. To help achieve those goals,
Serbia continues to develop and deepen its relations
with Republika Srpska in a transparent way and in
accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement. It also
actively promotes relations with the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Dayton Peace Agreement, which put an end
to the tragic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is an
important building block in that regard. Signed almost
a quarter of a century ago, it is just as important today
as a basis for peace and security. As a guarantor of the
agreement, Serbia will continue to work on its consistent
implementation, aimed at bringing about reconciliation
and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
entire region.
The region has faced numerous challenges for
centuries, including the suffering of the recent past.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States is therefore of paramount importance, and my
country considers it to be an overarching international
standard and principle that is binding on all. Proceeding
from that, as well as from the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Serbia has been firmly and continually committed to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as the cornerstone of regional stability.
However, political tensions and messages that we
thought belonged to the past have been evident in the
region of late. It has not always been blessed with a
constructive approach, positive agendas and mutual
respect. That is also true of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the relations among its constituent
peoples and entities. Regrettably, they have sometimes
been burdened by unproductive rhetoric.
Serbia’s approach and measures have been aimed
at stabilizing the situation and helping to calm political
passions and to create the conditions for overcoming
differences through dialogue. It is the obligation of us all
to invest our best efforts in promoting peace, progress
and a better life for our citizens. After all, dialogue
and agreement have been the best way to address all
outstanding issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina and find
acceptable and implementable solutions. That is what
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina expect from
their political representatives and what my country
wholeheartedly supports. We are motivated by the
vision of a better future for the region and the drive
22/25

Last October, general elections were held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than six months later,
Government institutions, including the Council of
Ministers, have not yet been formed. Serbia hopes that
the institutions will be formed soon and that they will
take up their full responsibilities, to the benefit of all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Once formed, the
Council of Ministers will partner with the Government
of Serbia, as it has in the past.
As a token of extensive communication and
political dialogue and an important instrument for the
promotion of a positive agenda of relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić
visited Mostar on 9 April and attended the opening of
the twenty-second International Economy Fair, in which
many Serbian companies took part. In his statement,
President Vučić emphasized that it is important that
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to build
a common future in peace and stability, irrespective of
the potholes in our historical legacy and differences of
views in that regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is among Serbia’s most
important foreign-trade partners and mutual trade has
been increasing year after year. Such cooperation is in
line with the Central European Free Trade Agreement.
However, Pristina recently increased tariffs on goods
originating from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
contrary to that agreement’s provisions. It is my hope
and belief that the international community will step up
its pressure on Pristina to bring those harmful practices
to a speedy end.
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
our other neighbours, have resolved to work together
to link peoples, regions and economies. We have made
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

commitments in different formats to carrying out
needed reforms and promoting regional cooperation
in the area of joint infrastructure projects and in the
transportation and energy sectors, for instance.
As partners in promoting mutual links, the two
countries are part and parcel of the process of EU
enlargement and integration. Every step made by our
neighbour in that direction is a step forward on that
important road and, therefore, highly appreciated.
As a candidate country, Serbia strongly supports
its neighbour’s EU membership aspirations and the
relevant reforms it is carrying out in order to achieve
that goal. It considers the submission of the reply to the
additional questions from the European Commission
questionnaire by Bosnia and Herzegovina last March to
be an important step forward on the country’s road to
EU integration and stands ready to intensify cooperation
and transmit its own experiences in the process.
Serbia believes, and I hope that I can also say
this on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the
European Union will continue to support the process of
Western Balkan EU integration which, once achieved,
will bring lasting stability and prosperity to the region
and help consolidate and develop Europe in its entirety.
That happens to be the strategic goal of my country’s
Government. Peace, stability and good-neighbourliness
have no alternatives and are lodestars on our region’s
road to the European Union. They are achievable only
through dialogue, mutual respect and civility.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko to
respond to questions and comments.
Mr. Inzko: First, I would like first to respond
to the statement made by the representative of the
Russian Federation. He said that my report is “far from
impartial”. I will respond not with my own words but
with those of the Prime Minister of Republika Srpska.
Yesterday, he said that
“[a]s far as the Republika Srpska is concerned,
Mr. Inzko’s support is among the best so far. For the
first time, Republika Srpska is not a black sheep in
the view of the High Representative”.
Those are the words of the Prime Minister of Republika
Srpska. Yet, I hear from the Russians that I am
not impartial.
As far as NATO is concerned, I will not express my
personal opinion again. Instead, I will recall that there
is a defence law that exists in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV. 8522

that foresees NATO membership and the membership
action plan. Politically, the Republika Srpska has
declared neutrality but the defence law still exists. If
somebody wanted to change Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
position they would have to change the defence law.
The defence law was adopted with votes from members
of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats party,
to which Mr. Dodik belongs, and we have the signature
of a previous member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Radmanović, in support of the
aforementioned defence law. So it is a legal obligation.
As to the report of Republika Srpska, the late
Ambassador Churkin, speaking in a very small
circle, once joked that the report was like a report
Chechnya would send to the Security Council. But,
jokes aside, Dayton does not provide for reports by the
entities. Dayton provides only for reports by the High
Representative. It also provides that foreign affairs
issues are State issues, not regional issues. Under the
original Dayton Accords, foreign affairs, foreign policy
and foreign trade are State-level issues. So entities
cannot send reports. In addition, I wonder whether
this report was sent via the mission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Security Council, because reports
can become official United Nations documents only
through a Member State. Otherwise they are illegal and
do not exist as official documents. That is the case for
this report.
In response to the German and British questions
on the rule of law, I would say that there are several
categories of rule of law. One category is that of
unimplemented decisions or verdicts of international
and local constitutional courts. Such decisions have
simply been ignored for 10 or more years, like those
on Mostar and Sejdić and Finci. Then there is the
outright rejection of certain decisions and verdicts
from international or local tribunals, especially when it
comes to war crimes. Some parties are rejecting outright
the verdicts of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Corruption committed by political parties is also
quite evident in the huge public sector, and I think
we have to address this issue. It is widespread in such
areas as employment and public tenders and bidding.
It is all over the place. Recently, there was a huge
scandal relating to fake diplomas. Germany has already
prohibited nurses from working in Germany if they
have fake diplomas from Bosnia and Herzegovina or
Croatia. If they come from Bosnia and Herzegovina,

19-1347123/25

S/PV.8522

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

certain diplomas are no longer being recognized, but
this is all part of the wider issue of the rule of law.
I think it would be very good if we could have the
presence of foreign judges and prosecutors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina again. I think Albania has asked for
a vetting procedure, and we did have foreign judges
and prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past.
Regrettably — and this is my personal opinion — we
allowed them to go home about 10 years ago, but maybe
if they were to act in a monitoring capacity, their return
would not be so bad.
Today, 8 May, we celebrate the liberation of Europe.
I would like to recall that we, in my own country of
Austria, also had a sort of High Representative: the
Allied Forces. It was very helpful. Nazism did not
return because there was an Allied Forces presence.
Democracy was restored — we had not had a parliament
since before the Second World War. In the presence of
the Allied Forces, democracy was strengthened. And
there was also the Marshall Plan. The foreign presence
was therefore beneficial. Further, owing to the presence
of the Allied Forces, certain judicial proceedings were
commenced in Austria against Nazis. It was very good
for our own country to come to terms with our past,
to purify our secret service and to look towards the
future. And now Austria is one of the most successful
countries in the world. But, of course, this presence was
limited. When all of what the Allied Forces wanted to
do was implemented, they withdrew and left Austria,
and we became a fully independent country.
That brings me to the so-called Bonn powers. The
Permanent Representative of Germany might want to
call them Berlin powers. There has been a change in
capitals as well as a change in philosophy. We used
the Bonn Powers exactly 958 times in the past. The
Bonn powers are actually rooted in and extend from
the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and they
make the High Representative the final authority on
the interpretation of the Dayton Accords and the actor
that should facilitate the resolution of difficulties. This
comes from the original Dayton Accords. However, to
activate these Bonn powers, a conference took place
in Bonn in 1997, at which the Peace Implementation
Council under the strong leadership of Foreign
Minister Kinkel, who passed away recently, welcomed
the intention of the High Representative to use final
authority and facilitate the resolution of difficulties in
future much more robustly.
24/25

08/05/2019

Of course, the first 10 years were very active as
far as High Representatives, including my predecessor,
of course, were concerned. We established many
institutions. There were only three ministries after
Dayton and based on Dayton; now we have nine.
There was no border police. There was no currency.
As the Bosnian delegation mentioned this morning,
the economy is doing quite well, and the country has
perhaps the most stable currency in the Balkans. There
is no inflation. The currency is pegged to the euro, and
it is still called the mark — not the Deutsche mark, but
the convertible mark — and it is a very stable currency.
It can be exchanged, sent abroad and so forth. Also,
there was no flag or national anthem. We still do not
have lyrics for the national anthem, but at least there
is a national anthem. There has been a lot of progress,
and when a Common Minister for Defence was
created — initially we had two Ministers for Defence
and three armies, but about 11 years ago, a single
army was created, with one Minister for Defence,
and a defence law, which I mentioned previously, was
adopted — the international community said we would
have to use the Bonn powers less. We will now have to
stress local ownership, because local ownership is the
future anyway.
Regrettably, there has been a retreat on that progress
in the last 10 years. We have not seen the establishment
of very many new institutions, nor have many new laws
been adopted. We mentioned Lord Ashdown earlier.
When he was there, during his four-year tenure, 236
laws were adopted. In the last four years, only about
40 laws have been adopted. I therefore think we should
reconsider our presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Maybe we should enter into a stronger cooperation
arrangement with local leaders, a more robust and
prescriptive cooperation, basing our presence, of
course, on local ownership, and Bonn Powers should
only be exercised as a last resort. When everything else
fails then maybe we should intervene.
Mostar could be a good example. We allowed
local ownership in Mostar more than 10 years ago,
and for some 10 years now we have had a decision by
the Constitutional Court in Mostar that the electoral
law should be changed. But nothing has happened. In
the meantime, we are happy that the mayor is sane.
He is distributing about $30 million a year, which
means $300 million have been distributed in the last
10 years without a municipal council. So local people
have had no opportunity to exercise their most basic
19-13471

08/05/2019

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

democratic right, namely, the right to vote. Mostar is
the fifth biggest city in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Can
Council members imagine the fifth biggest city in their
countries having no elections or no municipal council
for 10 years?
That is what we have to address in future. We
also should not tolerate what we have to tolerate at the
moment, in particular double standards. For example,
hate speech is not allowed in our countries. In Bosnia,
it is possible to use hate speech because there is no
law prohibiting it. Holocaust denial is not allowed in
our countries; in Bosnia, genocide denial is allowed
because there is no law. But we have genocide laws
specifically referring to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
Belgium, in Canada, in Switzerland and in some other
countries, but not in Bosnia.
As I mentioned earlier, one of the most sacred
principles of civilization — égalité — is not being
implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina. If one is a
Jewish citizen or a Roma citizen or an ethnic Ukrainian
citizen, that person cannot run for the State Presidency
or for Parliament. This is a great discrimination, and
we are just beginning to look at it. I think we should

S/PV. 8522

have a more proactive approach in future as well as
greater efforts to strengthen the rule of law. Believe me,
I would be very happy if I could say in one or two years
that we have rule of law and good governance. At that
point, I would be able to close my office, which would
be a happy moment for me, believe me.
We should probably take a fresh look at all the
open issues. We rely on local ownership, with the local
populations working together with us. We saw this
approach worked in the Baltics; in Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania, local ownership worked. In this way, the
wonderful people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
able to build their own future. Otherwise, the exodus
that we have witnessed for the last 10 years — 500,000
people have left Bosnia and Herzegovina — will
continue, which is not good for the country, especially
when the best people are leaving.
I thank the members of the Security Council for
keeping this issue on the Council’s agenda. We should
perhaps do a reset and have a fresh look at the issues in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and then, together with local
ownership, we can make a difference.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

19-1347125/25
