United Nations

S/PV.4896

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4896

th meeting
Monday, 19 January 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muñoz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Chile)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Arias
Mr. King
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms (S/2003/1217)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-21057 (E)

*
0
4
2
1
0
5
7
*

S/PV.4896

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General, entitled “Small arms”,
document S/2003/1217.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small Arms
Small arms: Report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/1217)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Armenia, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Mali,
Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Syrian Arab Republic, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine and Zimbabwe, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Disarmament Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Nobuyasu Abe to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
As a measure to optimize the use of our time, in
order to allow as many delegations to take the floor as
possible, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table, and invite them to resume their seats
on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
conference officer will seek the next speaker on the list
at the table. I hope that I have your understanding
regarding those changes, given the fact that there are
15 speakers in the Council and on this occasion 20 or
21 speakers under rule 37.
I now call on Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, UnderSecretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, to
introduce the report of the Secretary-General. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Abe: Allow me to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms as contained in
document S/2003/1217. The present report was
prepared by the Department for Disarmament Affairs in
close consultation with the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(Interpol). Pursuant to the request made by the
President of the Security Council in his statement on
31 October 2002, the report provides an overview of
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s previous report on small
arms (S/2002/1053). Those recommendations covered
four main topics, namely: first, the implementation of
the Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons; secondly, Security Council mandated
sanctions and arms embargoes; thirdly, conflict
prevention, peace-building and the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration of former combatants,
and fourthly, confidence-building measures.
The present report highlights the progress made
in respect of tracing illicit small arms and light
weapons;
demobilization,
disarmament
and

S/PV.4896

reintegration; control over the export and transit of
small arms and light weapons; the links between illicit
small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources, and
transparency in armaments.
The report also identifies some areas of greater
challenge, namely: the enforcement of Security
Council resolutions on sanctions; the imposition of
coercive measures against Member States that
deliberately violate arms embargoes; restriction on the
supply of ammunition to areas of instability; and the
need to finance demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programmes through the assessed budget
for peacekeeping operations.
Today’s open debate on small arms takes place in
the wake of two events of particular significance in the
global fight against the proliferation of illicit small
arms and light weapons. I am referring first, to the First
Biennial Meeting of States, held in New York from 7 to
11 July 2003, which allowed States, international and
regional organizations and civil society to draw lessons
from the first two years of implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted at the July 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; and secondly,
the establishment, by the General Assembly at its fiftyeighth session, of an open-ended working group to
negotiate an international instrument on tracing illicit
small arms and light weapons, which will start its
substantive work soon.
The Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council to address the
challenge posed by illicit small arms and light weapons
in the context of situations under the Council’s
consideration. I trust that this meeting will contribute
to strengthening the achievements obtained thus far, as
well as to identifying the best approaches to address
the areas of continued concern.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I thank Mr. Abe for his introduction. I will
now give the floor to Council members, beginning with
the United Kingdom.
Mr. King: We welcome the Secretary-General’s
report and today’s meeting. The United Kingdom
recognizes the influential and significant role to be
played by the Security Council in supporting the
General Assembly and the United Nations Programme
of Action in the fight against the proliferation and the

misuse of small arms and light weapons. The United
Kingdom is committed to the full implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. Indeed, we have
contributed some £20 million to the programme over
recent years.
We fully support the development of an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons and believe the establishment of an
open-ended working group is an important step
towards that goal.
Export controls are an essential tool in helping to
curtail illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. One measure to improve such controls would
be to enhance the effectiveness and verification of enduser certificates. The United Kingdom strongly
believes some evaluation of the environment in which
an end-user certificate is issued should also be taken
into consideration, for example, taking account of
whether the end-user is a realistic destination for the
type and quantity of goods listed.
Looking ahead, we attach great importance to the
biennial meeting of 2005 which will be a crucial step
towards the preparation of the 2006 review
conference — an evaluation of the programme of
action. Leading up to the 2006 meeting, the United
Kingdom aims to work with others to promote
progressive policies on small arms internationally.
Last year, the United Kingdom launched two very
relevant initiatives. The first was the transfer control
initiative, which seeks to raise awareness and build
consensus subregionally, regionally and internationally
on the need to develop harmonized guidelines on small
arms transfers, with a view to developing international
agreement by the United Nations small arms review
conference in 2006. The second was the armed
violence and poverty initiative, which aims to
document the impact of arms on poverty and to
encourage
donors,
the
international
financial
institutions and developing countries to design
development programmes which take account of and
seek to address the root causes of armed violence.
But much more needs to be done if these
initiatives are to have a lasting impact. On the transfer
control initiative, the United Kingdom will use the next
year as an opportunity to build consensus with, we

3

S/PV.4896

hope, others in Central and South America, South-East
Asia and East, West and Southern Africa. Next year,
we and our partners will try to build consensus within
the European Union, the United Nations and possibly
also the Group of Eight. While we do not expect the
task to be easy, if we sustain our efforts from now until
the United Nations review conference takes place in
2006, we believe that the initiative stands a real chance
of success.
We welcome the recent decision to expand the
scope of the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms as a global transparency and confidence-building
measure. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Council call for the strict
enforcement of embargoes to countries or regions
threatened by, engaged in or emerging from armed
conflict. We welcome the Security Council focus on
practical measures, including further consideration of
financing and improving disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and incorporating the process into the
mandate of peacekeeping operations. We believe that
this could make a real contribution on the ground. We
support these and other practical measures and believe
that they will have an impact.
As you know, Mr. President, we support efforts
by the international community to tackle the problems
of weapons of mass destruction. In large parts of the
world, small arms and light weapons are weapons of
mass destruction, killing perhaps as many as half a
million people a year. We shall continue to support
United Nations efforts to tackle this terrible blight with
all our energy.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania associates itself
with the statement to be delivered later by the Irish
Presidency of the European Union (EU). In addition, I
would like to make some specific comments on the
topic under consideration today. We commend the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and useful
report, and express Romania’s support for the
recommendations contained therein.
The problems caused by small arms make this
question not just one of disarmament, but also one of
development, democracy, human rights and human
security. More than 650 million small arms are in
circulation throughout the world — more than one in
nine, in terms of the population of the planet. The
civilian population is affected by the negative aspects
of small arms and light weapons, in both developing

4

and developed countries. That sombre reality makes the
topic under discussion today a global one.
The illicit traffic in and flow of small arms and
light weapons is a source of instability and human
suffering. But it also feeds organized crime and
terrorism and is capable of undermining peace
initiatives. The proliferation of these weapons
exacerbates conflict, sparks refugee flows, undermines
the rule of law and spawns a culture of violence and
impunity. The result can be a destabilizing
accumulation of such weapons, sponsoring civil war
and creating public disorder, the displacement of the
population and the blocking of economic and social
development. In almost all of the conflicts that took
place in the past decade, ranging from the Great Lakes
region of Africa to the Balkans and Central and South
Asia, the weapons used by the various parties were
mainly small arms and light weapons. Their
availability may prolong fighting, reduce the
willingness to negotiate peaceful solutions and limit
the capacity of States and international organizations to
engage in conflict prevention, management and
resolution efforts.
These arms are used by criminal organizations
operating on either a national or transnational basis. As
a result, the militarization of crime becomes a threat
not only to countries torn by internal conflict but also
to States that are free from instability, but which are
used as routes of transit or trans-shipment for illegal
transactions.
Countries facing economic and social difficulties
are especially vulnerable to additional challenges posed
by illicit traffic in arms and drugs. An increase in crime
and violence can become a serious obstacle to national
development and well-being.
On the other hand, countries have the right to
self-defence in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Arms production and transfers for that purpose
are therefore legitimate. Transfers should therefore be
conducted in a very responsible manner. The arms
industry must be carefully controlled by Government
policies and regulations, and clear and strict criteria on
arms exports should be implemented.
There are no simple solutions, however, and no
single method for dealing with the impact of the illicit
trade in small arms. Political commitments can,
however, make a critical difference in saving lives and
easing suffering.

S/PV.4896

In recent years, an increasing number of States
have committed themselves to abide by and implement
regional and international standards to enhance export
controls in order to prevent the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. The United Nations
Programme of Action, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) document of 2000
and the EU Code of Conduct and other related EU
documents are the most relevant standards in place.
The effective implementation of such commitments is
indeed a complex and challenging task which requires
not only political will and adequate resources, but also
transparency, coordination and cooperation in order to
identify and develop a common understanding of
procedures, standards and mechanisms to enforce
controls.
Most countries already have in place laws and
regulations that are used to control the production, use
and transfer of small arms and light weapons.
However, in some countries these existing laws appear
to be inadequate, while control procedures can be
vulnerable to misuse. As a country with a mature
export control system and responsible conduct with
regard to arms transfers, Romania will further promote
the full implementation of the agreed international
instruments and standards on small arms and light
weapons. Romania’s policy on small arms will
continue to be focused on combating illicit trafficking,
pursuing a responsible and transparent policy on legal
transfers and promoting the removal and destruction of
surpluses.
In implementing its commitments under the
Programme of Action, early in 2002 Romania
embarked on a programme of destruction of its surplus
of small arms and light weapons, with financial
assistance from the United States, the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands and Norway. Romania stands ready to
share its experience with all countries and to assist
other States in establishing and developing sound
export control systems.
As the current report of the Secretary-General
indicates, some progress has been achieved so far at the
global, regional and national levels. Yet a lot issues
relating to small arms and light weapons remain to be
discussed and agreed upon by means of elaborating and
enforcing international norms and regulations in this
field. The fight against terrorism and organized crime
demonstrates the need for security forces to be well
trained and equipped to respond effectively to such

threats. It also shows that we need effective controls to
ensure that terrorist groups and criminals do not have
access to such weapons. We are not yet close to
achieving global legal standards which would help
keep small arms away from human rights abusers. One
step forward is the United Nations Firearms Protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and Romania has started the legal
procedures for accession to that international
instrument.
The Security Council has a major role to play in
making small arms a focus of global attention and
action. It could add value by improving the
effectiveness of its arms embargoes, by putting an end
to the economy of war, by encouraging moratoriums of
arms sales to conflict regions and by supporting
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes.
The minimum requirement for Governments to
report to the United Nations on their small-arms
activities, including new categories, such as manportable air-defence systems (MANPADS), must be
raised. In this respect, Romania welcomes the
international efforts made and the positive results
achieved in 2003 in order to limit MANPADS.
Romania supported the inclusion of this new
category in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms transfers, and a Romanian
representative participated in the expert group that
issued that recommendation.
Romania welcomed the OSCE Maastricht
decision regarding the inclusion of MANPADS in the
annual reports relating to OSCE Document on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the Wassenaar
Arrangement
plenary
decision
regarding
the
notification of MANPADS exports.
Weapons management, and in particular the
control of civilian possession of small arms and light
weapons in post-conflict societies, is central to longerterm human security. This will be effective only if it
takes place within the framework of comprehensive
programmes of security reform, subject to the authority
of civilian representative governments. These are only
a few, but important, elements that, I believe, we all
have to consider in our future undertakings.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me first congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative on small arms. I

5

S/PV.4896

will abbreviate my statement in the light of your
prescriptions this morning.
The easy availability of small arms and light
weapons continues to stoke conflicts, increase their
intensity and cause a high number of casualties, apart
from making peacekeeping much more complicated
and risky.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
significance of effective governmental control over the
export and transit of small arms, meaningful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes in post-conflict situations, and greater
attention to end-user certificate systems and illicit
brokering activities.
We are also encouraged by the fact that the
Programme of Action on the illicit trade in small arms
is in the process of implementation. The Biennial
review Meeting has noted forward movement and
identified areas where more efforts will be needed. The
establishment of an open-ended working group this
year to negotiate an international instrument on
marking and tracing is another step forward. We
support these efforts.
However, there have been mixed results on the
Secretary-General’s recommendations. First, we
believe that there has been slow response in breaking
the vicious cycle of illicit trade in small arms and the
exploitation of natural resources. It is important to
trace the financial transactions involved in the illicit
trade of small arms on the one hand, and the illegal
trade of natural resources on the other.
Secondly, DDR has not gathered momentum,
primarily because of resource constraints. The
Secretary-General has rightly expressed concern that
this risks jeopardizing not only the disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
operations
themselves, but also the entire peace process.
Thirdly, Member States’ lack of capacity in the
legal and technical areas, especially on the question of
marking and tracing, has put further constraints on
combating the problem of small arms.
For effective implementation, a host of actions
are required at the national, regional and international
levels.
First, the developed countries should make
available the necessary financial resources to

6

developing countries for capacity-building, including
legal and technical expertise and transfer of
technology.
Secondly, there should be a stigmatization of all
financial transactions involved in the illicit trade of
small arms, including those relating to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
Thirdly, a political commitment and action are
necessary to resolve the underlying causes of disputes.
Pakistan has had to grapple with the millions of
small arms and light weapons that found their way into
our country during the course of the 20-year war in
Afghanistan. The Government of Pakistan is
vigorously implementing a programme of action on
small arms and light weapons. The following measures
are noteworthy.
First, the production and manufacturing of small
arms and light weapons is undertaken only by the
public sector.
Secondly, a record is kept of all types of arms
manufactured by the public-sector ordnance factories
or imported into Pakistan.
Thirdly, all small arms and light weapons
produced are uniquely marked to maintain a distinction
for civilian, law enforcement and armed forces uses.
Fourthly, Pakistan observes strict export-control
measures for small arms and light weapons, including
no-objection certificates, end-user certificates and a
consultative governmental process, inter alia to ensure
compliance with United Nations embargoes.
Fifthly, reforms have been instituted in the police
forces’ organizational structure and in the area of their
responsibilities and equipment in order to insure
against the proliferation of small arms.
And sixthly, a public-awareness campaign was
launched in August 2001.
Those measures have yielded encouraging results.
As of April 2003, around 250,000 illicit small arms and
light weapons of different categories and types were
recovered, confiscated and destroyed. A total of 85,000
people were prosecuted in the process of the collection
of illegal small arms in circulation. That effort is
continuing.
As a front-line State in the global fight against
terrorism, Pakistan has established a number of joint

S/PV.4896

counter-terrorism working groups at the regional level,
including with China and the Russian Federation.
Pakistan has also proposed similar arrangements with
other countries in the region, and we remain hopeful
that we will reach bilateral arrangements for this
purpose.
A tripartite commission between Pakistan,
Afghanistan and the United States was established last
year to resolve, among other issues, the problem of the
illicit flow of small arms and light weapons across
borders.
Pakistan will continue to support comprehensive
efforts at the national, regional and international levels
to address these other weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, we thank
you for having provided the Council and other
Members of the United Nations this opportunity to
address the important issue of small arms and light
weapons, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs for having presented the
Secretary-General’s report on the progress so far made
on the issue.
Why are solutions in combating the illicit trade in
small arms still not in sight? Two reasons stand out:
first, the magnitude of the problem, and secondly, the
fact that it has been only a little more than two years
since the adoption in July 2001 of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
The scope of the problem encompasses both the
proliferation of millions of loose firearms, which claim
millions of lives each year, and the entrenched
clandestine system of illegal arms trafficking. Indeed,
the problem can be likened to a malignant disease
requiring bold and decisive surgery.
This menace to international security — a factor
that protracts and complicates armed conflicts and
fuels the rise of terrorism and international organized
crime — has been identified and internationally
recognized as such. The identification and appreciation
by the international community of the gravity and
complexity of the problem represents a significant
accomplishment that will facilitate the adoption and
enforcement of appropriate measures. The importance
of this first step — the completion of the diagnostic
phase — cannot be overemphasized.

The next step concerns the prescriptive stage.
Here I would like to focus on two points.
The first area of consideration to which I would
like to invite the Council’s attention is the value of
complementarity between the two vital organs of the
United Nations — the Security Council and the
General Assembly — which are both seized with the
issue of small arms and light weapons.
If we were to examine closely the 12
recommendations of the Secretary-General, some of
them fall — appropriately — within the competence of
the General Assembly: for instance, recommendations
1, 2, 3, 9 and 12. Recommendations 5, 7, 10 and 11 fall
within
the
Council’s
competence,
while
recommendations 6 and 8 concern both the Council and
the General Assembly.
The Assembly is seized with establishing
universal norms and making rules to control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. On the
other hand, the Council is focused on practical
measures such as arms embargoes and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in conflict situations.
We realize, however, that their respective concerns on
the issue of small arms are not mutually exclusive, but
overlap and complement each other. The nuances of
organic competencies should thus be carefully weighed
so as not to slow down the progress of work by
overburdening the Council with the same issues
already under consideration by the Assembly. My
delegation therefore supports the holding of
consultations between the presidencies of the Council
and of the Assembly on this important issue of small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects to identify
complementarities and to avoid duplication in their
work so that the many complexities of the issue can be
addressed in the process.
We also recognize that many Member States have
undertaken initiatives to address the issue of small
arms and light weapons, as reported during the United
Nations First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
last year. The Assembly, however, still faces the task of
coming up with an international instrument for possible
completion before the first review conference on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, to be held in 2006.

7

S/PV.4896

We welcome General Assembly resolution
58/241, adopted last year, which established an openended working group to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. In the same vein, the
Council must adopt effective and practical enforcement
strategies for arms embargoes, for targeted sanctions
and for restricting the supply of ammunition to areas of
instability. The sanctions committees must be provided
by Member States with information on alleged
violations of arms embargoes.
The second point I wish to bring to the Council’s
attention relates to regional and subregional
cooperative arrangements to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. The process leading to
regional cooperation should be pursued just as
vigorously as the wider multilateral cooperative
processes and the national processes of formulating and
enforcing legislative and regulatory measures. There
should be parallel efforts to develop regional
arrangements as a vital segment of the policy
continuum. In fact, global experience has shown that
the illegal trade in small arms and light weapons has
passed mainly through porous border routes in conflict
areas.
Promoting regional awareness of the issue and
encouraging cooperation among regional partners in
the fields of information exchange and training in law
enforcement, customs and airport controls, among
others, are effective tools to control the traffic in small
arms and light weapons. My country in particular
benefited from such an exercise in the Regional
Seminar on Implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, held in Manila in July 2002, co-sponsored by
the Government of Canada and supported by the
United Nations Secretariat. We are aware that similar
exercises have been undertaken in other parts of Asia,
South-Eastern Europe and Central Africa. We
encourage more cooperation in that regard in order to
prevent the diversion of small arms and light weapons
to terrorist groups.
My country fully recognizes the tragic loss of
innocent lives and the insecurity and fear that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons creates
among the civilian population of the entire world. My
delegation is therefore determined to contribute —
together with relevant international organizations, civil

8

society and other actors — to the search for solutions
to this global problem.
Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
submitting his report on small arms (S/2003/1217). We
have carefully studied that document and the
conclusions and recommendations contained in it. They
confirm that the United Nations is playing a leading
role in taking a comprehensive approach to the
resolution of problems related to small arms and light
weapons. The Russian Federation consistently
advocates enhancing the Organization’s coordinating
role in that area, primarily in resolving problems
involving the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
Over the past year, a number of very important
activities were held in this area, revealing substantial
potential in the international community to fight the
illicit trade in such weapons. The holding in July 2003
of the First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is a
clear example of how we can use the potential of the
United Nations and of regional and non-governmental
organizations in carrying out this most complex effort.
Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/241
of 23 December 2003, on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects, work will begin
this year in the open-ended working group to prepare
an international document to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons. We trust that the establishment
of a comprehensive monitoring mechanism will erect a
serious obstacle to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons throughout the world. We are convinced
that in future, the main work in this area should be
carried out within that framework.
The Security Council has repeatedly tackled
problems involving the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons as they relate to conflict situations on its
agenda. In that regard, the Council’s comprehensive
consideration of this subject in March 2003 in the
context of resolving complex problems related to
maintaining and restoring international peace and
security on the African continent — particularly in
West Africa — was extremely useful and timely. Great

S/PV.4896

attention was devoted to that issue during the Security
Council mission to Central and West African countries.
The Russian Federation consistently advocates
imposing severe measures in cases where weapons are
supplied to illegal armed groups. Experience with the
imposition of arms embargoes against the Taliban
movement in conflict areas has confirmed the
effectiveness of such measures when undertaken by the
Security Council. Priority also continues to be placed
on monitoring compliance with Council-imposed arms
embargoes, enhancing the effectiveness of the
monitoring machinery for the tracking of violations of
such embargoes.
Recently, in the context of conducting
peacekeeping operations sponsored by the United
Nations, special attention — as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report — has been devoted to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants and to the inclusion in the
mandate of such operations of the collection and
destruction of illicit small arms and light weapons, in
close cooperation with the parties to conflicts. Donor
support for DDR programmes is an important
prerequisite for their successful realization.
Particular cases and practical experience related
to the settlement of conflict situations convincingly
confirm the negative impact of and the direct link
among the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
the activities of illegal armed groups, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the involvement of
child soldiers in conflict, mass violations of human
rights and of the norms of international humanitarian
law, and transborder crime.
The dangerous linkage between the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
international terrorism is becoming increasingly
obvious. We believe it is important that we continue to
devote special attention to specific, practical and
achievable measures to fight the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons both at the preventive stage
and during the post-conflict settlement phase. In that
connection, the experience gained by regional
organizations is extremely timely and useful.
For its part, the Russian Federation will continue
to make a substantial contribution to solving the
problem of the illegal trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.

Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): The
illegal circulation of small arms across national
borders, their abundant availability in certain regions
of the world and their improper use are at the root of
the prolongation of many civil wars and internal armed
conflicts and thus thwart efforts to promote economic
and social development.
The situation is particularly worrisome in Africa
because the illegal circulation of arms has facilitated
and encouraged recourse to force to settle internal
political crises, to the detriment of dialogue and
negotiation. As well, once conflicts have erupted, the
illegal trafficking of light weapons helps exacerbate
them. In that context, other particularly worrisome
phenomena have arisen: child soldiers, the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of crisis-stricken
countries and the emergence of a self-sustaining war
economy that makes it difficult to restore peace.
The illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons constitutes a grave challenge for crisisstricken countries and the regions to which they
belong. Porous borders and weak security and
monitoring structures bring the risk of widespread
destabilization in certain subregions of Africa. That
phenomenon is particularly evident in West Africa.
The impact on the protection of human rights and
respect for international humanitarian law is
particularly devastating for civilian populations,
notably the most vulnerable groups: women, children
and the elderly. Internal conflicts increasingly involve
non-State armed groups; this complicates the issue of
humanitarian action and the protection of human rights.
One can thus identify a long list of the harmful
consequences of the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. They provide the reasons justifying the
mobilization of the international community and the
United Nations and the particular attention that the
Security Council devotes to this problem.
I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2003/1217), which takes stock
of the initiatives undertaken. I would like to express to
the
Secretary-General
my
delegation’s
great
appreciation for the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
his previous report (S/2002/1053).
It is encouraging to note that the results of the
work of the United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts have led the General Assembly to create a

9

S/PV.4896

working group tasked with negotiating an international
instrument to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
This should strengthen the capacity of States to
cooperate in identifying and monitoring small arms in a
reliable manner. We hope that this work will make
progress; for our part, we intend to contribute actively
to that work.
The phenomenon of the illegal trafficking of
small arms persists because the monitoring
mechanisms are easily eluded and because the
exchange of information is inadequate. In that regard,
we hope that the results of the feasibility study on
Interpol’s Weapons and Explosives Tracking System
will soon be made known. My delegation believes that
the issue of trafficking and that of the illicit brokering
in small arms are components of a single problem.
Closer cooperation among States and the creation of
national registers are therefore essential for the
rigorous regulation of this activity.
It is opportune to recall the 31 October 2002
presidential statement of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2002/30), which, among other things,
underlines the need to study the feasibility of
developing an end-user certificate system. The
Secretariat could be involved in the framework of
support for the efforts of the working group established
by the General Assembly.
The Security Council, for its part, could further
consider the means to ensure better compliance with
embargoes and sanctions. The Council could further
consider innovative ways to ensure greater compliance
with embargoes on small arms and sanctions that could
be imposed, including the possibility of putting an end
to the supply of ammunition because, without
ammunition, all weapons are harmless.
United Nations support for regional moratoriums,
such as that agreed by the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States, can help overcome
the proliferation of small arms. Here, my delegation
would like to underline the importance of the support
the United Nations provides for the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development in West Africa.
It is crucial to monitor stocks of small arms and
their transfer to non-State actors. In that regard, the
Security Council must be aware of all the consequences
of the triangular relationship among the exploitation of

10

natural resources, the financing of conflicts and the
circulation of small arms, and, as a result, should put
an end to this trafficking, which fuels wars.
My delegation also wishes to recall the important
March 2003 workshop on the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities in
West Africa, which made clear the relationships among
mercenary activities, the illegal trafficking of small
arms and the exploitation of resources in order to
finance belligerents.
We welcome the fact that consideration of the
regional dimension of African conflicts, particularly in
West Africa, has become a widely shared concern. That
consideration of the regional dimension of conflicts
should enable the strengthening of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in the
framework of the peacekeeping operation mandates.
Security Council debates on children and armed
conflict and on post-conflict situations should enable
us further to examine these questions. At this stage, we
will limit ourselves to underlining the need for
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes to consider child soldiers in an appropriate
manner, taking their specific needs into account.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union, which
will be delivered later by the Irish Presidency.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/1217), and we also welcome this debate on a
subject that has quite a peculiar relationship to
international peace and security because small arms,
unlike weapons of mass destruction, are mainly held by
private individuals, and yet they kill more human
beings than any other type of weapon.
There are two key areas where small arms and
light weapons have played a prominent role in past
deliberations of the Security Council: the disarmament
of ex-combatants as part of peacekeeping missions and
the imposition of arms embargoes. Perhaps less
obvious, but of equal importance for the work of the
Council, may be a third area: the prevention of armed
conflict through disarmament measures. Let me briefly
touch on these three areas.
As a consequence of the increasing complexity of
peacekeeping, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants has become a
standard element in almost every peacekeeping

S/PV.4896

mandate the Council has issued in the past few years.
There are various approaches to the disarmament of excombatants. One approach has been to offer payments
for giving up weapons. Such an approach may work in
limited cases where there is no likelihood of renewed
weapons purchases. Another probably more sustainable
approach would be to provide incentives that are more
in line with the goal of transforming combatants’
military life into civilian life. This can be done by
exchanging weapons for development or by providing
ex-combatants with opportunities to earn their
livelihood through community-related work. Therefore,
ways and means to create work for ex-combatants need
to be found. This is a top priority in peacekeeping in
order to keep ex-combatants away from arms.
Furthermore, we also need to focus on arms
stocks, be they of weapons collected from excombatants or of weapons held in army depots. Stocktaking, guarding depots and, if necessary, destruction
of weapons are essential pre-conditions for successful
peacekeeping. The Council must consider this
whenever it is working on a mandate for a
peacekeeping operation.
Guarding and possibly reducing existing stocks,
however, is but one side of the coin. These measures
will remain of little effect unless the influx of new
weapons is prevented. The Council therefore must
continue to intensify its arms embargo policy when it is
preparing mandates for peace operations.
However, embargoes serve their purpose only if
everyone observes them meticulously. Effective
measures must be taken in the field to control possible
points of entry for weapons shipments. Peacekeeping
units may play an important role in this context.
Member States that might be countries of origin or
transfer of weapons shipments must be aware of their
responsibility under international law to guarantee
arms embargoes through measures to control and, if
necessary, interdict arms shipments by non-State
actors. When monitoring the effectiveness of arms
embargoes, the Council has to observe all segments of
illicit arms shipments, not just the receiving end.
Efforts are underway in the General Assembly to
work out an international instrument on marking and
tracing small arms, which will be extremely useful in
monitoring illicit arms flows. Germany applies strict
national standards on licensing small arms transactions
and transfers and has a transparent reporting policy for

such licenses. Germany therefore intends to actively
support the work of the open-ended working group on
marking and tracing, which is about to convene. The
Council will no doubt profit from such an instrument,
which will facilitate the implementation of arms
embargoes. Likewise, efforts to find ways to regulate
arms brokerage, which has the full support of Germany,
should be continued and intensified. Internationally
approved standards on brokerage would also work as a
useful tool towards more effective arms embargoes.
In line with the increased awareness for the need
of the prevention of armed conflicts, which the Council
acknowledged in resolution 1366 (2001), I would like
to recall the importance of two elements: first, the
elimination of surplus weapons stocks; and secondly,
strict governmental control over licit weapons. These
are first and foremost these are the responsibility of
Member States themselves. Regional organizations
may also play an important supportive role. The
Programme of Action on Small Arms, mapped out at
the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, provides excellent guidance in this respect,
and numerous organizations, including the United
Nations Development Programme, national aid
organizations and non-governmental organizations are
prepared to provide know-how and funds for this
purpose. The Group of Interested States in Practical
Disarmament Measures, chaired by Germany, tries to
make its own modest contribution towards that end.
If there are clear indications of massive arms
flows into regions with heightened political tensions,
the Council, acting under its mandate to secure
international peace, should carefully scrutinize the
situation and take the necessary action. The imposition
of an arms embargo sooner, rather than later, might
help to keep things under control. Likewise, the
Council may want to consider the freezing of funds
used by non-State actors to acquire small arms in large
quantities. In any case, preventing uncontrolled flows
of small weapons into areas of tension is one of the
most important tools of conflict-prevention, of deescalation and of post-conflict peace-building.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Our thanks
to the Department for Disarmament Affairs for this
excellent report (S/2003/1217) on how the Council can
contribute to dealing with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. The recommendations of the report
have Spain’s firm support and the conclusions that can

11

S/PV.4896

be drawn from it are positive, on the whole, although it
indicates that important gaps remain.

problems of illicit brokerage, all of these being key
elements in combating illicit trade.

As the Secretary-General has recalled and as has
been stated here, small arms and light weapons,
although they are not considered weapons of mass
destruction, have caused 90 per cent of the deaths in
conflicts since the Second World War. More than ever,
they represent a significant threat to peace and stability
in many countries. It is well known that they constitute
the main instrument of violence in internal conflicts,
their victims generally being civilians. Their
proliferation is also closely related to high levels of
crime and, of course, to the great scourge of our time,
terrorism. Fuelling that vicious circle is their illicit
trade in exchange for currency, gold, diamonds and
other natural resources and often illegally exploited
resources such as drugs.

Increasing the effectiveness of end-user
certificates and combating unlawful brokerage are
questions that have already been addressed in the First
Committee. For the time being, those discussions have
not yet been translated into concrete action, except for
the decision of the General Assembly in resolution
58/241 to ask the Secretary-General to consult with
Member States and international and regional
organizations on ways and means to enhance
international cooperation against illegal brokerage.

The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms is a politically binding instrument.
Hence, despite its unquestionable value, an effective
action against illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects calls for complimentary
legislative work, both internationally — that is,
through conventions — and domestically, through
legislation. It is not in vain that the Programme of
Action’s preamble gives States the main responsibility
for adopting measures aimed at combating the illicit
trade in these weapons.
Spain welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of a decision to set up a working group to
negotiate an instrument on the marking and tracing of
small arms and light weapons, the first legally binding
instrument that will come into being under the
Programme of Action. My country trusts that the
instrument to be agreed will contain all of the elements
needed to guarantee its effectiveness when it comes to
helping to prevent these kinds of weapons from ending
up in the wrong hands, especially among terrorist
groups.
Spain believes it is appropriate for the Security
Council to become increasingly involved in combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and, in
conjunction with the Assembly, to promote the
adoption of national measures as well as international
and regional cooperation to strengthen controls over
exports, imports and transit of small arms,
effectiveness of end-user certificates and combating

12

We believe, however, that the Council should
explore specific modalities in connection with the
Assembly on those two concrete issues, especially to
promote the development of long-term strategies aimed
at preventing and eradicating the illicit trade in those
weapons. Strengthening international and regional
cooperation are key elements in combating that trade.
Therefore, I should like to refer to a number of
initiatives in which my country is participating. First,
the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports
is applied by Spain and constitutes one of the most
advanced instruments with regard to laying down
common criteria for export of conventional weapons
with transparency. This is an example of regional
cooperation. The same can be said of the common
position on the control of brokerage, which requires
middlemen to be registered before they can conduct
their transactions. Spain will soon incorporate into its
legislation the recommendations of that joint position.
Finally, the permanent parliamentary forum on
small arms and light weapons in Central America,
constituted by the national parliaments of Spain,
Sweden and the countries of Central America has, as
its objective, the harmonization of national laws on
small arms and light weapons. It represents an
outstanding example of regional cooperation in that
field.
In conclusion, Spain considers that the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms constitutes an
important mechanism for global transparency. We
therefore welcome the recent decision to expand its
scope to cover so-called man-portable air defense
systems. If those systems were to fall into the hands of
terrorists, it would be an extremely grave threat to the
security of air traffic and thereby constitute a danger to
international peace and security. For that reason, my

S/PV.4896

country believes the Council should address this
question as soon as possible.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Ambassador Munoz, I would like to thank you for
organizing this meeting today and for your effort in
drafting a presidential statement on this very important
issue. I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Abe for his comments outlining the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The United States recognizes the serious
consequences of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, especially in areas of conflict where the
problem is most acute. The widespread proliferation of
these illicit arms exacerbates conflict, hinders
economic and social development, fuels crime and
terrorism, and contributes to the continued
destabilization of war-torn societies.
The United States believes that a practical,
results-oriented approach to the problem of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons is best. Each
country must begin its efforts at the national level by
adopting strict export and import controls, strong arms
brokering laws, ensuring the security of small arms and
light weapons stockpiles held for national defence, and
disposing of excess weapons.
The United States was pleased to participate in
the successful Biennial Meeting of States held in July
2003 to review progress in fulfilling the
recommendations adopted in the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We commend the excellent stewardship of
Ambassador Kuniko Inoguchi of Japan, who chaired
the Biennial Meeting. The vast majority of
participating States provided national reports on the
status of their efforts to fulfil the recommendations
included in the Programme of Action, greatly aiding
efforts to understand and diagnose the problems
associated with that illicit trade and helping us to
effectively address those problems. We commend those
States that provided national reports to the United
Nations Department for Disarmament Affairs for the
Biennial Meeting and encourage all those who did not
provide reports to do so in the near future.
The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report and appreciates its recommendations.
Many of those recommendations are aimed squarely at
the immediate problems of illicit arms trafficking in
regions of conflict, such as enforcement of Security

Council embargoes, efforts to
improve
the
effectiveness of export controls and, specifically, the
use of end-user certificates, better controls over the
activities of arms brokers and support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts in post-conflict
environments. With regard to the last item, we
commend the work of the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts in expanding the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms to include man-portable
air defense systems (MANPADS) and voluntary
reporting on small arms and light weapons. The United
States and many other countries, as my Spanish
colleague mentioned, are deeply concerned with the
grave threat to civil aviation posed by the proliferation
of MANPADS to terrorist groups and their State
sponsors. We call on all Member States to provide full
and accurate reporting of MANPADS transfers in their
annual submissions to the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and encourage the adoption of the
MANPADS guidelines developed last year by the G8
and the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for
Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and
Technologies.
The United States continues to seek partnerships
with countries requiring assistance in the areas of small
arms and light weapons destruction, physical security
and management of stockpiles, export controls and law
enforcement training. Given our acute concern over the
proliferation of MANPADS to terrorist groups, we have
recently expanded our assistance programmes to
safeguard and eliminate those dangerous weapons.
Since the inception of our small arms and light
weapons destruction program in 2000, we have
provided assistance for the destruction of nearly
700,000 weapons and over 75 million rounds of
ammunition in 13 countries. In addition to those
bilateral efforts, we continue to actively participate in
regional and international efforts such as the InterAmerican Drug Abuse Control Commission’s Group of
Experts, which successfully developed a model arms
brokering regulations programme for the countries of
the Organization of American States.
The United States has demonstrated a
commitment to finding practical and effective ways of
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons such as our own strict control regime for
small arms and light weapons and the significant
technical and financial support we provide to other
States. We very much look forward to working with

13

S/PV.4896

other States to eliminate the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and its harmful consequences
around the world.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The Brazilian
delegation is particularly pleased to congratulate you,
Sir, for the important initiative of debating this item
during the month of January. We are thankful, as well,
to the Secretary-General, for his report on ways and
means in which the Security Council could contribute
to dealing with the question of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration.
The issue of the uncontrolled traffic of this kind
of weapon became a great concern for the international
community, due to the tragic consequences of arms
availability in terms of making local conflicts more
lethal and generating a sense of insecurity in civil
societies.
The issue of small arms, whether in the context of
disarmament, national security, public security or from
a humanitarian perspective, must be permanently
discussed in all relevant forums — subregional,
regional or multilateral. The Security Council has been
dealing with this problem, when it is associated with
conflict
prevention,
implementation
of
arms
embargoes, post-conflict arms collection and the tasks
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
In 1999, when the subject of small arms was
discussed in the Council for the first time, Brazil also
had the opportunity to occupy a non-permanent seat.
Since then, the Council has reached common ground on
that issue, permitting a broader understanding of its
diversified aspects. The implementation of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, enacted in 2001 and
recently evaluated in July 2003, is especially important
in our effort to find an acceptable solution to that
serious problem.
Unfortunately, despite national efforts, there are
still loopholes in the regime for the legal transfer of
arms that allow for the diversion of arms to the illegal
market. Brazil stands as an example of such efforts,
having adapted its legislation to current necessities.
Recently, President Lula da Silva sanctioned the
innovative Disarmament Statute, which restricts the
bearing, possession and commerce of arms, in addition
to criminalizing international arms trafficking. Brazil

14

has also adopted a national arms system as a measure
of preventive control. Aside from such strengthening of
legislative measures, we also regularly exchange
information with our neighbours and have established
border procedures.
With our Southern Common Market partners, we
have endeavoured to establish a joint mechanism
establishing a registry of buyers and vendors of
firearms, ammunition and explosives. In our region as
a whole, which has been a pioneer in dealing with
small arms, as well as with other matters relating to
disarmament, the Inter-American Convention Against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and other Related
Materials is in effect. Notwithstanding all these
national, subregional and regional initiatives, we still
have not solved our problem.
For this reason, the step taken by the General
Assembly towards constituting a working group
responsible for devising an international instrument to
identify and trace small arms is crucial. We expect the
document to be produced in forthcoming sessions to be
legally binding and responsive to the urgent necessity
of interrupting the illegal flow of weapons.
The head of the delegation of the Philippines,
Ambassador Lauro Baja, made interesting comments
on the recommendations contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, drawing our attention to the
complementarity between the work of the Security
Council and that of the General Assembly on this issue
and to the need for consultations on this point between
the Presidents of those organs.
A solution to the problem of small arms will
require the commitment of all States and the assistance
of civil society, in addition to the necessary input of
international, regional and subregional organisms. The
Council will not be able to meet the challenge alone.
The fact that it is discussing the matter and listening to
the opinion of States members of the Council and other
Members about expectations with regard to its actions
is positive, however. This open debate assures all
Members of the Council’s renewed commitment to
working together and contributing to collective efforts
towards eradicating the illegal flow of small arms.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, as well as Mr. Abe for his briefing. We would

S/PV.4896

also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate today on such a crucial issue.
It is well known that conventional arms are the
weapons that are responsible for the greatest number of
victims in the world today. We are aware of the scourge
that light weapons, in particular, constitute in this
regard. We support and are taking an active part in the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. In this regard, we welcome the adoption by
the General Assembly of resolution 58/241 of 23
December 2003, by which is was decided, in particular,
to set up a working group to negotiate an international
instrument to identify and trace small arms.
That is not the only aspect of the problem,
however. The question of brokering and the issue of
end-user certificates also merit the attention of the
international community. But work on identifying and
tracing represents the first step towards a treaty to
control the illicit trade in small arms.
I would like once again to congratulate, on behalf
of my country, Ambassador Anton Thalmann of
Switzerland, who has just been appointed to chair the
work of that group. As soon as the Swiss candidacy
was announced by the President of the Swiss
Confederation in the General Assembly, the President
of the French Republic assured him of the support of
France. As the Council knows, our two countries have
worked together for a long time with a view to making
progress on the identification and tracing of small
arms. France will work actively to make progress on
the elaboration of such an instrument. I would like to
reaffirm our hope, expressed during the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, that any such
instrument will be legally binding.
Combating the illicit trade in small arms is of
major concern to the international community. As
emphasized in the United Nations Programme of
Action, that concern is global, regional and national. In
Europe, the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and the
political changes that have taken place in Eastern
Europe have resulted in the dangerous proliferation of
small weapons throughout the European continent.
Today, we are finding such arms in our own territory.
France remains particularly concerned about the
continued increase in the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons on the African continent — a

major factor in the destabilization of States there. I
would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the need for greater cooperation and
involvement on the part of the international
community, together with the African continent, in
combating the traffic in small arms and light weapons.
We believe, in particular, that specific attention should
be paid to this issue within the framework of the postconflict processes in Central Africa, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in West
Africa, where an important role should be played by
the Economic Community of West African States — as
mentioned earlier by the Ambassador of Benin — as
well as by the peacekeeping operations that have
already been set up and that will be set up in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire.
It would be useful to develop the regional
dimension in combating the illicit trade in small arms
as part of our effort to counter the proliferation of
weapons. In this regard, information exchanges on
various regional experiences should be more actively
promoted, including in the framework of the United
Nations. In that spirit, France, together with the
Netherlands, submitted this year to the General
Assembly a draft resolution on the promotion, at the
regional level in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe the United Nations Programme
of Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, to facilitate the sharing of
our experience within that body, which has already led
to the publication of eight best practices guides. We are
pleased that the draft resolution was adopted by
consensus. In the context of sharing information,
France can see only advantages in having the OSCE
best practice guides distributed by the Secretariat to
Member States as soon as possible.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report to the Security Council on small arms. In
addition, I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Abe, for his
introductory remarks.
The issue of small arms has attracted a great deal
of attention from the international community in recent
years. This reflects a common awareness that the
excessive accumulation of and illicit trade in small
arms
is
jeopardizing
stability,
post-conflict

15

S/PV.4896

reconstruction and social development in the areas and
countries concerned.
It is gratifying to note that the United Nations has
already taken a series of effective steps to deal with
this issue. In 2001, the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Firearms Protocol and the Programme of Action on
small arms were concluded. They provide a legal and
policy basis for an adequate solution to the issue of
small arms. This reflects the determination of the
international community to combat the illicit trade in
small arms.
During the past three years, great progress has
been made in accelerating the entry into force of the
Firearms Protocol and the implementation of the
Programme of Action on small arms. In particular, the
success of the 2003 United Nations First Biennial
Meeting of States on small arms has given fresh
impetus to the general implementation of the
programme of action.
The General Assembly, at its current session,
adopted resolution 58/241, which establishes a working
group to negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons. This will no doubt further stimulate
international efforts to combat illicit small arms.
Likewise, the Security Council has also attached
increasing importance to the issue of small arms. It has
organized several special meetings to consider the issue
and has adopted relevant presidential statements and
resolutions.
Moreover, the Security Council has also
emphasized the importance of resolving the problem of
the illicit trade in small arms in its consideration of a
series of related issues, including the protection of
civilians and of women and children in conflict.
Ensuring the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes in
the settling of regional conflicts, including the
collection and disposal of small arms, has also been of
major concern to the Security Council. All of these
factors have played a positive role in reducing the
illicit flow of small arms and in strengthening peace
and stability in the regions concerned.
In 2002 the Secretary-General put forward 12
recommendations concerning ways and means by
which the Security Council could contribute to dealing

16

with the question of small arms. Since then, United
Nations bodies, including the Security Council, have
made significant progress in dealing with this issue,
and we would like to express our appreciation in this
respect.
In our view, the Security Council should continue
to pay close attention to the issue of small arms, in
keeping with its mandate, and actively promote the
implementation of DDR processes in conflict regions
while closely monitoring the implementation of
relevant arms embargoes.
The Security Council should also strengthen its
coordination with the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies for concerted action to promote
the settlement of the question of small arms.
China has always attached great importance to the
combat against the illicit trade in small arms. We have
actively participated in international efforts in this
regard. In recent years, the Chinese Government has
been resolutely implementing the Programme of Action
on small arms, and it is now actively preparing for the
ratification and implementation of the Firearms
Protocol. Chinese experts have also actively
participated in the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts to identify and trace illicit arms.
We would like to join others in deploying
common efforts to facilitate an early and adequate
settlement of the question of small arms throughout the
world.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me first of
all to thank you, Mr. President, for having scheduled
this important meeting this morning. I should like also
to thank Under-Secretary-General Abe for having
introduced the Secretary-General’s report and for his
words this morning.
Preventing, combating and eradicating the
uncontrolled spread and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons is an integral part of the
Security Council’s peace efforts and represents a key
assignment for the Security Council in discharging its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Illicit small arms and light weapons are killing
people on a massive scale and are the main deadly
instruments in the hands of terrorists in several
countries around the globe. This debate is therefore

S/PV.4896

timely, as we believe that the Security Council has a
key role to play in this regard.
The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
acknowledges that the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in many regions of the world have had a wide
range
of
humanitarian
and
socio-economic
consequences and pose a serious threat to sustainable
development, peace and security. That phenomenon is
indeed a matter of serious international concern, since
it can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed
conflicts.
Small arms and light weapons are thus emerging
not only as a single disarmament and armaments
control issue, but as the source of a cluster of policy
issues with complex linkages among different elements
and regions.
The challenge will be to develop an adequate
political and practical framework within which all
relevant dimensions of this problem, including the
development dimension, can be effectively tackled in
the years to come.
In order to achieve that goal, we need to be
concrete in defining actions at the national, regional
and international levels, especially in strengthening
efforts in such key areas as manufacturing and export
controls, stockpile management, better end-user
certificates, and transparency and information
exchange on legal flows, brokering activities, and the
marking and tracing of small arms.
The United Nations Programme of Action
provides the international community with an
important tool in combating the source of illicit small
arms and light weapons. We are particularly
encouraged to see that regional and subregional
organizations are giving the question of small arms
high priority and that considerable efforts to implement
the Programme of Action are under way at the national
level.
To that effect, with the adoption in 2000 of the
Bamako Declaration on the illicit proliferation,
circulation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, the African Union has articulated a
continent-wide strategy for tackling the problem of
illicit small arms.
Correspondingly, the renewal by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) of its

moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons and the initiatives taken
with the framework of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), especially in
adopting improved national legislation to ensure
effective control of the export, import, transit,
stockpiling and storage of small arms, represents a
genuine effort to address the issue.
My country, Angola, has bitter experience with
trafficking in small arms and light weapons fuelled by
the illicit exploitation of natural resources, namely
diamonds, a problem of which the international
community has gained new awareness. That prompted
the Security Council to decisive action — imposing a
strict arms embargo against the rebels — which was
instrumental in bringing the conflict to an end. Angola
and its people are very grateful for the decisive
intervention of the Security Council.
Since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action, relative progress has been
achieved in this field. The United Nations has
established a Group of Governmental Experts to
examine the feasibility of developing an international
instrument on tracing. The progress already achieved,
particularly the report presented during the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly and General
Assembly resolution 58/241, represent very important
steps forward on issues related to the marking, tracing
and record-keeping of illicit small arms.
Measures to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and to promote peace-building and
conflict
prevention
must
be
implemented
simultaneously if we are to be successful. Thus,
providing for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of former combatants and
establishing measures for weapon collection and
destruction should always be considered in the context
of negotiated settlements and peacekeeping mandates.
Here, the references made a short while ago by the
representatives of Benin and France are relevant,
particularly to the situations prevailing in Central and
West Africa. In that connection, we fully support the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2003/1217). In addition, we believe it
important that the Security Council support efforts by
Governments and international institutions to develop
further steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating illicit arms
brokering.

17

S/PV.4896

We are facing what one could call a sequence of
complex crises in Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere. It is obvious that only a comprehensive
approach that takes into account socio-economic,
political, security and other factors can effectively
address the problems associated with small arms and
light weapons. The approach should be comprehensive,
in the sense that we need to address the issues at all
levels, from the global to the local. That implies
focusing on the link between licit and illicit flows of
small arms, because most weapons that are now illicit
originated from legal sources.
I should like to conclude by saying that the
international community’s efforts aimed at dealing with
small arms must be focused on implementing the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. My delegation
endorses the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report on small arms submitted to
the Security Council in December 2003, and fully
supports the draft presidential statement to be issued as
the outcome of this important meeting.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
welcomes the attention that the Security Council
continues to devote to the issue of small arms, whose
importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security is now self-evident. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2003/1217) and Mr. Abe for
his excellent introduction of it. I should like now to
make the following observations.
First of all, we must emphasize that the issue of
small arms — like that of conflict prevention — is an
area where the shared responsibility of the General
Assembly and the Security Council is obvious. The
Assembly is doing its part admirably: the convening in
July 2001 of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, followed by the adoption of a Programme
of Action aimed at preventing, combating and
eliminating the illicit trade in such weapons, made
great progress in heightening our collective awareness
of the spread of this scourge and of the threat it poses
to international peace and security, in that it maintains
and exacerbates conflicts and fuels terrorist networks
throughout the world.
For its part, the Security Council constantly
confronted with this scourge’s grave consequences in

18

managing conflict situations and conducting its fight
against international terrorism, took the initiative —
through today’s meeting and those preceding it in
August 2001 and October 2002 — to join its efforts
with those of the General Assembly, particularly by
formulating precise recommendations.
In that regard, my delegation shares the
Secretary-General’s view that we must strengthen the
interaction between those two principal organs in order
to promote the development of long-term strategies to
put an end to the illicit proliferation of small arms. In
the normative and legislative areas, such interaction
should be carried out swiftly within four areas.
The first is the framework of the open-ended
working group charged with negotiating an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons, which the General Assembly
created last month through its resolution 58/241.
The second is the establishment of supplementary
measures to strengthen international cooperation to
prevent, combat and eliminate the illicit brokering of
small arms, particularly through the widespread
establishment of national registers of arms brokers and,
in the case of arms embargo violations, registers of
intermediary firms and transport agents, as well as the
organization of broad-based consultations open to
States and other entities, provided for in resolution
58/241.
The third area is that of the objectives to be
pursued under an end-user certificate regime at the
regional and international levels and under an
information-exchange and verification mechanism to
monitor exports more effectively.
The fourth and final area is the improvement of
transparency in the sphere of armaments — particularly
efforts aimed at universal and consistent participation
in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms — it being understood that transparency must
also cover national production and related purchases as
well as military allocations. From that perspective, the
establishment of a mechanism for structured
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
Security Council is very desirable.
Because it bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council, for its part, should make further use

S/PV.4896

of the means of action conferred on it by the Charter to
fight the illicit trade in and circulation of small arms.
The Council should remind Member States —
particularly the countries that produce small arms — of
their obligation to implement all resolutions containing
sanctions, particularly arms embargoes, and to enforce
arms embargoes more rigorously and effectively, in
conformity with Article 41 of the Charter.
Consideration of the reports and activities of the
various sanctions committees and mechanisms
established by the Council in various regions reveals,
however, a diversity of situations, requiring diverse
actions. The example of West Africa shows that the
widespread idea that the States neighbouring conflict
areas bear primary responsibility for arms embargo
violations does not always hold true. The praiseworthy
commitment by the States of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in settling the
conflicts in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau shows that we should attribute the illicit
circulation of small arms in that conflict region more to
the very piecemeal implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes,
with well-known consequences for the transfer of idle
former combatants — particularly the vulnerable
category of child soldiers — from one conflict zone to
another, and the criminal phenomenon of mercenaries,
as well as for the entry of new quantities of weapons. It
is therefore of the greatest importance that the Security
Council echo most resolutely the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report on the need to
provide DDR operations with planned, foreseeable and
adequate financing, without which the resources and
efforts deployed to settle so many conflicts will have
simply been wasted.
The particular nature of the situation in West
Africa should not, however, hide the fact that arms
embargo violations and the illicit exploitation of
natural resources by countries in conflicts which they
maintain and fuel with illicit weapons are often the
responsibility of Member States which are sometimes
neighbours and sometimes geographically remote
weapons producers. We believe that the Council should
envisage the adoption of enforcement measures in that
respect, given the dimensions that the threat posed by
the illegal trafficking of small arms has assumed.
Furthermore, a precise analysis of the factors
generating and developing the traffic in small arms will
help to clarify the concepts, enabling us to prevent

lumping it together with the legal trade in small arms
covered by Article 51 of the Charter, which recognizes
each State’s inherent right to legitimate defence and
right to put in place a system of self-defence.
To conclude, I reaffirm the importance of
international cooperation in the fight against
transnational organized crime, which cannot be
separated from international cooperation against
terrorism. Collaboration among custom, police and
information services is essential, and it is encouraging
to learn that efforts are currently being undertaken to
strengthen the Interpol Weapons and Explosives
Tracking System.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of Chile.
Repeatedly and with justified alarm, the
specialized reports on small arms and light weapons
published by various sources in recent years agree in
warning that in various regions of the world there is a
marked trend towards the excessive accumulation of
and illicit trafficking in this type of arms, which are
statistically demonstrated to be the principal scourge
and cause of civilian deaths — in particular of children
and women — of social misery and of internal and
international conflicts, which gravely hinder the
development of peoples.
Small arms in the streets of our cities often kill
more people than open warfare. That is why we
reaffirm today that the fight against the uncontrolled
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
prevention and elimination of that proliferation are a
key task within the primary responsibility of the
Council. That is why it is important for the Security
Council to carry out in a comprehensive and effective
manner programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration in post-conflict situations.
Moreover, the weapons-exporting countries need
to assume a greater degree of responsibility in their
operations relative to small arms and light weapons.
Similarly, we need to strengthen international
cooperation on information on the origin and transfer
of these types of weapons in order to prevent them
from falling into the hands of terrorists. The important
advances that have been made in this area should be
complemented by greater international and regional
cooperation on exports and effective compliance with
embargo and other sanction measures and regulations

19

S/PV.4896

imposed by the Security Council, including the
obligation of Member States to inform the Sanctions
Committee about violations of arms embargoes, in
accordance with the recommendations contained in the
respective reports.
Finally, the delegation of Chile welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/1217)
presented by Under-Secretary-General Abe and
supports the need for the Security Council to continue
to consider this important issue in the future.
I now reassume my functions as President of the
Security Council. In accordance with rule 37, the next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Ireland.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this
statement.
I appreciate that you, Sir, have asked that
delegations speak for no more than five minutes.
However, as I am speaking on behalf of 35 countries, I
hope for your indulgence if I exceed ever so slightly
your time limit.
The European Union welcomes today’s debate
and the opportunity to address the subject of small
arms two and-a-half years since the 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and a year since
the Council’s last debate on this issue.
The European Union worked very actively to
achieve a successful outcome from the 2001
Conference and remains consistent, through the
political and practical actions of the Union and its
member States, in its commitment to the full
implementation of the Programme of Action.
The problem of small arms and light weapons
worldwide has, unfortunately, not diminished in any
significant way over the past two years. Estimates for

20

stockpiles worldwide of small arms vary considerably,
but recent figures suggest as many as 600 million of
these weapons are in circulation. Such statistics
demonstrate the scale of the problem.
The death toll from misuse of small arms and
light weapons remains dramatic by any standard —
perhaps as many as 500,000 people each year. The
nature of modern conflicts is such that it is most often
civilians who suffer most, with the overwhelming
majority of victims being women and children. But the
impact on societies of the destruction caused by the
misuse of small arms and light weapons is much wider:
on victims’ immediate families, on livelihoods and,
more generally, on the very fabric of societies.
The problem of the excessive and destabilizing
accumulations of small arms is a global one, requiring
a coordinated response at national, subregional,
regional and international levels. The response also
needs to be comprehensive if we are to address
effectively this complex and multifaceted issue
involving, inter alia, factors such as international and
internal security, trade, civil-military relations, the role
of weapons in societies, human rights and humanitarian
concerns and the impact on development.
The Small Arms Survey 2003 puts it succinctly
when it says that “the challenge is and will be to
develop an adequate conceptual, political and practical
framework within which all relevant dimensions of the
problem ... can be tackled”.
Many of the world’s conflicts are fuelled by the
easy supply and availability of small arms. The ease
with which they can be concealed and moved, their
relatively low cost and violations of Council arms
embargoes make it extremely difficult to retrieve and
remove these weapons from the equation. It makes
sense, therefore, to do everything possible to stop their
supply at source or to prevent their diversion from
legitimate purposes.
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
is recognized as a primary factor in sustaining
conflicts, exacerbating violence, contributing to
displacement and fuelling crime and terrorism. Arms
control activities, including, in particular, measures to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, remain an essential dimension, therefore, for
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as for the
success of peace-building efforts.

S/PV.4896

Therefore, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2003/1217), in response
to the statement of the President of the Security
Council of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30) on the
state of implementation, one year on, of the
recommendations originally proposed to the Council by
the Secretary-General.
Overall, the assessment of the report is positive.
It notes where advances have been made, without, on
the other hand, shying away from pointing to areas
where progress has been less marked or where a more
proactive approach is needed.
In 2002, the Secretary-General had recommended
that the Council might wish to call upon Member
States to support the development of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. The European Union (EU) warmly welcomes
the concrete progress that has been made on this
particular point with the agreement by the General
Assembly at this session to establish an open-ended
working group to negotiate an international instrument
on marking and tracing. The working group will hold
its organizational session in early February, and we
hope that it can hold its first substantive session before
the summer. The European Union strongly believes that
a multilateral and legally binding instrument on
marking and tracing would greatly strengthen abilities
to tackle issues of illicit weapons flows and illegal
traders and to curtail the acquisition of such weapons
by those engaged in terrorist activities.
The European Union regards the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms as a global
transparency and confidence-building measure and
welcomes the recent decision taken on expanding its
scope. The widest participation by Member States in
the Register would greatly enhance its value, and the
EU therefore reiterates its call on all States to submit
timely returns of their imports and exports to the
Register, including information on military holdings
and procurement through national production.
The European Union supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the Council pursue
more vigorously and expeditiously the use of arms
embargoes to countries or regions threatened by,
engaged in or emerging from armed conflict and to
seek additional ways to promote their effective

implementation
mechanisms.

through

enhanced

monitoring

Stopping the flow of small arms at source through
efforts aimed at preventing their diversion from
legitimate purposes implies the implementation and
enforcement of national laws and regulations
controlling the manufacture, production, import,
export, possession and trade in small arms and through
cooperative efforts at subregional, regional and global
levels. In this regard, the EU sponsored in the First
Committee the draft resolution entitled “Promotion at
the regional level in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe of the United Nations
programme of action on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects”, adopted as
resolution 58/55, which reaffirms the importance of
ongoing efforts at the regional and subregional levels.
The European Union Code of Conduct on Arms
Exports has been in operation since 1998, and we
believe that it is a model that can be drawn on in
implementing legislation in other jurisdictions. The
European Union is currently looking at the elaboration
of common national and international standards that
would aim to ensure that legal trade is not diverted into
illegal channels and to limit the excessive
accumulation of small arms in areas of existing tension
or armed conflict.
Export controls are an essential tool in helping to
curtail illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. One measure to improve control over the
export and transit of small arms and light weapons
would be to enhance the effectiveness of end-user
certificates. The European Union continues to advocate
enhanced international action in this area.
Controls on brokers and on brokering is an area
of particular concern and one to which the EU is
paying priority attention. Illicit brokering and
trafficking are recognized as being among the main
factors fuelling the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons around the world. I wish, therefore, to draw
the attention of the Council to the European Union’s
adoption, in June 2003, of a common position on arms
brokering, requiring member States to introduce
legislation in order effectively to control the activities
of brokers.
Also in this regard, the EU welcomes the General
Assembly’s decision, in its resolution 58/241, to
request the Secretary-General to hold broad-based

21

S/PV.4896

consultations with all Member States, interested
regional and subregional organizations, international
agencies and relevant experts on further steps to
enhance international cooperation on illicit brokering
in small arms and light weapons. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s future report on his
consultations.
The European Union, as a demonstration of its
seriousness in implementing its commitments under the
2001 Programme of Action, has allocated assistance
totalling approximately €7.7 million in the period 2001
to 2003 to affected countries, to help them deal with
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small
arms and light weapons. Examples include projects in
Cambodia of approximately €4.8 million, in Latin
America and the Caribbean of €1.045 million and in
Albania of €1.37 million. Additionally, a contribution
of €500,000 was granted to the running costs of the
joint Stability Pact and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) regional clearinghouse in
Belgrade on the control of small arms and light
weapons. In May 2003, a financial agreement totalling
€2 million over a three-year period, for a large-scale
project implemented by SaferAfrica, was concluded
between the United Republic of Tanzania and the
European Commission. In addition, States members of
the European Union contribute individually to
numerous projects and assistance programmes with the
aim of controlling the illicit trade in, and combating the
use of, small arms and light weapons, particularly in
African countries.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s emphasis,
in his report (S/2003/1217) on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in postconflict situations, and we welcome the Council’s
increased focus on this issue. Given porous borders in
many regions of tension around the world and the easy
portability of small arms, effective disarmament
programmes, including weapons collection and
disposal, will often require a subregional or wider
regional approach. We encourage the Council to
continue to explore how best to address this regional
dimension of the issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Norway appreciates this
opportunity to discuss in the Security Council the
subject of small arms and light weapons. We welcome

22

the Secretary-General’s report (S/2003/1217) and
concur with his description of the present situation.
There have been some advances in international
cooperation to control the flow of small arms, but
significant problems still remain. These problems call
for continued and improved cooperation among
nations, international organizations and civil society to
ensure further progress.
We have noted that in many international forums
there is increased attention to the humanitarian, social
and economic implications of the problem of small
arms. In particular, we would like to mention the
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Human Security Network to address these
issues. Norway fully supports their work.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
fuels armed conflicts, causing suffering. States must
therefore recommit themselves to ensure respect for
applicable international humanitarian law.
Norway commends the outcome of the biennial
conference on the Programme of Action on small arms
that took place here in New York in July of last year.
Norway also welcomes the General Assembly’s
decision, in its resolution 58/241, to request the
Secretary-General to hold broad-based consultations
with Member States, regional and subregional
organizations, international agencies and relevant
experts on further steps to enhance international
cooperation on the illicit brokering in small arms and
light weapons. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s future report on his consultations.
The Government of Norway and the Government
of the Netherlands have launched an international
initiative to enhance international cooperation on illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons. That
initiative aims at developing effective national control
mechanisms for arms brokering. As a result, the
Governments of the Netherlands, the United Kingdom
and Norway will sponsor a conference organized by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in February and March of this year to
improve regional cooperation on small arms issues in
West Africa.
Under the Dutch and Norwegian initiative, we
will also be supporting the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to promote increased regional cooperation
against illicit brokering in small arms, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 58/241.

S/PV.4896

As we prepare for the next Biennial Meeting of
States on the Programme of Action, scheduled for
2005, emphasis must be put on the following: assisting
countries in developing their capacity to implement the
Programme of Action and produce national reports on
their implementation efforts; developing regional
cooperation to implement the Programme of Action in
all its aspects; supporting the participation of civil
society in the implementation of the Programme of
Action; greater emphasis on the humanitarian aspects
of the illicit arms trade; and developing national
legislation on the arms trade.
It is hoped that considerable progress will have
been made by the next Biennial Meeting in 2005. By
2006, we should be ready to discuss a comprehensive,
international, legally binding agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call next on
the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Egyptian delegation is pleased to attend this meeting
under your presidency, Sir, in order to discuss a vital
issue that affects every continent — although the
continent of Africa, to which Egypt belongs, is the
most severely affected: there, wars and conflicts are
further fuelled by small arms and light weapons, which
claim the lives of tens of thousands of Africans
annually.
I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2003/1217) on
small arms, which describes the developments that took
place over the past year.
Allow me to make some remarks concerning the
issue before the Council today. First, the effectiveness
and credibility of the Security Council do not emanate
solely from the fact that it is the sole internationally
accepted organ charged, since its establishment over
half a century ago, with the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is based also on the
fact that the Council constantly addresses, responds to
and evolves with new challenges to peace and security
at both the regional and the international levels. Thus,
since the Security Council has recognized the gravity
of the illicit trade in and proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the resulting serious
humanitarian consequences over the years, the Council
must address those issues in a serious and effective
manner commensurate with the grave implications of
the dangers involved.

Secondly, interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly is indispensable in
dealing with issues relating to the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the development of
an effective long-term strategy to address the problem.
In that regard, the General Assembly has achieved
tangible progress, as demonstrated in its resolution
58/241 of 23 December 2003, by which it decided to
establish an open-ended working group to examine the
feasibility of negotiating an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons. We hope that the efforts of that working
group during 2004 and 2005 will succeed in
strengthening international cooperation in prohibiting
and eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
Thirdly, despite the fact that the imposition of
arms embargoes is the mechanism most frequently used
by the Security Council to curb the flow of illicit arms
to areas of conflict, the report of the Secretary-General
highlights a crucial factor: the difficulty of enforcing
embargoes. That is due either to non-compliance by
some countries with Security Council resolutions or to
the weakness of security structures and border control
agencies in countries adjacent to conflict areas. Such
lapses make it easier for illicit arms brokers and
smugglers to operate freely. The strengthening of
security institutions in some countries is a long-term
goal, and compliance by Member States with Security
Council resolutions mandating arms embargoes should
take place with as little difficulty as possible in order to
ensure the credibility of the Security Council and its
resolutions. It might even be plausible for the Security
Council, when its resolutions are violated, to consider
measures such as publication of the names of
institutions or States that violate those resolutions, as a
first step towards the development of a tighter legal
and political framework that would ensure the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.
Fourthly, all this is closely related to another
issue: the supply of illicit weapons to areas of conflict
in exchange for natural resources such as diamonds,
and in some cases for narcotic drugs. Over the past five
years, the Security Council has examined the question
of the diamond trade and its relationship to the fuelling
of conflicts in some regions of Africa. The report of the
Secretary-General before the Council today highlights
the way in which the illicit drug trade in some States in

23

S/PV.4896

the Horn of Africa, promotes the import of weapons in
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions.
There is no doubt that those cases relate in large
measure to the question of whether or not Council
members have the political will to address the constant
breaches of Security Council resolutions, and to how
serious the Council is about ensuring strict compliance
with its resolutions.
Finally, there is no doubt that the evolution of
Security Council peacekeeping activities allows for the
incorporation in peacekeeping operations of clear
provisions regarding the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants in civil
society. In addition to specific measures relating to the
collection and destruction of surplus small arms and
light weapons, Egypt suggests that the General
Assembly’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations should consider and support ways to
enhance the role of the United Nations in DDR and to
finance those activities from the assessed peacekeeping
budget.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of the Republic of Korea,
to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting today. In the light of your request for brevity,
my oral statement has been shortened from the original
text, copies of which have been circulated.
We are pleased to note that the Security Council
remains committed to addressing the problem of small
arms and light weapons in a timely and efficient
manner. In that regard, my delegation welcomed the 12
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/1053) on the ways and
means in which the Security Council can further
contribute to the fight against the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes within the Security
Council’s conflict-prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. In recent years we have seen DDR
programmes make significant contributions to the
reconstruction of post-conflict societies. Unfortunately,
at the same time we have witnessed the problems that
ensue when DDR initiatives are not undertaken and

24

when large quantities of small arms and light weapons
fall into the wrong hands, thus prolonging conflicts and
hindering reconstruction efforts. In that context, we
would like to underscore the need to include in the
disarmament process comprehensive programmes for
arms management, such as measures to ensure the
effective collection, safe stockpiling and eventual
destruction of small arms and light weapons.
Accordingly, we support the recommendation that the
Security Council strengthen financing for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration as it expands the
mandates and budgets of its peacekeeping operations to
include these important programmes.
The enforcement of Security Council arms
embargoes is also critical in the fight to curb the
proliferation of and the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. We commend the Secretary-General's
recommendation that each and every State take
appropriate action against any activity that is in
violation of a United Nations Security Council
embargo. Noting the Secretary-General's eleventh
recommendation, which calls for consideration of the
use of coercive measures against embargo violators and
the establishment of monitoring mechanisms, my
delegation is of the view that sanctions Committees,
under the guidance of the Security Council, could act
as a monitoring mechanism in close cooperation with
relevant bodies throughout the United Nations system.
Over time we have recognized that the scourge of
small arms and light weapons has become an even
graver threat to international peace and stability due to
the fact that it is closely linked to other problems of
national and global concern, such as drug trafficking,
money laundering and cross-border terrorism. My
delegation thus welcomes the Secretary-General's call
for the Security Council to continue its efforts to
identify these links and to develop innovative strategies
to combat them. We further support the proposals for
the establishment of a standing monitoring mechanism
for targeted sanctions and the illicit trade in high-value
commodities in armed conflicts.
At the 2001 United Nations Conference and the
subsequent First Biennial Meeting, held last year,
States acknowledged the crucial importance of marking
and of keeping accurate records that enable the timely
tracing and identification of illicit small arms and light
weapons. Successful tracing initiatives require
adequate marking and record-keeping, through which
Governments and concerned organizations are able to

S/PV.4896

identify the producers, end-users and uses of a specific
weapon. Against this backdrop, my delegation looks
forward to actively participating in the open-ended
working group tasked with the development of an
international instrument that would allow for the timely
and reliable identification and tracing of illicit small
arms and light weapons.
My delegation underscores the importance of
implementing rigorous export and import controls at
the national, regional and global levels. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the Security Council to call on
those States that have not yet done so to establish the
necessary measures to ensure effective control over the
import and export of small arms and light weapons.
Finally, my delegation would like to lend its
support to the Secretary-General's recommendation to
enhance transparency in armaments through, inter alia,
the universal and consistent participation of Member
States in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms. In this regard, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts on the Register last year, which agreed to
expand it to include man-portable air-defence systems
as a new sub-category. Such developments should
serve as a guide in our efforts to adapt our existing
mechanisms to threats in the changing security
environment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Mexico, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this public meeting
on an issue of the utmost importance for my country. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Security Council, contained in document
S/2003/1217, on ways and means in which the Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. I should
also like to express gratitude and appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr.
Nobuyasu Abe, for introducing the report.
The fact that hundreds of thousands of people fall
victim to small arms and light weapons every year
makes it necessary for the Security Council to address
the question of the proliferation of such weapons in the

framework of its chief responsibility — that of
maintaining international peace and security.
In considering this issue it should view with a
broad perspective the destabilizing effects of such
weapons and the way in which they prevent the
creation of conditions for stable and lasting
development.
Another important element that must be examined
is the link between such activity and transnational
organized crime, the illicit drug trade and terrorism.
That is why, within the Counter-Terrorism Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), my
country promoted the idea of including this issue on
the Committee’s agenda and on the reports submitted
by countries.
The main response of the Council to the problem
has been the imposition of arms embargoes through the
sanctions regimes that it establishes. The results,
however, have not always been entirely satisfactory.
The problem is exacerbated by the diversity of the
sources of production of weapons, the many means of
their transportation, lax internal regulation, the absence
of international legal instruments governing the trade,
the traffic in used weapons and the black market.
That is why an effort must be made at both the
domestic and the international levels. At the national
level, more and better controls are needed over sales.
In the international sphere, the Council should, as a
first step, encourage States to provide information
about the transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Over the long term we need a legally-binding
international instrument that provides for the
punishment of those involved in the illicit trade in
these weapons, including brokers.
All States — not only the recipients of illicit
small arms and light weapons — have a responsibility
for dealing with the traffic in and production of such
weapons. Indeed, in my country’s opinion, the
producing and exporting countries have the greatest
responsibility. We should require a greater degree of
participation and commitment on their part with regard
to the measures adopted by our Organization with a
view to controlling such weapons.
Having participated in the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 56/24 V charged with the task of
considering the possibility of developing an

25

S/PV.4896

international instrument enabling States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable way, illicit small arms
and light weapons, Mexico welcomes the adoption by
the General Assembly, by consensus, of resolution
58/241, which, inter alia, provides for negotiations on
such an international instrument to begin this year.
As the report of the Secretary-General states,
General Assembly resolution 58/241 also requests the
Secretary-General to hold consultations with all
Member States, relevant regional and subregional
organizations, international bodies and experts in the
field regarding the adoption of new measures aimed at
intensifying international cooperation to prevent,
combat and eliminate illicit brokerage in the trade in
small arms and light weapons.
Mexico participated in the work of the Council as
a non-permanent member for 2002-2003, and we will
continue to pay close attention to the work of the
Council.
My country believes that this first open debate
concerns an area in which it is important to pool the
efforts of the various United Nations organs; regional
and subregional organizations; and the relevant
international agencies.
In that regard, my delegation deems extremely
important the promotion of the implementation of
recommendation 4, contained in the October 2002
statement by the President of the Security Council,
which refers to increased interaction between the
Security Council and the General Assembly with
regard to the question of small arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Japan, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, let me
start by reviewing the progress that has been made
since the last Security Council meeting on small arms,
held in October 2002. I believe that two areas warrant
special mention. The first is the holding of the First
Biennial Meeting on small arms, and the second is the
unanimous adoption of the General Assembly
resolution entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects”.
At the Biennial Meeting on small arms — which
was chaired by Ambassador Kuniko Inoguchi, the
Japanese Ambassador to the Conference on
Disarmament — it was clearly recognized that the

26

illicit proliferation of small arms and its negative
consequences are problems of a global dimension, and
multilateralism was set forth as a guiding principle in
coping with such problems. In particular, thanks to the
consensus-based proceedings, it was very meaningful
that the countries participating in the meeting —
including those suffering from the proliferation of
small arms — shared the feeling that they were able to
advance the process of disarmament in the area of
small arms through their individual ownership.
Moreover, it is of crucial importance that, since
the Chairman’s summary outlined the tasks which must
be given priority, the meeting garnered wide support
for the need for international cooperation in resolving
the problems and — with regard to the respective tasks
to be addressed — the need for domestic laws, the
advancement of international cooperation, the training
of those who are expected to engage in the relevant
activities, and financial assistance to developing
countries in this area.
We are pleased at the success of the First Biennial
Meeting and, as the country which chaired the meeting,
wish to thank once again all participating States for
their cooperation. At the same time, in anticipation of
the Second Biennial Meeting in 2005 and,
subsequently, the Second United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, scheduled to be held in 2006, we
believe it essential to add to the momentum that is now
being generated on this issue.
Although we have witnessed the aforementioned
successes in the area of small arms, as rightly indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report, a number of issues
remain that we have to address seriously. They must be
addressed both from the supply side and the demand
side. Let me elaborate on some of them.
As I mentioned earlier, the General Assembly
resolution on this issue, which Japan submitted as one
of the sponsors, was unanimously adopted. That was
particularly significant, because the resolution decided
to establish an open-ended working group to negotiate
an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace illicit small arms and light weapons. Tracing
is an important method in detecting and criminalizing
the illicit transfer of small arms. The creation of an
international instrument on tracing is particularly
important in tackling the issue of small arms from the
supply side. Japan considers that the area of tracing

S/PV.4896

needs to be given high priority. From that point of
view, we look forward to seeing concrete results
produced by that working group, which will begin its
activities this February.
Next, I would like to raise the issue of arms
embargoes as a method of controlling the spread of
small arms from the supply side. In order to implement
an arms embargo effectively, it is not enough simply to
adopt a Security Council resolution. It is also
necessary, after its adoption, that its implementation be
monitored, and, if violations are found, enforcement
measures be taken.
In the recently adopted Security Council
resolution authorizing the arms embargo in Somalia, a
monitoring group was established, and the compilation
of a violations list was requested. We welcome those
elements as a sign that the Security Council is well
aware of the importance of the monitoring of armsembargo implementation. The approach adopted in that
instance will serve as a valuable model when arms
embargo measures of the same kind are taken in other
areas of conflict.
On the other hand, control of small arms on the
demand side is equally important. This means that the
international community, in order to address the
problem of conflict in various parts of the world, must
also pursue measures to eliminate the demand for small
arms. In particular, it is absolutely critical, in order to
bring a conflict to an end and to create a stable society,
to promote the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former soldiers. In order to encourage
cooperation in weapons-collection efforts, reasonable
economic incentives must be provided, and it is also
essential that proper employment opportunities be
provided to induce them to give up their weapons, so
that they can start new lives.
Incidentally, as a member of the Economic and
Social Council ad hoc group on Burundi, I had the
opportunity to visit that country at the end of last year.
I was very impressed to see that, now that a peace
agreement has been reached, the disarmament of
soldiers of rebel parties was being seriously pursued.
Disarmament efforts in Burundi are taking place in the
context of cantonment, so their success or failure will
depend, above all, on whether the former soldiers can
be persuaded to report to cantonment.
To achieve that goal, it is necessary to provide
assistance in the pre-cantonment phase as well.

However, I have learned that it has been the policy of
the World Bank that, in principle, no aid should be
provided to the military. I am of the view that,
assuming that pre-cantonment assistance for former
soldiers becomes a requirement for a successful DDR
programme, it might be necessary for the World Bank
to find an acceptable alternative to its aid policy with
regard to this point.
I have heard that, these days, 60 to 70 per cent of
the Security Council’s deliberations — as far as official
meetings are concerned — are devoted to peacekeeping
operations and other United Nations peace activities in
Africa. Economic development in Africa depends
heavily on peace and stability, but the widespread
proliferation of small arms among the peoples of
regions in conflict makes conflicts in Africa all the
more devastating and renders their resolution much
harder. This means that the situation with respect to
small arms is particularly grave in Africa.
In that connection, let me commend the fact that
the problems of West and Central Africa were
vigorously debated last year in the Security Council. It
is particularly significant that Security Council
members fully recognized the importance of the efforts
made by subregional groups such as ECOWAS to
address the issue of small arms. Above all, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of exsoldiers, as a component of peace-building efforts
following a ceasefire, is essential not only for the
collection of weapons and to reduce the danger of the
resumption of conflict, but also to reduce the demand
for small arms.
As a concrete example of that approach, Japan
would like to share with other United Nations
Members, when appropriate, its experiences with, and
results achieved by, its DDR programme which is
currently being undertaken in Afghanistan. Japan has
long
been
implementing
its
“Weapons
for
Development” projects, under which it provides
development assistance as compensation for the
surrender of small arms. We will continue to make such
efforts and intend to share the experience gained from
weapons-collection programmes in Cambodia to other
small-arms collection projects in the African, Latin
American and Middle East regions.
We hope that the Security Council will continue
to pay attention to this important issue. We would also

27

S/PV.4896

like to request that the Secretary-General continue to
provide us with progress reports as he deems necessary.

addition, further work on the important issue of
brokering has been mandated.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of South Africa,
to whom I give the floor.

The proliferation and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons continue to pose a threat
to the security and stability of many nations, inhibit
their development and undermine good governance.
The human suffering caused by such weapons needs to
be addressed urgently in a practical and action-oriented
manner, which would provide substance to the many
statements made on this issue in the recent past.

Mr. Raubenheimer (South Africa): I wish to
make use of this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January and to express our
appreciation for the convening of this important open
debate on an issue that greatly affects us all. South
Africa also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on small arms (S/2003/1217), which contains
numerous recommendations that warrant our attention.
My delegation notes in particular the recommendations
on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action, and we acknowledge the
valuable role played by the Security Council in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects.
The United Nations Programme of Action, which
the international community adopted in 2001, set out
important steps on which we, as Member States, should
take action at the national, regional and global levels in
order to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
full and early implementation of the Programme of
Action is crucial if we are to succeed in our collective
efforts to address this illicit trade, which affects us all.
The United Nations First Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action — which was held in July 2003
under the able leadership of Ambassador Inoguchi of
Japan — proved that the political will exists to
eradicate this illicit trade, in collaboration with civil
society. The General Assembly, through its recently
adopted resolution 58/241, on the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects, prioritized the
work of and set the small arms agenda for the
international community until 2006, the year in which
the implementation of the Programme of Action will be
reviewed by Member States. In terms of that
resolution, the time frame and venue for the 2006
review conference of the Programme of Action have
been set and an open-ended working group to negotiate
an international instrument on the tracing of illicit
small arms and light weapons has been established. In

28

In that regard, South Africa is pleased to note
from the Secretary-General’s report that significant
progress has been achieved in the tracing of illicit
small arms and light weapons. We believe that the
negotiations on a tracing instrument, to be undertaken
in the General Assembly’s open-ended working group,
will culminate in a practical and effective instrument
that will assist Member States in tracing the origin of
these weapons and the routes used to transfer them.
Such an instrument will also facilitate the effective
implementation of arms embargoes, as mandated under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Cooperation among Member States on the issue of
tracing illicit small arms and light weapons and the
minimum standards for marking and keeping records of
these weapons will make it increasingly difficult to
undertake activities aimed at circumventing such
embargoes.
South Africa concurs with the observation by the
Secretary-General that the issues of end-user
certificates and illicit brokering activities have emerged
as areas where interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly can be enhanced.
We have learned through experience that, if activities
related to fraudulent end-user certificates and illicit
brokering are not curtailed, we will surely fail in our
endeavours to eradicate the scourge of illicit small
arms and light weapons. We hope that the work
envisaged by the General Assembly on illicit brokering
activities will culminate in a better understanding of
that problem and will identify practical steps to
eradicate such activities.
Although no concrete work on the issue of enduser certificates has yet been mandated by the United
Nations, South Africa believes that the General
Assembly, at its fifty-ninth session, should consider the
possibility of establishing a mechanism to study that

S/PV.4896

important issue and to provide the Assembly with
recommendations on how to deal with it.
South Africa’s policy on small arms has
identified the importance of regional approaches in
addressing the problem of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. We have learned from our own
experiences that peace and security are conditions for
sustainable development. The inclusion in the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development of a peace and
security initiative maps out the commitment of the
African continent to the promotion of long-term
conditions for development and security.
In that regard, South Africa fully supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
initiatives, and we welcome the inclusion of such
measures in Security Council- mandated peace
operations. Involvement and support on the part of
international financial institutions as well as relevant
development agencies — especially in the reintegration
process — cannot be overemphasized, as their
participation will ensure the success of the DDR
process as a whole.
South Africa continues to believe that the
Security Council and the General Assembly have two
complementary, but distinct, roles to play in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
Therefore, it is important to avoid duplication of
initiatives in areas of common effort by the Council
and the Assembly, as identified in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Accordingly, we trust that the Council
will remain seized of this matter and will continue to
take effective and practical steps in support of the
implementation of the Programme of Action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
on organizing this debate. For a sister country such as
Colombia, it is a source of satisfaction to see Chile
presiding over the United Nations organ charged with
the difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security.
I should like to begin my statement with some
reflections on the subject we are considering. One of

the worst tragedies that much of humanity seems
condemned to experience proceeds from the use and
abuse of small arms and light weapons and from the
trade and trafficking in them. Moreover, all so-called
low-intensity conflicts are fed, maintained, expanded,
deepened and degraded because of our incapacity to
effectively fight the illicit trade in such weapons. In
addition, the possibilities of negotiating to resolve such
conflicts are negatively affected by the continuous flow
of these instruments of war and death. Even alreadysigned peace agreements have failed because of the
armament of the parties, facilitated by the world traffic
in these weapons.
Scandalized or not, the world watches as major
arms traffickers with huge fortunes appear in
entertainment magazines with absolute impunity for
their grave crimes against humanity.
At the United Nations, we talk at length about
conflict prevention and resolution. One elementary and
effective way not only to resolve and prevent these
misnamed low-intensity conflicts, but also to make
them nearly impossible, is to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and to control the licit
trade in such arms more effectively. The Organization
has undertaken a process on these matters that —
although it is a slow process — my country
appreciates. However, we should ask ourselves if the
ongoing efforts are adequate and effective enough to
put an end to this scourge.
The millions of deaths and injured, the disabled
people maimed by these weapons in their massive
destruction year after year require of us more action,
more commitment and more imagination to face this
problem. Could the Security Council deal with this
issue under Chapter VII of the Charter the same way it
used resolution 1373 (2001) to fight terrorism, taking
into account that the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is an equal or even greater threat to
international peace and security?
Here I finish my initial thoughts and begin my
comments on the report under our consideration. The
Secretary General’s 12 recommendations can be
divided into those that can be implemented directly by
the Security Council — those relative to peacebuilding, conflict prevention and arms embargoes and
their monitoring systems — and those that should be
implemented by Member States, to which the Security
Council can only appeal or encourage their compliance.

29

S/PV.4896

For my delegation, it is particularly significant
that the Secretary-General reported significant progress
or encouraging indications on most of the
recommendations to be implemented by Member
States, while progress on those to be implemented
directly by the Security Council is not as significant
and indications are not as encouraging.
In effect, this year in the General Assembly,
Member States will begin to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons — recommendation 1.
States are also committed to provide technical and
financial support to the Interpol Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System — recommendation 2; in
this task we underline the financing provided by the
United States of America. Member States have also
enhanced transparency in armaments through an
increased participation in the Register of Conventional
Arms and the United Nations standardized instrument
for reporting military expenditures — recommendation
12.
However, a lack of compliance with arms
embargoes by Member States is noted — the subject of
recommendation 5 — due to inadequate legislation,
lack of enforcement and technical capacity limitations.
Moreover, there has been no significant progress on
legislation to ensure effective control over the import,
export and transit of small arms and light weapons or
on the use of authenticated end-user certificates — this
relevant to recommendation 9. That was noted during
last year’s First Biennial Meeting of States to consider
the Implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action.
Only 98 States presented reports, where it is reflected
that 78 of them have export-import control laws and
only 39 meet end-user certificate requirements. Even
more worrisome is the situation regarding brokering
activities: only 16 countries have domestic regulations
covering this area.
Allow me here, Mr. President, to emphasize
parenthetically that export control mechanisms should
not be based on criteria that take into account only the
views and interests of the producing and exporting
countries, without consideration of the interests of the
importing countries, in particular countries affected by
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Criteria such as respect for human rights, the existence
of internal conflicts and the imbalance between defence
and development expenditures, although legitimate and
even commendable, are by their very nature subjective,

30

not objective criteria. Furthermore, such criteria,
applied by the exporting country, violate the right of all
States to import and possess small arms and light
weapons for their self-defence and security needs, in
accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter, which recognizes the inherent right of selfdefence. Such criteria also tend to violate the principle
of non-intervention and to decide unilaterally what
should be the security and defence needs and priorities
of the importing country. This is a typical case in
which the good intentions by the exporting State — to
control small arms exports and minimize the risk of
diversion of those weapons into the illegal trade — end
up doing great damage: preventing the affected
importing States from acquiring for their legitimate
forces the small arms and light weapons they require to
fight criminals and terrorists, who possess enough
illegal small arms and light weapons to destabilize a
country.
Therefore, we consider it to be more fair and
effective to establish strong national end-user
certificates, as well as to set up a regional and global
end-user certificate system, and to create a mechanism
for information exchange and verification. We also
advocate the adoption of additional measures such as
the certification of exports after shipping and the
double verification of the end-user certificates.
With respect to the recommendations whose
implementation depends directly on the Security
Council, we note even less progress than on those
whose implementation corresponds to States. The
Council barely took note of the Secretariat’s proposal
to create a small arms advisory service on the basis of
extrabudgetary resources — recommendation 3 in the
report. It did not enhance its interaction with the
General Assembly on issues relating to small arms in
order to develop long-term strategies within the
framework of conflict prevention and peacebuilding — the subject of recommendation 4. Nor did it
register major progress with respect to the links
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, and no progress was made on the links with
the trade in illegal drugs — the subject of
recommendation 6.
On recommendation 7, related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, some important
efforts by the Security Council were registered.
Nevertheless, they are insufficient due to the lack of

S/PV.4896

compliance with recommendation 8 on financing those
programmes from the budget for peacekeeping
operations. Financing those programmes with
voluntary funds, which tend to be very limited, puts at
grave
risk
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration in post-conflict zones and, as a
consequence, peace-building. Furthermore, it leaves at
large in those zones a huge quantity or arms and
ammunition, which are transferred to other areas and
countries in conflict.

of this scourge and because of the serious threat that it
poses to international peace, security and stability, it is
of vital importance to have controls and rules on the
trade in small arms and light weapons at the national,
regional and world levels. As this Security Council has
already stated, arms-exporting countries are obliged to
exercise the highest degree of responsibility in these
transactions, and all countries should prevent the
illegal diversion and re-export of small arms and light
weapons.

The Security Council should also give greater
attention to recommendation 10, regarding arms
embargoes in situations under its consideration,
particularly embargoes against non-State actors. More
attention should also be given to the restriction of the
supply of ammunition for weapons that are already
widely available for non-State actors in countries or
regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflicts.
On this question, it is worth underlining the
observation by the Panel of Experts on Somalia: armed
groups in that country require steady access to
ammunition more than to arms, which are already
available in great quantities in the chaotic war the
country is experiencing. The Panel therefore
recommended that the front-line and neighbouring
States be urged to establish sanctions assistance offices
on their territories with the help of regional and
subregional organizations.

The Secretary-General quite rightly said that
small arms and light weapons, which annually cause
millions of deaths around the world, are the real
weapons of mass destruction. Also, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia was right when he said, in
his speech to this Council on 2 August 2001:

This recommendation is valid for all conflicts in
which there is a destabilizing accumulation and
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition. Neighbouring countries have the
responsibility to avoid allowing their territory to be
used to send small arms and ammunition to non-State
armed actors in countries in conflict. The United
Nations should urge these countries to assume their
responsibilities and comply with their obligations.
Allow me to conclude by noting that, over the
past decade, the use of small arms and light weapons
caused the deaths of millions of people, seriously
wounded or permanently disabled six million people
and contributed to the forced displacement of 20
million people. Countries in conflict, almost all of
them developing countries, earmark more than 10 per
cent of their annual gross domestic product for treating
the victims of these conflicts and for trying to control
the some 200 million illicit small arms and light
weapons circulating around the world. Because of these
grave humanitarian and socio-economic consequences

“It is ironic that most of the conflicts in which
small arms and light weapons are used take place
in the developing world, while most of those arms
are produced in the developed world. This terrible
irony requires the application to the global trade
in such weapons of a principle that has already
been accepted in the fight against drug
trafficking:
the
principle
of
shared
responsibility” ... (S/PV.4355).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Chile and to you, personally, Sir, for
holding this open debate on the issue of small arms. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive and timely report on this matter
(S/2003/1217).
The illicit trafficking and accumulation of small
arms remain among the greatest impediments to
sustainable development, conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peace-building. It
continues to pose a serious threat to human security
and human rights.
Ukraine has steadily expressed its concern about
the serious humanitarian consequences of this
phenomenon, which claims hundreds of thousands of
innocent lives all over the world, thus highlighting the
global dimension of the problem. We are deeply
convinced that, without concerted efforts by the
international community to prevent uncontrolled

31

S/PV.4896

proliferation of these weapons, it is impossible to
maintain peace and regional and global security.
The Programme of Action on Small Arms,
adopted by the 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, is a significant step towards the goal of
controlling this scourge but only the first step. We hope
that through the follow-up process successfully started
last year, it will be possible to make the
implementation of the Programme of Action more
efficient and to find ways to strengthen and further
develop the measures contained therein.
In our view, it is essential to provide for regional
coordination between national control systems and
mechanisms for the prevention of small arms and light
weapons trade operations. Ukraine reiterates that the
responsibility for establishing controls over the
trafficking in small arms and light weapons rests with
the States acquiring those weapons. At the same time,
those States should be encouraged to improve their
abilities to curb the illicit trafficking in small arms.
This might require substantial financial assistance from
the international community.
Ukraine welcomes the report of the United
Nations Group of Governmental Experts on Tracing
Small Arms and Light Weapons, presented last year in
the First Committee. We fully support its
recommendation concerning the development of an
international instrument, open to all, which will
increase the national capacity of States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, small arms and
light weapons, as well as to seize those of illicit nature.
Preventing, combating and eliminating the
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons is
one of the important issues for the Security Council to
look into. It is evident that promoting the conditions
for long-term development and security is impossible
without resolving ongoing conflicts and taking
adequate measures aimed at ensuring stability in postconflict situations.
The Council has made considerable progress in
this work, but I think it is fair to say we still have a
long way to go in detailed monitoring and in working
with business, financial institutions and other actors —
internationally, regionally and at the local level — on
the implementation of arms embargoes.

32

Excessive accumulation of and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons continues to fuel and
intensify conflicts as well as delay their resolution. The
series of innovative measures taken by the Security
Council to enhance compliance with arms embargoes,
including through establishing independent panels of
experts and monitoring mechanisms, have resulted in
positive outcomes, especially in Angola and Sierra
Leone. At the same time, the problem of illicit
trafficking persists in other areas, such as Somalia and
Afghanistan.
In this connection, in our view, the last report of
the Secretary-General on small arms presents a mixed
picture on the imposition of arms embargoes. The
restriction on the supply of ammunition to areas of
instability requires more attention by the Security
Council, as does the issue of identifying links between
small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources. We support
the Council’s consideration of actions against States
that deliberately violate arms embargoes.
We believe that, at this stage, it is important to
review the lessons learned, in order to ensure the
efficiency of further measures that could be taken by
the Security Council. In this connection, it will be
useful to continue to focus on the financial sources
used for the purchase of illegal weapons and to define
the role that the relevant international organizations,
business and financial institutions and other actors can
play in implementing arms embargoes.
Ukraine firmly adheres to the practical efforts
undertaken to ensure effective implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
particularly with regard to the destruction of surplus
stocks of small arms and ammunition. In this context,
we look forward to a successful future implementation
of the NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund project
to destroy 1.5 million small arms and light weapons
and 133 thousand tonnes of ammunition in Ukraine.
These efforts are also aimed at assisting Ukraine in
coping with its significant ammunition stockpiles.
Particular importance in this regard is also attached to
the assistance mechanism provided in the OSCE
Document on Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition.
I would like to stress that Ukraine maintains a
responsible policy in the field of arms control.

S/PV.4896

Ukrainian legislation envisages strict measures to
prevent illegal manufacturing, possession and
trafficking of all types of armaments, including small
arms and light weapons. The national export control
system provides for effective procedures of exportimport licensing. As of today, efforts are being made to
improve national legislation in this field. One of the
latest steps was the adoption by the Government of
Ukraine of its action plan to implement the United
Nations 2001 Programme of Action as well as to
implement the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Document on Small
Arms and Light Weapons of 2000.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Sir, that Ukraine
will continue to take an active part in the international

efforts towards combating illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons and in restraining their
uncontrolled proliferation. The members of the
Security Council can count fully on our support
concerning that issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. Because of
the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence of
members of the Council, I now intend to suspend the
meeting.
The Council will resume its consideration of the
item on its agenda at 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

33
