S/2002/366

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 5 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 28 February 2002.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-32177 (E)

090402

*0232177*

S/2002/366

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-28 February 2002) there were just over 39,300
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of February remained stable
although low levels of violence continued to be reported across the province,
relating mostly to inter-ethnic tension and criminality. The new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Michael Steiner, arrived in Kosovo on 14
February.
Security
3.
KFOR continued to enhance security along the borders with Albania and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 1 prevent attempts by members of ethnic
Albanian armed groups to use lines of communication through Kosovo, and monitor
any signs of support for terrorism.
4.
In province-wide search operations, weapons and ammunition were found by
KFOR on a daily basis. During the reporting period 363 weapons, 293 grenades and
mines and 50,385 rounds of ammunition were seized. In addition, KFOR and
UNMIK together conducted search operations to maintain pressure on extremists
and criminals.
5.
Although there were no major incidents involving inter-ethnic violence, there
were reports of harassment and intolerance across the province, as well as a number
of incidents related to criminal activity. On 22 February a Kosovo Serb woman was
killed in Lipljan in an incident which is believed to relate to pressure on her to leave
her home. Several incidents in Lipljan and Koretin involving the stoning of Kosovo
Serbs or their vehicles have also been reported.
6.
Following the arrest of three former members of UCK on suspicion of
committing illegal abductions, murders and physical attacks on Kosovo Albanians
during the war, demonstrations were held in Pristina, Pec, Podujevo and Mitrovica
and continued into the middle of February. Apart from an outbreak of violence
during the demonstration in Pristina, when UNMIK police were stoned, the protests
ended peacefully.
7.
In Mitrovica, there were protests by hundreds of people following the opening
of a municipal community office in the city, and following the arrest on 21 February
of two Kosovo Serbs suspected of murdering a Kosovo Albanian man. On occasion,
UNMIK personnel and property were targeted by the demonstrators. As a result,
KFOR provided support to UNMIK and increased patrols to maintain security.
Border/boundary security
8.
KFOR continued its activities along the borders with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and with Albania to confiscate weapons, deter smuggling,
detain persons illegally crossing the borders, and deter others attempting to enter the
__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

2

S/2002/366

province. During the reporting period, 36 people were caught by KFOR attempting
to cross the border illegally and were handed over to UNMIK.
9.
On 14 February, the KFOR Commander and the President of Albania signed an
agreement on temporary operating procedures for cooperation and coordination of
activities along the border. All multinational brigades have been encouraged to liaise
and exchange information with Albanian forces on force levels, patrols, mined
routes and suspected threats.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
10. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) and the first phase of the
process to reduce the Peace Establishment, 368 members were transferred to the
reserve on 28 February. KFOR and UNMIK are developing a force structure based
on a report prepared by the Joint UNMIK/KFOR/KPC/IOM Working Group. KFOR
began issuing the new identity cards on behalf of UNMIK on 15 February.
11. During the period under review, the spokesman for KPC was suspended for
three weeks on the recommendation of a joint UNMIK/KFOR security committee
following remarks made on the arrest of the three former members of UCK. Three
members of Regional Task Group 4 were arrested for attempted robbery.
12. The total number of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction
programme now stands at 10,445; 80 were destroyed during the reporting period.
During the last week in February, some 75,000 rounds of ammunition were being
destroyed each day, the total now reaching almost 4 million.
13. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
14. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations. KFOR in close
cooperation with UNMIK police is providing security support for the Kosovo Serb
members of the Kosovo Assembly.
15. An OSCE/UNMIK police/KFOR working group will meet weekly to
coordinate plans for the municipal elections scheduled for September 2002.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
16. The number of refugees from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
remaining in Kosovo has gone down to an estimated 10,813.
Outlook
17. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be stable, although ethnic
tension exists. Violent incidents due to ethnic intolerance, criminal activity and
intimidation are expected to continue.

3
