UNITED ,NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

0FFI::CIAL
THIR

TY-FO

YEAR

MEETING:

215(yh

NEW

UR TH

RECORDS

15 JUNE 1979

YORK..

CONTENTS

Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation. in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/13369 ‘and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

150)

1

-

.’

.

.

.,..
.’

NOTE

._

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
.‘.. ‘.,.
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally bublished in
quarterly Supplements of the OficiaI Records of the Security Council. The-date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohrtions and D&&s
of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
:: ’
,:.

2150th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 15 June 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union

accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

of Soviet Socialist Republics).

,Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, ’ China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway,. Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
. . .._._..*
’ :

It was’s0
.,.‘ decided
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russia@ Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus for the period from 1 December 1978 to 31 May
1979 [S/Z3369 and A&Z]. In addition, the Council has
before it a draft resolution [S/Z3396j which was drafted
during consultations among Council members.
.

‘..

Provkionai’ $$$da
(S/AgendaBlSO)
.

4.

1. Adoption of the agenda

I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
.

A vote was taken by show of ha&.

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/13369 and Add.l)

The &aft resolution was adopted by I4 votes to none.’
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

5. The PRESIDENT (intmpretationfrom Russian): I now
call on the Secretary-General who wishes to make a
statement.

Adoption of the agenda
Be agenda was adopted.

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken note of
the resolution just adopted by the Council. I wish to assure
the members of the Council that I shall continue to make
every effort to carry .out the mandate laid down in this
resolution, in both its peace-keeping and its peace-making
aspects.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l3369 and Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Russian): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Cyprus, Greece
and Turkey in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, and with the consent of
the Council, I propose to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. I also want to inform the Council that, as agreed at the
high-level meeting held at Nicosia under my auspices on 18
and 19 May, the intercommunal talks were resumed at
Nicosia this morning. Under-Secretary-General
Perez de
Cuellar opened the first meeting on my behalf in the United
Nations conference area at the Ledra Palace. Mr. George
Ioannides represented the Greek Cypriot community and
Mr. Umit Suleiman Onan represented the Turkish Cypriot
community.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. MavrommatFr
(Cypnrr), Mr. Katapodis (Greece) and Mr. EraIp (Turkey)
took places at the Council table.

8. Mr. Perez de Cuellar read a message from me in which I
referred to the historic importance of this occasion, which
provides the parties with the opportunity of taking up
again, after a two-year gap, the path of peaceful negotiations towards a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem. I pointed out that it is now for the representatives
of the two communities to build upon the consensus
reached at the high-level meeting and to make progress in

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Russian): I
should also like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Turkey in which he requests
that Mr. Nail Atalay should be allowed to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. If I hear no
objection, I propose to extend an invitation to Mr. Atalay in

I See resolution 451 (1979).

I

14. DeeD annreciation is more than deserved by MaiorGeneral &mm and the officers and men of UNFICYPfor
doing such an excellent job in Cyp~s,
and our thanks go to
those Member States which are providing contingents or
making financial contributions to UNFICYP, with the rider
that now more than ever, the presence of the Force is
essential for the maintenance and improvement of conditions conducive to the success of the dialogue that has just
begun.
.

the direction of agreed.solutions of the various aspects of
the pr$$em, with-due regard for the principles and priorities indicated in the 19 May agreement. It will in the last
analysis be for them to demonstrate on behalf of their
communities the political will and statesmanship that alone
can ensure such progress. I therefore appealed to the two
representatives to devote themselves jointly to this task.
.
9.. As provided in the high-level agreement, it is understood that the negotiations will be carried out in a continuing and sustained manner, avoiding any delay. It was agreed
that there would be, as a rule, three formal meetings per
week; what is equally important, there will be ample opportunity for private consultations.

15. Let me now turn to the IO-point agreement of 19 May
1979 [S/23369, para. 511. This agreement, in the words of
Mr. Kyprianou, the President of the Republic of Cyp~s,
contains all the essential elements and principles for a just
solution of the Cyprus
problem and constitutes the proper
basis for negotiation and the framework for anacceptable
solution. I would add that this’agreement was a triumph
of reason, and a triumph crowning months of persistent,
skilful and patient work by the,Secretary-Genera1 and his
team. I wish particularly to mention also Mr. Brian Urquhart, Ambassador Galindo Pohl, Mr. George Sherry and
Mr. Rtmy Gorge.
.,.,
16. In responding to the appeal of the Secretary-General
contained in paragraph 63 of his report, I shall try to be
both brief and constructive.

10. At this point, I can only express the hope that it will
prove possible during the next few weeks, with the cooperation of the parties, to use the impetus provided by the
19 May agreement. My representatives will certainly exert
every effort to sustain that impetus. I shall follow the negotiations closely and shall not hesitate to intervene personally
whenever I deem it appropriate to do so in the interest of the
talks. I hope that the parties will be able to seize this
opportunity. My best wishes and, I am sure, those of the
international community are with them as they embark on
this difficult and important task.

17. It is an accepted fact that, apart from the agreement of
19 May 1979, which demonstrates once again that my
Government has always been willing to negotiate not only
in a sustained but also in a meaningful and substantive
manner, nothing else has happened to resolve such important issues as the withdrawal of the Turkish army from
Cyprus,
the return of the refugees to their homes in safety,
the restoration of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and the accounting for the tracing of the missing persons.

11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom Russian): The
first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I call.
12. Mr. MAVROMMATIS
(Cyprus): Sir, allow me at the
outset to extend to you our warmest and most sincere
congratulations upon your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June. Your wellknown qualifications, skill and experience guarantee the
successful discharge of the important tasks of the Council.
The fact that you represent the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, a country that has constantly and consistently
supported Cyprus
and its just cause, is a further source of
satisfaction for my country. I should also like to thank you
and, through you, all the members of the Council for acceding to our request to participate in the present discussion.

18. Speaking about the missing persons, the most tragic
chapter of the Cyprus drama, and having again to thank the
Secretary-General for not missing the opportunity of
attempting to resolve it afforded to him at the recent Nicosia
meeting, I wish to express the disappointment of my
Government over the lack of “information** regarding the
submission to Mr, Denktq’s “appropriate authorities” of
the agreement already reached. I sincerely hope that those
authorities, whoever they are, will view this concluded
agreement with the compassion it deserves and that we shall
not again be faced, as in the past, on this as well as on other
issues, with backtracking; for such a retrograde step would
be bound to poison the atmosphere of the talks and would,I
am afraid, have a devastating effect on them. The first signs
are already there. I plead with the Secretary-General to
persevere in his efforts to have the agreement on the missing
persons implemented.

13. The Security Council has already decided on a further
renewal, with the consent of the Government of Cyprus,
of
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP).
It is meeting today at a very auspicious moment, a few short hours after the resumption of the
intercommunal dialogue at Nicosia, which was recently
characterized by my Foreign Minister, Mr. Rolandis, as
“the event of the year for Cyprus”. For this most welcome
occurrence we have to thank, first and foremost, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his tireless and
painstaking efforts which culminated in the success of the
meeting of 19 May last, a success which came as a pleasant
surprise, even to those ‘of us who sometimes wish to be
incurably optimistic. Our grateful thanks go also to his
collaborators, both in Cyprus
and here in New York, and
this is a unique opportunity to mention specifically and
welcome back in the fold of Cypriologists Ambassador
Mr. Perez de CuCllar, who brought with him not only his
deep knowledge of the problem but also, perhaps, a touch
of good luck.

19. Recent events in Cyprus
have in‘no way altered the
fact that the Cyprus problem persists, with all the potential
danger that this entails; hence they in no way affect the
obligation of the Security Council, the General Assembly
and other international forums to deal with it in all its
aspects and to demand a speedy resolution and compliance
with decisions. Similarly, they in no way affect the sovereign
right of the Government of the Republic to have recourse to
these forums until the time that an agreement is reached.
2

20. The agreement of 19 May 1979 has.not per se resolved
any of the substantive issues and, for that to be achieved,‘we
need the political will of the -sides, and especially of ilie
Turkish side, to resolve the problem in accordance with the
four guidelines and, what is even more important, the Uriited Nations resolutions relevant to the Cyprus question. To
this end, the Security Counc$ and its individual members,
be they permanent or otherwise, have a significant part to
play by reminding those that need to be both reminded and
persuaded of their duties under the Charter, the United
Nations resolutions and fhe agreements. We do not want to
believe that the recent agreement was brought about by
ulterior motives of a short-term nature, but if that was the
case, then soon the whole matter will become crystal clear
and every bonajide person will know and should speak out.
We want to believe that ‘the agreement was brought about
by a genuine desire to achieye a breakthrough.

rienced, wise and humane diplomat ‘was fully’ justified by
the skilful way in which you-conductefl the &bate.of the
last few days on the situation in Southern Lebanon. An
additional source of satisfaction to us is the fact that you
represent a <duntry with which mine maintains cordial
relations and which has always lent its full and unqtilified
support to the independence, sotiereignty, territorial integrity, non-alignment and demilitarization of the Republic of
Cyprus. I should also like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity fo
participate in its present deliberations.
28. The report of the Secretary-General which is on the
Council’s agenda covers two aspects of what has come to be
known as the problem of Cyprus, namely, the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus for a period of six months, and the developments
which led to the Xl-point agreement of 19 May for the
resumption of the intercommunal talks.

21. In the meantime, statements of the nature of some of
those recently heard shc$d be avoided, as the SecretaryGeneral requested.

29. As regards the renewal of the mandate, which has just
been approved, it meets with the complete concurrence of
my Government. In the 15 years of its presence in the island,
UNFICYP has performed an exemplary task and can be
counted among the most successful peace-keeping operations in the history of the United Nations. Our grateful
thanks go to the Commander, officers and men of the
Force, as well as to the Governments which for so long have
contributed contingents to it, with the considerable em
nomic burden that this entails. We should also like to thank
all other contributing Member States. At the same time, we
whole-heart&y support the appeal of the Secretary-General
for new or increased pledges to ensure the continuation of
the operation, which he deems indispensable for maintaining peace in the island.

22. I need not remind the Council that the people of
Cyprus of whatever origin-Greek,
Turkish, Maronite or
Armenian-have
a common yearning, a yearning for peace
and conciliation in an island where there are no armies, no
refugees and no boundaries or lines of division and confrontation. The Government of Cyprus, I can assure the Council, will spare no effort to,achieve the solution desired by the
people of Cyprus, one which will safeguard the unity of the
people and the unity of the, country in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions.
23. For my Government, the early, just and viable solution of the Cyprus problem, within the framework of the
United Nations resolutions, is a political must, and I want
categorically to assure the Council that the political will to
work hard towards such a solution is ever present and to
this end we shall work only in a continuous, sustained and
result-oriented manner, but, also in a meaningful and substantive manner, avoiding any delay.

30. The second, and perhaps more important, aspect of
the problem covered by the Secretary-General’s report concerns the resumption of the intercommunal talks. The
Greek Government has always held the view that negotiation is the only way out of the present deadlock in Cyprus. It
has consistently encouraged efforts to that effect. We are,
therefore, gratified at the prospect of a new round of negotiations between the parties. This hopeful development
would not have been possible without the untiring efforts,
the dedication and the inventiveness of the SecretaryGeneral, who cannot be praised enough for the success of
his mission to Nicosia. He has received valuable help from
his able collaborators, both at United Nations Headquarters and at Nicosia.

24. I should like to thank all the members of the Council
for unanimously adopting resolution 45 1(1979), and particularly those members who took an active part in arriving at
that resolution.
25. I should like to conclude by expressing our appreciation for the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP and the
hope that the intercommunal talks at Nicosia will soon
result in a speedy resolution of the problem of Cyprus in
accordance with the terms of the agreement of 19 May 1979.

3 1. Due praise should also be given to the two parties
concerned, and especially to the President and Government
of Cyprus, who, by accepting to come once again to the
negotiating table, despite the fact that the numerousunited
Nations resolutions calling for the withdrawal of foreign
troops and the repatriation of the refugees have not even
begun to be implemented, gave the best proof of their desire
to approach the talks in a spirit of constructive cooperation.

26. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I now
call.
27. Mr. KATAPODIS
(Greece): Mr. President, it gives
me great pleasure to present to you the warmest congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your outstanding record in more than two years as your country’s
representative in this important body need not be underlined, while your welldeserved reputation as an expe-

32. Coming to the lO-point agreement itself, my Government considers that it constitutes a good framework for a
viable settlement. We should like to underline in particular
3

the proviso that such a settlement should be based on the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. Indeed; we firmly* believe that these resolutions,
by reaffirming the principies of the Charter which must
govern the elimination of all international disputes, offer
the only possible basis for allowing the Republic .of Cyprus
to function once more as an independent, unified*. and sovereign State,

leader of the Greek Cypriot community-*‘anywhere,
any time and discuss the problem with him even without
an.agenda.” [S/12715, anmx,J
I am ‘more than happy to state’&% my President’s offer for a ’
summit meeting between Mr,- K$ri&ou
and himself has,
although after a lapse of exactly’one year, materialized with
1
:_
a happy conclusion of a IO-p@ agreement.

33. Another encouraging development derivingfrom the
Secretary-General’s trip to Nicosia wasthe agreement of the
Turkish Cypriot side to collaborate in the implementation.
of General Assembly resolution 33/172, concerning the
search for missing persons in Cyprus. Thii is a purely
humanitarian matter and we sincerely hope that full light
will be shed on the fate of some 2,000 persons, a number of
whom are Greek citizens.

40. The Turkish community~~‘which ‘has lived without
peace and without security of Ii&and property between
1963 and 1974, is pleased with-the recent summit meeting
that has resulted in the IO-point agreement. We should like
on this occasion to express.our.appreciation
to the’
Secretary-General for his efforts in this connexion.
41. The peace envisaged at the’.summit meeting would be
within the four-point agreement ‘reached between the late
Archbishop Makarios and President DenktaS in 1977
[S/12323 of 30 April 1977, ~ar@.,~J. Thus the two national
communities, which have not known peace and tranquillity L
since 1955, would be able now to pursue the exercise of
living side by side as friends within a bi-communal,bi-zonal
federal system.

34. The negotiations which, by a happy coincidence, have
started on the very day of the Council’s deliberations, will
undoubtedly be arduous, protracted and demanding. There
are still great differences separating the two communities in
Cyprus. But if the political will, which has made the resump
tion of the talks possible, persists, we are hopeful that, with
the assistance of all concerned, there will be an end to the
tragedy of the Cypriot people, a tragedy that has brought
suffering to all the inhabitants of the island, irrespective of
their ethnic origin. The Greek Government, for its part, is
determined to do everything in its power to help to bring
about this result.

42. It is evident that the chief.prerequisite for friendship is
mutual trust. Also, it is obvious that the security of the
Turkish community
would-be .the main part of the
foundation-stone on which the,,:Makarios-Denke
princiIdi
ples are based.
.,‘.Y;
43. We are ,quite confident that each and every peaceloving country in the world will support the efforts to
establish a bi-zonal Federal Republic of Cyprus, which
would guarantee the lives and properties of the Turkish
Cypriot community in the island and prevent the recurrence of the events which took place prior to 1974.
i
44. Now, the Turkish community has reason to expect
that the economic boycott and other measures imposed
against the Turkish Cypriots since:1963 by the Greek side
will be lifted. Furthermore, during the intercommunal
negotiations, one-sided requests’an’d the discussion of the
question of Cyprus in international forums must not be
encouraged. That would ensure that the peace talks proceed in a smooth and constructive manner. The two
communities should be afforded the opportunity to make’
peace.

35. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerarionfrom Rzmian): The
next speaker is Mr. Atalay, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
36. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I should like to thank
you and the other members of the Council for having
invited me to participate in this debate. I am confident that
under your wise, patient and able guidance the Council will
complete its proceedings smoothly and efftciently on the
extension of the mandate.
37. I should like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, for his efforts to bring
about a peaceful, just and lasting solution of the Cyprus
problem. Our thanks and appreciation go also to Mr. Galindo Pohl and his deputy. Mr. Gorge, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Cyprus. I should also
like to thank the staff of the Secretariat for their endeavours. In this connexion the Under-Secretaries-General for
Special Political Affairs Perez de Cdllar and Urquhart,
the Director, Mr. Sherry, and Mr. Picco deserve mention.

45. The agreement reached at the summit meeting has
at long last brought the two’communities to the negotiating table. As is known, the dialogue between them had .’
been interrupted for the last two years.
.,
46. As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report,
the difftculties in the crux of the prablemstill remain and :
should not be underestimated. .This fact has also been
confirmed by the two leaders following the summit meet- A
ing. But, as Mr. Denktas, President of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, has emphasized, the fact that both
sides have accepted this reality is in itself a positive step. ..
President Denktas has also emphasized the necessity of ‘,
conducting the negotiations with patience and the deter--.
mination not to leave the table till the end. We wish
success to the interlocutors in the historic task.they have
. ,?
undertaken.

38. We wish also to express our gratitude to the Corn-.
mander of UNFICYP, Major-General Quinn, all the officers and men of UNFICYP and all the countries which have
contributed towards the maintenance of the Force in the
island.
39. On 22 May 1978 my President, His Excellency
Mr. Denktas, said:
“I want to reiterate what I said to the press on Friday,
19 May 1978: I am ready to meet Mr. Kyprianou”-the
4

on the United Nations operation in Cyprus, room for
optimism increases not only because of the calm and tranquillity prevailing in the island, but also in view of the fact
that the intercommunal talks resumed only a few hours ago
at Nicosia. The Cyprus question has today reached a stage
where the common purpose of the international community, as well as that of the parties directly concerned, has been
to encourage the conduct of the intercommunal talks in a
continuing and sustained manner. We are confident that the ..
members of the Council will grasp this opportunity to voice
their firm support and their satisfaction at the heartening
outcome of the summit meeting between the leaders of the
two communities in .Cyprus, held under the personal
auspices of the Secretary-General, an outcome embodied in
a IO-point agreement.

47. As for the question of missing.persons raised by
Mr. Mavrommatis,
the representative of the Greek
Cypriot Administration,
I -should like to inform the
Council that Mr. Denktas has agreed to refer the matter
to the Council of Ministers of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus with his recommendations. As soon as
the constitutional process is completed, we shall inform
the.Secretary-General accordingly. I particularly wanted
to make this clarificationto prevent any misunderstanding which might arise from the wording of paragraph 51
of the report of the Secretary-General.
48. I should now like to put on record our comments on
the resolution that has just been adopted.
49. The resolution refers to the non-existing entity “the.
Government of Cyprus”. As is known, this concept is not
acceptable to us. The position of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus on this issue has been put on record
several times in this chamber. Therefore, I shall not..
repeat. it now. Nevertheless, the Government of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus is giving its consent to the
extension of the mandate of the Force.

55. I take this opportunity to perform a pleasant duty by
commending the Secretary-General on the successhe has
achieved in bringing about an agreement on a basis for the
resumption of the intercommunal talks. Despite the enormous difficulties he encountered, the Secretary-General
tenaciously and skilfully continued his efforts with a view to
restarting the negotiating process between the two communities in Cyprus. That process is in fact the only valid
exercise for the achievement of a just and lasting settlement
of the Cyprus problem. He certainly deserves credit for the
successful conclusion of the high-level meeting between the
leaders of the two communities held under his auspices at
Nicosia on 18 and 19 May.

50. Furthermore, I have,to bring to the Council’s attention again the fact that the mandate of the Force is out of
date and must be amended according to present realities.
5 1. In concluding, I should like to quote a paragraph from
the statement delivered by President DenktaI at a luncheon
given to members of the foreign press by the Director of the
OlRce of Public Information of the Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus on 21 May 1979 at Magosa:

56. I should like to express my deep appreciation of the
statement that the Secretary-General has just made and of
the assurances he has given that he will persevere in his
peace-making efforts.

‘The Cyprus problem can be and will be settled if
people take no position on principle but say: ‘We have to
talk, talk until we begin to trust each other and until we
begin to see how the other side is affected by what has
happened, what the realities are and what is happening*.
So the dialogue between the two communities is important, and I hope that all the members of the international
community will do their utmost in this respect.”

57. Our deep appreciation also goes to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Reynaldo Galindo
Pohl, whose contribution to the search for peace has
already proved extremely constructive. Our grateful thanks
go also to the. Under-Secretaries-General Brian Urquhart
and Perez de CuCllar, and to Mr. George Sherry, Mr. Picco
and their staff for the devotion and competence they have
shown in the discharge of their respective duties.

52. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerarimfrom
Ruxdan): The
next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I
now call.

58. I shot&l be remiss if I did not strike a special note of
gratitude to Mr. Perez de Cutllar, who once again proved
himself to be an experienced diplomat possessing excep
tional .qualities and a deep knowledge of the affairs of
Cyprus by successfully contributing to the preparatory
work in the high-level meeting.

53. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Mr. President, I should like, in
the first place, to thank you and, through you, the other
members of the Council for inviting me to participate in the
deliberations of this body. I hasten to say that it is a great
privilege for me to take part in a meeting of the Council
presided over by you. Your diplomatic skills and vast experience are widely appreciated and I am confident that under
your wise and tactful guidance, which you have already
amply displayed in the conduct of the consultations, the
Council will be able to conclude its deliberations in a way
that will enhance the chances for productive negotiations
between the two communities in Cyprus. I should also like
to pay a mbute to your country, the Soviet Union, with
which my country enjoys constantly developing goodneighbourly and friendly co-operation.

59. I should like to express once again the appreciation of
my Government to the Member States which have contributed to UNFICYP. Last but not least, I wish to thank the
Force Commander, Major-General James J. Quinn, and
the officers and men of the Force for the competence they,
have shown in the discharge of their duties.
60. The breakthrough in efforts designed to bring about a
resumption of the intercommunal talks was achieved precisely one year after President Denktas proposed a meeting
between himself and Mr. Kyprianou. In fact, on 19 May
1978, President Denkq publicly stated that he was ready to
meet Mr. Kyprianou anywhere and at any time to discuss

54. As the Security Council today reviews the situation in
Cyprus on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General
5

stated before the Council on this’ point, because they are
already on record, I should like to stressonce again that any
compliance or cooperation with the peace-keeping effort in
Cyprus on our part would beconditional upon the exclusion of the concept of an existing‘Govemment of Cyprus.
..I..64. The resolution contains three operative elements.
First, it gives UNFICYP a mandate for another six months.
We concur in that extension having heard Mr. Nail Atalay,
representative of the Turkish -Federated State of- Cyprus,
who informed the Council of the consent of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus in that respect. It should, however, be noted that Mr. Atalay hasonce again underlined
the necessity of reviewing the ‘mandate of the Force as
established in 1964 in order to adopt it to the circumstances
now prevailing in Cyprus and to the new and’ reduced
dimensions of the problem.
’

the problem with him even without an agenda. He also
stated at that time that it would be much better if, instead of
working at cross purposes, they came together in a search
for a solution to the benefit of both communities. We are
gratified that that proposal of President DenktaI has eventually produced material results through the indefatigable
efforts of the Secretary-General within the framework of his
good offices, which culminated in the high-level meeting
between the leaders of the two communities. The efforts and
various initiatives of the Secretary-General in devising a
basis for the resumption of the negotiating process, which
have been pursued intensively since the second half of last
December, always met with a constructive attitude and with
encouragement from the Turkish Cypriot side; The efforts
of the Secretary-General also received support and encouragement from my Government. The Turkish Government,
which has always encouraged the intercommunal negotiations and taken steps to contribute to an easing of tension
and the creation of an atmosphere of dialogue, welcomed
the convening of the summit meeting between the leaders of
the two communities and the IO-point agreement of 19 May
that resulted from it. The decision by the Greek Cypriot
leadership to follow the path of talks for an independent,
non-aligned, b&communal and bi-zonal federal republic
has raised our hopes. We are cognizant of the fact that the
Denkta@yprianou
agreement is not a solution in itself,
but it is a significant development and a major step forward
in the right direction.

65. In its paragraph 2, as well as in the fifth preambular
one, a pertinent reference is made to the high-level meeting
between the leaders of the twd’communities and the lopoint agreement resulting therefrom. The Turkish Government certainly joins ‘the members of ‘the Council in
welcoming this important achievement. We ardently hope
that the negotiations resumed ‘today at Nicosia will be
conducted in a continuing and ‘sustained manner. My
Government will continue with, .determination to support
and encourage this negotiating process, with the expectation that it will lead to progress towards a just and lasting
settlement within the framework of the Denkta@Iakarios’
agreement of 12 February 1977, which continues to be the
basis of the talks resumed today;’
,’

61. The negotiating process restarted today at Nicosia
may be arduous, but there is no doubt that it has moved in a
more concrete phase following the summit meeting between
the leaders of the two communities. At this crucial moment,
if the momentum of the procedural breakthrough of 19
May 1979 is to be maintained and if the talks are to be given
a chance to succeed, it is essential that the parties should act
constructively by abstaining scrupulously from any action
that might jeopardize the outcome of the talks and by
initiating practical measures in order to promote goodwill
and mutual confidence. It is with regret and reluctance,
however, that I am compelled to mention here the fact that,
despite the diligence and restraint demonstrated by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership in that respect, the record ofthe
period between 19 May and now has been far from gratifying. Nevertheless, we shall continue to nurture the hope that
the political will shown by the two community leaders to
overcome the existing stalemate and to resume the intercommunal talks will also prevail throughout the negotiating
process and thereby open the way to fruitful co-operation
between the Turkish and Greek communities in Cyprus.
My Government also believes that Turkey and Greece
should assist and encourage the two national communities
in Cyprus to find a viable and equitable solution of their
problem through intercommunal talks.

66. In its third important element,‘the resolution reiterates
the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General in the
intercommunal negotiations, as established by paragraph 6
of resolution 367 (1975). As has ,already been stated on
numerous occasions; the Turkish Government fully sup
ports the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General.
67. In view of the fact that theSecretaryGenera1 .was
absent from the meeting when I made part of this statement,
I should like to mention once again how much I appreciate
the statement he made this afternoon and the assurances he
has given that he will persevere in his peace-keeping efforts.
68. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (inzerprezurionfiom Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has pointed out on many occasions
that the Cyprus question wascaused by prolonged fmperialist colonial rule and that super-Power meddling and inter2
ference were the basic cause for the eruption of thecyprus
crisis in 1974 and the long-standing failure to solvethe issue
thereafter. In our view, despite thedifferences of one kind or
another that exist between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots
and between the parties directly concerned, they share identical basic interests and, therefore, they have every reason to
seek an early solution of their differences through negotiations on an equal footing. Recently, we were very pleased to
note the gratifying new progress that has been achieved on
the Cyprus question. On 19 May of this year, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, talks were heldbetween
Mr. Kyprianou, President of Cyprus and leader of the
Greek Cypriots, and Mr. Denktq, leader of the Turkish
Cypriots. They reached a IO-point agreement and decided

62. Turning now to resolution 451 (1979), which the
Council has just adopted, I should like to explain the position of my Government on it.
63. In the third preambular paragraph there is, as in
previous-resolutions on the same subject, an irrelevant reference to a Government of Cyprus. The Council must be
familiar with our basic, unchanged position in that respect.
Therefore, without going into the details of what we have
6

to resume at Nicosia on 15 June the intercommunal talks
which have been suspended for two years, thus achieving a
breakthrough in the stalemate on the Cyprus issue. This
progress is supported by both.Cypriot communities and
widely acclaimed by the people of all countries who are
really concerned about the destiny of the people of Cyprus.

presented on this question. My delegation has studied this
report with the utmost care, as it deserves, and we feel in
duty bound to express our admiration for the tireless efforts
of the Secretary-General and his staff in the search for a
solution to the many intricate problems involved in. the
situation in Cyprus. In particular, my delegation wishes to.
commend the Secretary-General for the wisdom that he
brought to bear’at the high-level meeting held at Nicosia
under his auspices on 18 and 19 May 1979, the purpose of.
which was to .initiate an effective negotiating process, with
a view to achieving a just and durable solution to the’
problem of Cyprus. The IO-point communique issued at the
conclusion of that meeting is of tremendous significance,
and my delegation hopes that its substance willprovide the
necessary impetus in further efforts ,to resolve the many
complex issues -that have for a long time bedevilled the
situation in Cyprus.

69. Needless to say, it will take some time to resolve the
Cyprus question, which is a complex issue left over by
history, and there may yet be obstacles and zigzags of one
kind or another on the road.ahead. However, what isessential now is after all the common ground shared by the two
Cypriot communities and the parties directly concerned.
They all stand for safeguarding the indepndence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and favour a settlement of the Cyprus question through negotiations.
Furthermore, they are all faced with the threat of superPower aggression and expansion. Now, with the emergence
of a breakthrough in the stalemate, they will certainly be
able to narrow,their differences gradually and achieve a fair
and reasonable settlement pf the Cyprus question at an
early date, so long as they take to heart the over-all interests
of unity against imperialism and hegemonism, continue to
guard against and firmly exclude super-Power interference
and sabotage and carry on patient negotiations on an equal
footing and in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual
accommodation. The Chinese Government and people
entertain profound friendly sentiments towards the
Cypriot people. We sincerely hope that the two Cypriot
communities will continue their efforts on the basis of the
results already attained and bring about an over-all and
reasonable settlement at an early date. We believe that
herein lie the basic interests of the two Cypriot communities
and that this is the common desire of the third-world countries and all the other countries and peoples that uphold
justice.

73. Accordingly; my delegation is heartened by the news
provided this afternoon by the Secretary-General about the
resumption of the intercommunal talks this morning. We
hope that these intercommunal talks will register further
progress in the search for a solution to the problem of
Cyprus. Indeed, we hope that the same spirit of statesmanship that prevailed at the meetings of 18 and 19 May will
continue to inspire the leaders of Cyprus in their commitment to the resolution of the problems of their country.
74. There can, of course, be no question that in the final
analysis the solution to the problem Of CypNS lies in the full
implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) as well as of subsequent Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. My delegation is of the firm view that all
foreign interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus should
end and that the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus
should be preserved.

70. On the basis of the aforementioned position, we support the positive elements in draft resolution S/l3396 welcoming the IO-point agreement reached between the two
communities and urging them to proceed with the intercommunal talks within the framework of the lo-point agreement in a result-oriented manner, avoiding any delay. In the
meantime, in view of the fact that the draft resolution
mainly concerns the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP,
on which the Chinese delegation has always held its position
of principle, the Chinese delegation did not participate in
the vote on the said draft.

75. I wish to conclude on a note of hope that the much
needed permanent settlement of the problem of Cyprus will
not continue to elude us.
76. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America): In
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus for another six-month period, the international community recognizes that the continued maintenance of peace and stability on Cyprus is essential for
serious, sustained and successful resumed intercommunal
talks. UNFICYP has continued to fulfil its mandate in an
exemplary manner. The impartiality and integrity it has
displayed in its operations enhance the reputation which
United Nations peace-keeping has justly earned as an effective force for maintaining stability in troubled areas of the
world.

71. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): My delegation was happy to
vote in favour of the resolution just adopted by the Council
extending the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for another six months, in accordance with the recommendation of the Secretary-General
contained in his report which is before the Council. It is
significant that the parties directly concerned have also
expressed their concurrence with the recommendation of
the Secretary-General. Clearly, there is a recognition of the
vital, if not indispensable, role that LJNFICYP has continued to play in promoting conditions of peace and stability in Cyprus and in contributing to the search for a just and
durable solution.

77. We &new the mandate of UNFICYP on the same date
on which intercommunal talks have begun anew at Nicosia.
UNFICYP therefore has the added opportunity of maintaining the peace while the parties exert every effort to arrive
at a just and equitable settlement of their differences. Credit
for the fact of these talks must be given to the SecretaryGeneral for his unfailing efforts and to the willingness of the
leaders of the two communities to demonstrate the necessary flexibility. The Council has every right to expect that

72. ,I take this opportunity ‘to commend the SecretaryGeneral for the very lucid and objective report that he has
7

Cyprus in order to resolve it, without taking account of
the fundamental interests of the people of Cyprus, in
pursuit of the policy of a narrow group of NATO States.
That sort of “solution” of the problem of Cyprus would
really only entrench the partition of the island and would
transform the country into a pawn on the strategicchessboard of the Western countries.

the representatives of the two communities participating in
these talks will work to establish a moderate, flexible and
statesmanlike atmosphere; so that genuine progress can be
made towards a lasting solution in Cyprus.
78. If the resumed talks a&sustained and constructive, as
we hope, further opportunities for resolution of the issues
dividing the two communities will present themselves. I am
sure the Council shares with my Government the strong
expectation that the negotiations will succeed and offers its
support to the Secretary-General in the continuance of his
good offices.

\

84. The present meeting of the Security Council is taking place in a promising atmosphere following the recent
agreement reached regarding the resumption of theintercommunal talks. The report of the Secretary-General is
also significantly more optimistic than previous, reports.
My delegation would like to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General for the effo’rts he has exerted to dis-~ 1,
charge the difftcult task entrusted to. him by the
Council-that
is,. the international solution of the question of Cyprus on the basis of United Nations resolutions.
At the same time, we voice the hope that the intercommunal talks will be a tangible step towards the achievement
of a just settlement of the internalaspects of the problems
and will thus be of assistance in securing the existence of
Cyprus as an independent, sovereign and united. State in
consonance with the interests of both national communities in the island.

79. We continue to be deeply concerned that voluntary
contributions to the maintenance of UNFICYP, still do not
meet anticipated expenditures for the Force and that the
deficit-which is owed primarily to the troop-contributing
countries-continues to increase. Unfortunately troop contributors are forced to bear an inordinate and unfair share
of the burden of maintaining their contingents in Cyprus.
The United States has continued to contribute its fare share
of the costs, and we greatly regret that some countries,
including permanent members of the Council, have not
responded to the repeated appeals of the Secretary-General
for contributions. We urge Member States to meet their
obligations, thereby giving concrete evidence of their commitment to international peace and security and to the
promotion of a just and lasting Cyprus settlement.

85. The speedy elimination of the focal point of tension
on Cyprus would be a stabilizing factor in the troubled
eastern Mediterranean region and an important contribution to the cause of the strengthening of peace and
security. It would be in accordance with the Final Act
adopted at Helsinki and with the need to make progress
1
in international detente.
.

80. In closing, I should like to express my Government’s
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in Cyprus for their unceasing efforts to
assist the parties to achieve a lasting settlement. A special
note of thanks and best wishes is also offered to UnderSecretary-General Perez de Cutllar, who today presided
over the beginning of the resumed intercommunal talks.

86. Bearing in mind the wish expressed by the:Government of the Republic of Cyprus, the Czechoslovak delegation voted in favour of the renewal of the mandate of
UNFICYP
for a further six months. I should like to
express here the hope that the representatives, of both
national communities will use the renewed mandate of
the Force to solve their internal problems in the interest
of a just settlement of the conflict;

8 1. Finally, our particular thanks and fullest admiration
are offered to Under-Secretary-General Urquhart and his
able staff, to Major-General Quinn and the officers and
men of the Force for the dedicated and professional manner
in which they have carried out their important duties.
82. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia) (interp~etution
from Russian): At the very beginning of the Cyprus conflict the main principles according to which it could be
settled were reaffhmed within the United Nations-that
is, strict respect for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of the Republic of
Cyprus. The main requirement for a resolution of the
Cyprus question has always been, and indeed remains,
the immediate cessation of any foreign interference in the
internal affairs of the country, the withdrawal of all
foreign troops and the demilitarization
of the island. As
for the question of the State unity of the Republic of
Cyprus, the United Nations resolutions do not admit of
any equivocal interpretations. Respect for those’principies is still the basis for making much-needed progress in
resolving the problem of Cyprus and for the success of
any diplomatic efforts.

87. Mr. ALCARD (Norway): My delegation supported
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for another period of six
months. We did so because we feel that in the prevailing
circumstances the continued presence of UNFICYP is
indispensable.
88. My Government welcomes the iO-point communique issued at Nicosia at the high-level meeting under the
auspices of the Secretary-General. We should like to
express our sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his persistent and untiring efforts in this matter. We
hope that the talks started today at Nicosia will bring a
just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.
89. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to the
Commander of UNFICYP,
Major-General
James J.
Quinn, to his staff, to the officers and. men serving in
UNFICYP
and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
:

83. Everybody is fully aware that there still exist certain
external forces that would like to circumvent the principles of an international settlement of the problem of
8

-<

the @ridelines established in the relevant communiquC, have
begun. The initiative enjoys the full support of my delegation.

90.

Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (i~rerprerarioa fr& iI
Fw?zc~):
The French delegation has always taken a position
in favour of the draft resoiutic& providingfor the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Force stationed in
Cyprus. But in so doing we have always been careful to
remind everyone of the role of jhe Force as we seeit, that is,
to prevent acts of violence between the members of the two
communities, thereby allowing their representatives to seek
an over-all agreement in an atmosphere of relative calm.

95. Bolivia voted in favour of the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for
another six months, with the hope and the sincere desire
that the dialogue that has started today will be approached
by the two parties in the loftiest spirit of understanding.
Only in that way can stable and lasting solutions be found
which respect the rights and freedom of all the citizens and
preserve the unity, sovereignty and integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus.

91. For more than two yea& now, however,.events have
hardly lived up to the hopes and wishes we have expressed.
Hence, the French authorities welcomed with deep satisfaction the IO-point agreement reached on 19 May at Nicosia.
It was with the conviction that in’itself it is already a positive
element that my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted to us today. That agreement provides,
in fact, for the resumption of the intercommunal talks,with
no break in the continuity of and with respect for certain
priorities mutually agreed .upon
by the parties.
.

96. I should not wish to conclude without expressing my
delegation’s gratitude to Mr. Galindo Pohl, Mr. Javier
Perez de Cutllar and Major-General James Quinn for the
effectiveness and dedication with which they have carried
out and are‘continuing to carry out their important task.
97. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal): Allow me at the outset to
pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for the remarkable
and effective work he has done in creating the conditions
that led to the resumption of negotiations between the two
Cypriot communities. The Portuguese delegation hopes
that both parties will approach the resumed intercommunal
talks which started this morning with the political will to
bridge the differences that separate them. We believe that
the IO-point communique referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report may constitute a sound basis for the effort
now needed to overcome the difficulties that lie ahead.

92. The French authorities wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the essential role he has piayed in this success
and for the constant efforts he has made. They congratulate
him on the result obtained. I would add that my delegation
welcomed with particular satisfaction the news given us at
the beginning of this meeting by Mr. Waldheim regarding
the felicitous resumption of the intercommunal talks. My
Government wishes to statein that connexion how much it
admires the restraint and open-mindedness shown by the
representatives of the two parties. Their positive attitude is
an element essential to the development and successof the
process that has resumed today in Cyprus. Fully aware of
the difficulty and scope of the undertaking, aware also of
the dangers involved in overestimating the scope of the
agreement, my Government appeals to the parties to demonstrate the qualities of heart and mind necessary to the
development and implementation of the momentum towards
peace. The condition indispensable to the successof these
negotiations is, need I recall, the political will of all
sides to achieve a settlement, In any case, the settlement
must be in conformity with justice and international law; it
can be achieved only if the parties exert at the same time an
effort towards compromise. .’

98. These talks in our view should emphasize the benefits
the two communities will enjoy co-existing in a free and
peaceful way and respecting their specific differences and
thus contributing to the development of their common
country. We urge each party to be flexible and ready to
acknowledge the needs of the other so that this aim can be
achieved.
99. Portugal, therefore, voted in favour of the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, with the hope that its presence will help the search
for a peaceful solution that will permit a retum,to normal --.
conditions, thus allowing the Force later to withdraw, ha+
ing fully accomplished its mandate.

93. Finally, I should like to,pay a tribute to the men and
offkers of the Force, who have served in an exemplary way
under the command of Major-General Quinn. My delegation wishes also to thank Under-Secretary-General Perez
de Cu&lar and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Galindo Pohl, for the contribution they have
made to peace. They may rest assured that they have our
confidence and our support in their task.
‘_~~
94. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (inrerpref&ion
from Spanish): Once again the Council is considering one of
the oldest and most difficult problems facing our Organization: peace and security in the Republic of Cyprus. However, my delegation believes that this time we can glimpse a
real chance of lasting and effective peace in the Republic.
Thanks to the indefatigable and effective work done by the
Secretary-General, a fundamental, decisive step in that
direction has been taken. Intercommunal talks, subject to

100. I should further like to express my delegation’s
appreciation to all the officers and men of the Force and to
the Secretary-General’s staff for the effective way in which
they have all been carrying out their task.
101. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): Bangladesh voted in
favour of the draft resolution renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for another
six months. In doing so my delegation was conscious of the
crucial role UNFICYP has played over the years and the
vital contribution it can make by maintaining, as the.
Secretary-General has put it, a climate of calm in the island,
thereby facilitating the search for a peaceful settlement.
102.’ Bangladesh welcomes the IO-point agreement which
constitutes the basis for the resumption of intercommunal
talks. We are all indeed grateful to the Secretary-General
for the dedication and perseverance that he has displayed in
9

-

bringing this about. We also hail the statesmanship and the
spirit of co-operation of the leaders of the two Cypriot
communities. We would urge them to pursue this peaceful
process to its logical end.

atmosphere, encourage it and nurse it, in order to encourage the constructive spirit so far displayed by the parties
concerned. The resolution just adopted is, in our view, a
step in that direction.
,’

103. I wish in conclusion to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General% Special Representative, to the Commander, the officers and men of UNFICYP and to the
troop-supplying Governments for their contribution in
mantaining this important peace-keeping operation.

108. Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the countries that contribute troops, to the
officers and soldiers and to all those who work hard, including members of the Secretariat,‘foi the achievement of a just
and noble peace in Cyprus.

104. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Very briefly I should like
to explain the vote of my delegation. The parties concerned
have requested the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for another six
months and, because of that, the delegation of Kuwait voted
in favour of the resolution just adopted by the Council. My
Government is one of the very few that always responds
very favourably to the appeal of the Secretary-General for
financial contributions for the maintenance of the Force.
We always maintain
the position, however, that
UNFICYP, while it has been providing a senseof quiet, has
not played the role initially envisaged for it, that of an
interim force that would encourage the parties towards a
meaningful solution of the problem; Instead, it has provided a good shelter behind which the parties have
entrenched their positions and consolidated their policies.

109. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): The delegation of Jamaica is
pleased to have supported the resolution just adopted by the
Council renewing the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus for a further six months. From our
examination of the Secretary-General’s report, it is clear
that the continued presence of the Force is indispensable,
bearing in mind not only the objective requirements of the
situation on the ground but also’the significant political
developments which have taken place under the auspices of
the good offices of the Secretary-General.
110. Jamaica welcomes the fact that the intercommunal
talks which have been stalled for so long were resumed this
morning at Niwsia. It is our earnest hope that these talks
will result in progress towards the restoration of harmony in
Cyprus and a state of affairs where the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus is
respected and guaranteed in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.

105. We cannot say that the situation has been very satisfactory. However, it is always good to light a candle rather
than curse the dark. We note with relief that the unflagging
efforts of the Secretary-General have brought about agreement on the l&point programme reached at the meeting
recently held between the leaders of the two communities.
The Secretary-General deserves high commendation and
praise for his patience and unmatched dedication to the
solution of the problem.

111. I should like to take the opportunity to congratulate
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
their patient and persevering efforts which have resulted in
the resumption of the negotiating process and we also commend the parties directly concerned for the constructive
cooperation they gave to the Secretary-General as he lent
his good offices.

106. We would also commend the parties concerned, both
Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot, for the constructive
spirit displayed in the course of these talks. The parties
concerned must know that the present situation is not
acceptable. We are committed to the preservation of the
independence, territorial integrity, non-aligned character
and unity of Cyprus. We are also committed to assisting in
any efforts directed towards the achievement of a just and
comprehensive solution of the problem. There is no rhyme
or reason in saying that the question of Cyprus is an internal
matter in which the majority would decide the affairs of the
Republic. It has always been the position of my Govemment that the Turkish Cypriots have the right to participate
fully in the decision-making of the island. At the same time,
they should seek the co-existence that can be obtained from
co-operation rather than getting it on the basis of a fait
accompli.

112. Finally, Jamaica expressesits sincere appreciation to
the Commander of the Force, Major-General Quinn, and
the officers and men of UNFICYP and its civilian staff for
their dedicated work, both in the political and humanitarian
aspects, which has allowed the situation to remain calm.
113. Mr. MANSFIELD
(United Kingdom): I should like
to begin by expressing my Government’s pleasure at the
outcome of the high-level meeting convened by the
Secretary-General at Nicosia last month. The success of
that meeting, in particular the agreement that the intercommunal talks should be resumed and that they should be
carried out in a continuing and sustained manner, owes
much to the spirit of enlightened statesmanship and cooperation which, in the words of the Secretary-General,
prevail at the meeting. Our warm congratulations are also
due to Mr. Waldheim for his skill and persistence in bringing the parties together, to his Special Representative in
Cyprus, and to the members of his staff, in particular, Perez
de CuCllar, for their unremitting efforts, It is our firm hope
that the talks which began at Nicosia this morning will lead
to a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem. The
efforts which the two communities are undertaking to
achieve this will have the fullest support of the British
Government.

107. The Council’s role at this stage is to reduce and
eliminate the mistrust, suspicion and fear. In this wnnexion, the best we can do is to support to the hilt the efforts of
the Secretary-General. The talks that have just started must
be encouraged. What is important is that the present spirit
of relaxation of tension that has brought about an atmosphere conducive to subtantive negotiations must be preserved. The overriding problem is how to nurture that
10

114. I should also like to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral on yet another comprehensive and lucid report on
the operations of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus and on the exercise of his good o&es. My
Government accepts without reservation his recommendation that the UNFICYP mandate should be extended by a
further six months and hopes to maintain the British contingent of the Force at its present strength for the next six
months. We agree that UNFICYP continues to play an
essential part in maintaining peace in Cyprus and should be
kept in being while the resumed intercommunal talks are
given reasonable time to achieve substantial progress.

121. The delegation of the Soviet Union did not object to
the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP for another six
months: in fact, we voted in favour of it, inasmuch as the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus had agreed to its
extension. We’ assume that the financing of the Force will,
as heretofore, take place on a voluntary basis.
122. In view of the resolution adopted by the Security
Council regarding the extension of the UNFICYP mandate,
the Soviet delegation would reaffirm its position of principle on the question of a Cyprus settlement.
123. The Soviet Union continues staunchly to advocate a
solution of the Cyprus question on the basis of the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integi
rity of the Republic of Cyprus, with strict respect for its
policy of non-alignment.

115. We are grateful to the officers and men ofUNFICYP
for their dedication to their task. We hope, however, that
the Secretary-General’s further appeal for voluntary contributions for the financing of the Force will meet with a
generous response. As the Secretary-General points out in
paragraph 66 of his rep,ort, the financial situation of
UNFICYP continues to be a cause for concern, with a
disproportionate financial burden falling on those Govemmerits which contribute troops to the Force. This most
unsatisfactory situation ought to be rectified in the interest
of equity and balance.

124. The lack -ciT any solution to the Cyprus problem,
which has been with us for many years now, is the result of
the continuing foreign interference in the internal affairs of
Cyprus.. In violation of United Nations decisions, certain
NATO interests have not relented in their attempts to
change/he status of Cyprus as a non-aligned State by
turning the island into the main NATO stronghold in the
easte’m Mediterranean. One must be aware of the aim of
those interests to link the settlement process in Cyprus with
narrow self-seeking political manoeuvres extraneous to the
interests of the people of Cypnts. There is an urgent need to
put an end to all foreign interference in the internal affairs of
Cyprus and to halt any attempts to impose on Cyprus plans
and decisions which run counter to the interests of-its people.
The withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island must
be ensured, and the elimination of the foreign military bases
guaranteed. The two national communities of Cyprus must
be given an opportunity to settle the questions of the internal organ&ion
of their State themselves, free of foreign
interference and taking account of the interests and rights of
the Greek and Turkish communities.

116. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretationfi0m French):
Sir, as this is our first statement since you assumed the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, I wish to
take this occasion to extend to you our congratulations.
Your great country, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
and my own, the Republic of Gabon, enjoy very good
relations, and it is with particular pleasure that the delegation of Gabon wishes you great successin your presidency
and pledges to you its fullest co-operation.
117. We should also like to congratulate the representative of Portugal on the effective manner in which he discharged his functions as President of the Council for the
month of May, a particularly busy and difficult month.
118. As has been remarked, my delegation voted in favour
of the resolution just adopted which extended the mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for an additional six
months. In so doing, my delegation wished to express its
confidence in the intercommunal talks. We in the delegation of Gabon believe that a solution to the Cyprus problem
can be found only within the framework of those intercommunal talks, free of any foreign pressure. That is why my
delegation, in the light of the Secretary-General’s announcement a little while ago that the negotiations have resumed,
wishes to congratulate him on the resumption of those
intercommunal talks. We :hope that they will lead to a
settlement of this very delicate problem. But if those intercommunal talks are to be successful, there must be no
foreign interference, and the non-aligned nature of Cyprus
and its independence must be safeguarded.

125. The Soviet Union lays great stress on the immediate
and full implementation of the United Nations resolutions
on Cyprus. It is ready to promote by all such means a
settlement of the problem of Cyprus aiming at guaranteeing
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus and serving the interests of peace and
international security. To that end, the Soviet Union has
proposed that a representative international conference
should be convened within the context of the United
Nations to examine the question of Cyprus. There is no
doubt that the convening of that conference could provide
an important element in achieving a just settlement of the
problem of QpNS
and the strengthening of peace in the
eastern Mediterranean.
126. In view of the meeting which took place in mid-May
at Nicosia between the President of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou
and the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community,
Mr. Denktag, under the aegis of the Secretary-General and
thanks to his efforts, we should like to express the hope that
the agreement reached at that meeting will open up prospects for the bringing together of the two sides. We hope
that the intercommunal talks will bring positive results.

119. It was in the light of these considerations that the
delegation of Gabon voted in favour of the resolution just
adopted.
120. The PRESIDENT (intmprezation from Russian): I
wish now to make a statement in my capacity as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
11

127. The Soviet delegation hopes that this further renewal
of the UNFICYP mandate will be used by both sides to
reach a settlement of the controversial issues in the interests
of ensuring the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its status as a
non-aligned State.
128. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I call on the.repF
scntative of Cyprus, who has asked to be allowed to speak.
129. Mr. MAVROMMATIS
(Cyprus): Thank you very
much, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak again. I have
asked to do so to thank once again the members of the
Council for adopting resolution 451(1979) and even more to

thank them for rcaflirming their position on the question of
Cyprus, which is a source of encouragement to us.
130. VWe have heard certain allegations this afternoon and
one might have wished that they would find no place here or
thought that they had none in view of the prevailing climate.
Those statements would normally call for a reply, but I shall
not reply, because if I were to do so I would have to mention
a few truths, which might be misunderstood as not being
conducive to maintaining the prevailing climate. In any
event, our position with respect to each and every one of
those allegations is well known to the members of the
Council.
T&e meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

,

‘..
., ,

..,,.

.._

.’

:’
:,....’
8

3’

-,

.

.

.;.

. . ,.‘.

,
.I.

,.

,

‘.
,.

a.

;.

:,
. .

.‘.

:

:

.“‘.

. ..‘
:

.I.,.

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

COMMENT

PUBLICATIONS

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

or

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNlES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
les librairiea
d&ositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
auprAs
de votre
libraire
A : Nations
Unies.
Section
des venter.
New York ou GenAve.
ZCAK

IIOJIY=IWTb

Eizsna$tttH

H3AAHHII

OD~~HHJ~UHR

auuax
n arenvcvaax
80
BarneyI
~ttmuto~
htsra3mte
Hau~R.CeKttHanonpo~aiteH3ASHHA.
COMO

CONSEGUIB

BAUNN

Oli%ELWHEHHhZX

HAHHH

OCinemuteHHbtx

HatwR

acex
paRoaax
HIIH nmume

uupa.
Haaonnre
cnpaaxa
no aspecy
: Oprauaaauxs

PO~KKRO ~yttnrb

8 KHHJKHblXYilra-

06 m~ztwt$tRx
06nenuueexubnc

a

Hbmo-FfOpKKnH~eKeBK.

PUBLICACIONBS

Las publicacioues
de las
buidoras
en todas
path
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas.

Litho in United Nations, New York

OPPAHH

et les sgences
au adresses-vous

DE LAS

Naciones
Unidas
eat&n
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfss
a su librero
o dirfjase

Price: SUS. 1.50

y casas distris: Neciones

79-);0062-March

1982-2.250
