A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/145
22 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 111
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/600)]
54/145. Assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/172 of 23 December 1994, 50/150 of 21 December 1995, 51/73 of
12 December 1996, 52/105 of 12 December 1997 and 53/122 of 9 December 1998,
Aware of the fact that the majority of refugees are children and women,
Bearing in mind that unaccompanied refugee minors are among the most vulnerable refugees and the
most at risk of neglect, violence, forced military recruitment, sexual assault and other abuses and therefore
require special assistance and care,
Mindful of the fact that the ultimate solution to the plight of unaccompanied refugee minors is their
return to and reunification with their families,
Noting the revised Guidelines on Refugee Children issued by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in May 1994 and the development of an emergency kit to facilitate coordination
and enhance the quality of responses to the needs of unaccompanied minors by the Office of the High
Commissioner, the United Nations Children’s Fund and non-governmental organizations,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the United Nations Children’s Fund in the identification and tracing of unaccompanied refugee
minors, and welcoming their efforts in reunifying families of refugees,
Welcoming the efforts exerted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to reunite
refugees with their families,
/...

A/RES/54/145
Page 2

Noting the efforts of the High Commissioner to ensure the protection of and assistance to refugees,
including children and unaccompanied minors, and that further enhanced efforts need to be exerted to this
effect,
Recalling the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child1 and the 1951 Convention2 and
the 1967 Protocol3 relating to the Status of Refugees,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2. Also takes note of the report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict;5
3. Expresses its deep concern at the continued plight of unaccompanied refugee minors, and
emphasizes once again the urgent need for their early identification and for timely, detailed and accurate
information on their number and whereabouts;
4. Stresses the importance of providing adequate resources for programmes of identification and
tracing of unaccompanied refugee minors;
5. Calls upon the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in cooperation with
other relevant United Nations bodies, to incorporate into its programmes policies that aim at preventing the
separation of refugee families, conscious of the importance of family unity;
6. Calls upon all Governments, the Secretary-General, the Office of the High Commissioner, all
United Nations organizations, other international organizations and non-governmental organizations
concerned to exert the maximum effort to assist and protect refugee minors and to expedite the return to and
reunification with their families of unaccompanied refugee minors;
7. Urges the Office of the High Commissioner, all United Nations organizations, other international
organizations and non-governmental organizations concerned to take appropriate steps to mobilize resources
commensurate with the needs and interests of unaccompanied refugee minors and for their reunification with
their families;
8. Calls upon all States and other parties to armed conflict to respect international humanitarian law,
and, in this regard, calls upon States parties to respect fully the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19496 and related instruments, while bearing in mind resolution 2 adopted at the twenty-sixth
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held at Geneva in December 1995, and to

1

Resolution 44/25, annex.

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

3
4
5
6

A/54/285.
A/54/430, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
/...

A/RES/54/145
Page 3

respect the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,1 which accord children affected by armed
conflict special protection and treatment;
9. Condemns all acts of exploitation of unaccompanied refugee minors, including their use as soldiers
or human shields in armed conflict and their forced recruitment into military forces, and any other acts that
endanger their safety and personal security;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Children’s Fund, other
United Nations organizations and other international organizations to mobilize adequate assistance to
unaccompanied refugee minors in the areas of relief, education, health and psychological rehabilitation;
11. Encourages the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his efforts to raise awareness
worldwide and to mobilize official and public opinion for the protection of children affected by armed
conflict, including refugee minors;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session on the
implementation of the present resolution and to give special attention to the girl-child refugee in his report.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

/...
