216

General Asscmbly --Thirt~-eighth Session

Unitv at its nineteenth ordinarv scssion. held at Addis
Ababa from 6 to 12 June 1983. Í74
Gral'c/\' conccrncd at thc persisten! and scrious problcm
of large numbcrs of refugees on the African contincnt.
Awarc ofthe economic and social burden borne by African countries of asylum on account of the presence of
these refugees and its conscquences for tbeir national
devclopment and of the heavy sacrifices madc by them.
despite their limited resources.
Recognizing the universal collcctivc rcsponsibility of
sharing tbe urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of African refugees through effcctivc mobilization of
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of tbc
refugees and to strengtben the capacity of countrics of asylum to providc adequately for tbe refugees whilc the)
remain in those countries. as well as to assist the countries
of origin in tbe rebabilitation of voluntary returnees.
Recof?ni::ing that tbe achievement of durable solutions
to refugee problems, in particular voluntary repatriation
and local integration, calls for generous humanitarian and
developmental assistance to the affected countries, as well
as for efforts to address the causes of refugee situations.
1. Takcs note with apprcciation of the report of tbc
Secretary-General concerning preparations for tbe Second
lnternational Conference on Assistancc to Rcfugces in
A frica:
2. Approl'cs tbe proposed Conferencc arrangements
contained in paragrapb 17 of tbc report of tbe Secretan General:
3. Rcqucsts the Secrctary-General to invite ali States to
participate in tbc Conference at the ministerial leve! and to
invite also the relevan! organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organi1,ations to participate in thc Conference at a bigh leve!;
4. Appea/s to the international community, ali States.
specialized agencies and regional intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to provide tbe utmost
support for the Conference with a view to offering maximum financia! and material assistance to refugees 111
Africa and to ensuring tbe success of tbe Confcrencc:
5. Exprcssc.1· its dccp apprcciation to tbe countrics of
asylum for tbe gcnerous contribution and tbe sacrificcs
that tbey are making to alleviate tbe pligbt of refugees:
6. Commcnds thosc countries tbat are supporting
programmes for refugees and returnees for tbeir continucd
assistanee and calls upon them. as well as other States and
international organizations. to assist and co-operate with
the United Nations Higb Commissioner for Refugees in
tbe promotion of durable solutions:
7. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General. 111 close cooperation witb the Organization of African Unity and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. to ensure tbat, in tbe period leading up to thc Conference, ali appropriate measures are taken so tbat Member States, in particular principal donors. are kept fully
informed oftbe priority needs ofthe affected countries and
tbat contacts are established in the capitals conccrned to
mobilize the necessary support and resources:
S. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by thc
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to initiate public information programmes to increase public
awareness of the rcfugee situation in A frica and the objecti ves of the Conference:

lJ. Rn¡11csts the Dcpartmrnt of Public lnformation of
thl' Sccrctariat and othcr competent bodics of tbc llnited
Nations systcm to co-operatc do,cly witb thc llnited
Nations Higb Commissioncr for Refugccs to cnsure that
thc maximum amount of publicity is givcn to tbc refugec
situation in Africa. ,1s wcll as to tbc Conferencc and its
oh¡ccti ves:

174 See A/381312. annex.
17 5 Otficial Record., o( thc (icnera/ A."cmhlr. J"hirt,·-i'lghth SC\sl()n. S11¡,
p/emenl No. 12 (A/38/ 12 and Corr. 1).
176 Jbid .. Supp/ement No. J2.·1 (A;38- 12• Add. l l

177 !hui., l'furll'-('ll;hth .\'1'\\/1•11. rlnrd ('omn11111·c, 42nd mt•cting. paras
'8-V

1O.

Rcq11cs1.1 tlw Sccrctary-Crencral to repon to thc

<irneral Asscmbh at its tbirty-ninth scssion on the implemcntation of tbL' prcscnt rcsolut1on.
/{)()//¡ ¡1/cnarr IIICCl/1/g

ltJ Dffclllhff /983

38/121.

Report of the llnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Fhc (il'l/cral h,c111hll".

l!al'ing considl'rcd the rcport of tbe United Nations

Higb Commissioncr for Rcfugccs on tbe activities of his
Officc. 17 ·' as wcll as tbe report of the Exccutive Committcc
of thc Programmc of thc H igb Commissioner on tbe work
of its thirty-Íourtb scssion. 176 and having beard the statcmcnt madc by thc Higb Commissioncr on 14 Novcmber
l lJ83. t''
Rc,·a/ling its resolution 37 195 of 18 Decembcr 198::!.
Rcaf/imli11g thL' cminently bumanitarian and nonpolitical character oftbc activitics oftbc Otlice oftbc Higb
<·ommissioner.
No1111g 11·11/, dcc¡1 co11cN11 tbat problcms of rcfugees and
displaced persons of concern to thc High Commissioncr
rcmain acutc in all parts of the world. notably 111 Africa.
Asia and Latín Amcrica.

Strc.1sing the fundamental importance of the Higb Commissioner's intcrnational protection function and the necd
for States to co-operatc witb tbe High Commissioncr 111
the cxercisc of tlus csscntial function.
l:'.\'¡1rcss111g se11,,11s <'Onccm on'r tbe dillicultics cncountcred by the Higb Commissioncr in tbc exercise of bis
rnternational protcction function in tbc face of continucd
violations of tbc basic rights of pcrsons of concern to bis
Ollicc.
Dccpl¡· conccmed that in various rcgions the safcty and
welfare of refugecs and asylum-seekers bave been seriously
1copardi1cd on account of military or armed attacks. acts
of piracy and othcr fi.1rms of brutality.

. lcknml'/cdging ldth appreciation thc note of the Executive Committec on tbc strengtbening of the management
policy of tbe Ofücc of tbe llnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugccs. submitted by the High Commissioncr. 17 ~ ami thc High Commissioner's efforts to
strengthen tbe management of bis Ollice.
Noting tbat tbc Exccutive Committee has requestcd the
Higb Commissioncr to undcrtake a comprebensive study
of the full financia! and practica! implications of the inclusion of Arabic. ( '11incsc and Spanisb among tbc official and
working languagcs of tbc Exccutivc Committec.
,Votlllg 1rith dee¡1 ap¡m'Ciallon tbc valuablc support
extended by many (iovernments to tbc High Commis,1oncr in carrying out his dutics.

l 7H A A(.% HCR H SC.2 15 Add. l

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Commitlt••·

Welcoming the increasing number or accessions by
States to the 1951 Convention 174 and thc 1967 Protocol 180 relating to the Status of Refugees,
Emphasizing that voluntary repatriation is the most
desirable and durable solution to problems of refugees and
displaced persons of concem to the High Commissioner,
l. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the valuable work they perform on behalf of refugecs, retumccs and displaced persons of concern to the Office of thc High Commissioncr:

2. Rea/jirms the fundamental nature ofthe High Commissioner's function to provide intcrnational protection
and the need for Governmcnts to co-operatc fully with
him to facilitate the effectivc excrcise ofthis essential function, in particular by acceding to and fully implcmenting
the relevant international and regional instruments and by
scrupulously observing the principies of asylum and nonrefoulement:
3. Deplores ali violations of the rights and safety of ref~
ugees and asylum-seekers, in particular through military or
armed attacks against refugee camps and settlements.
other forms of brutality and failure to rcscue asylumseekers in distress at sea:
4. Urges States, in eo-operation with the Offiec of the
High Commissioner and other competent international
bodies, to takc ali neeessary measures to ensure thc safcty
of refugees and asylum-scckcrs:
5. Reaffirms the principie of international solidarity
and burden-sharing in rcsponding to the refugee problem,
particularly in vicw of the hcavy burden borne by reeeiving countries on account of the presenec of large numbers
of refugees and asylum-seekers:
6. Expresses its dcep apprl'Cialion for the valuable
material and humanitarian response of rccciving countries, in particular of many developing countrics that give
asylum to or accept on a temporary basis large numbcrs of
refugees:
7. Commends ali States that facilitate the attainment
of durable solutions, accept refugees for resettlcment and
contribute generously to thc High Commissioner's
programmes:
8. Urges ali States to support the High Commissioncr
in his efforts to find durable solutions to refugee problems.
primarily through voluntary repatriation, including assistance to returnees, as appropriate, or, wherever appropriate, through integration in countrics of asylum or resettlcment in third countries:
9. Notes with appreciation thc continuing support
given to the High Commissioner by organizations of thc
United Nations system, as well as intergovemmental and
non-governmental organizations. in carrying out his
humanitarian task and requests thc High Commissioner to
continue to co-ordinatc his efforts with those agencies and
organizations;

1O. Calls upon ali Statcs to pro mote durable solutions
and to contribute generously to thc High Commissioner's
humanitarian programmes in ordcr to assist refugees, displaced persons and returnees in a spirit of intemational
solidarity and burden-sharing.
!OOth p/enary meeting
16 December 1()8J
179 United Nations. Trea/\' ,','crin. vol. 189 No. 2545. p. 137.
180 ll•id.. vol. 606. No. 8791. p 267

38/122.

217

lnternational campaign against traffic in
drugs

Fhc <icncra/ Asscmb/_¡.
Reca/fing its resolutions 36/ 132 of 14 Deeember 198 1.

36/168 of 16 Deeember 1981, 37 168 of 17 Dcccmhcr
1982, 37-'198 of 18 Dcccmbn 1982 and 38/98 of 16
Deecm bcr 1983,
Reca//1ng a/so Econon11c and Social Council rcsolutHrns
1982/8 and 198219 of 30 April 1982,
Reatfinning thc nccd to improvc and maintain regional
and intcrregional co-opcration and co-ordination. part1rnlarly in the ficld of law enforccmcnL to counter drug trarfieking and drug abuse.
No/Jnx thc growing intcrcst in the dcvclopmcnt of
regional and intcrregional co-ordination. as indicatcd by
thc holding of threc mcctings in thc Bahamas, <ircccc and
India during 1983,
Consnnus that while many countrics, hoth dcvclopcd
and dcvcloping, continuc to divcrt substantial human,
financia! and other rcsourccs to combat thc illicit tratlic,
thc dcvcloping countries encounter particular hardships 111
doing so.
Acknow/edging that thc illicit product1on of, dcmand liir
and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotrop1c suhstann·s
constitute a scrious thrcat to thc devclopmcnt and scrnnty
of many countrics, cspccially devcloping countrics,
Recog11i::.i11g. in particular, thc dilcmma oftransit Statcs,
which havc no control ovcr the production of and dcmand
for illicit narcotic drugs and psychotropic substanccs \'L'l
are seriously affectcd. both at thc domcstic ami thc intnnational lcvels, by thc movcmcnt of illicit drugs,
Not111g that thc intcrnational drug control trcat1cs
includc provisions for the developmcnt of cfü_·ct1 ve
countcrmcasurcs to comhat thc illicit supply oL dcmand
for and tralfic in narcotic drugs and psychotrnpic ,ubstanccs.
Cons1dering the importan! role of thc llnitcd Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Centro! ín supporting ,arious drug
control programmes in dcvcloping countrics, and thc
neecssity of incrcasing contributions to thc Fund to pcrmit
it to continuc its most valuablc work.
1/aring considcrcd thc report of thc SccretarvGcncral. IKI
1. Takcs note 11·ith ,1¡,prcciatio11 of thc rcport of t he
Sccretary-Gcneral:
2. Ca/Is upon Mcmher States that havc not yct done so
to ratify the intcrnational drug control treatics and, until
such time, to endcavour to abide by thl' prmisions
thcreoC
3. 1,·11courages Memhcr States to contribute, orto rnntinuc to contribute, to thc lJnited Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control to enablc it to cxpand its support for
programmes in thc ficld of drug abuse control:
4. l 'rges organizations and programmcs within thc
United Nations system, as wcll as Member Statcs with
available resourees and cxpcrtise, to continue to grant
teehnical and other forms of assistancc, espccially in thc
area of training of Iaw cnforccment profcssionals. to countrics most affected by thc illicit production of and tralfic in
drugs and drug abuse and, in this rcgard, to givc appropriatc priority to providing the resourccs and assistancc
necdcd to ensurc rapid, sccurc and accurate mea ns of cornmunication and cxchangc of information:
181 e\ .1X ~78
