A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/145
6 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.3)]
52/145. Situation of human rights in Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
International Covenants on Human Rights2 and accepted humanitarian rules, as set out in the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 19493 and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977,4
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have freely undertaken under the various
international instruments,
Recalling that Afghanistan is a party to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide,5 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Covenant

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

4

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

5

Resolution 260 A (III).

98-77137

/...

A/RES/52/145
Page 2

on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,2 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment6 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child7 and that it has signed
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,8
Recalling also all its relevant resolutions, as well as the resolutions of the Commission on Human
Rights and the decisions of the Economic and Social Council,
Recalling the deep concern expressed by the Security Council at the continuing discrimination against
girls and women and other violations of human rights, as well as violations of international humanitarian
law in Afghanistan,9
Welcoming the special emphasis that the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan has placed
on human rights issues in its discussions with all the Afghan parties,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan 10 and of the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein;
2. Notes with deep concern the intensification of armed hostilities in Afghanistan, which have
resulted in the destruction of houses and in forced evictions, including on grounds of ethnicity, and calls
upon all parties involved immediately to cease such hostilities and to engage in a political dialogue aimed
at achieving national reconciliation and the voluntary return of displaced persons to their homes in safety
and dignity;
3. Also notes with deep concern the ongoing further deterioration of the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan, including the situation of women, as reported by the Special Rapporteur, and condemns
the violations and abuses of human rights and humanitarian law, including the rights to life, liberty and
security of person, freedom from torture and from other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, freedom of opinion, expression, religion, association and movement;
4. Expresses in particular its deep concern about the frequent practice of arbitrary arrest and
detention and summary trials throughout the country, which have resulted in summary executions, as well
as the application of forms of punishment prohibited under the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;6
5. Calls upon all the Afghan parties fully to respect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
regardless of gender, ethnicity or religion, in accordance with international human rights instruments;

6

Resolution 39/46, annex.

7

Resolution 44/25, annex.

8

Resolution 34/180, annex.

9

S/PRST/1997/35; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1997.

10

A/52/493, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/145
Page 3

6. Urges all the Afghan parties to bring an end to discrimination on the basis of gender and to the
deprivation of human rights of women without delay and, in particular, to take measures to ensure:
(a) The effective participation of women in civil, cultural, economic, political and social life
throughout the country;
(b) Respect for the right of women to work and their reintegration in employment;
(c) The right of women and girls to education without discrimination, the reopening of schools and
the admission of women and girls to all levels of education;
(d) Respect for the right of women to security of person and to ensure that those responsible for
physical attacks on women are brought to justice;
(e) Respect for freedom of movement for women and their effective access to the facilities necessary
for the protection of their right to the highest attainable standards of physical and mental health;
(f)

Equal access for women to health facilities;

7. Also urges all the Afghan parties to work closely and to cooperate with the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan with a view to achieving a comprehensive political solution leading to the
cessation of armed confrontation and to the establishment of a democratic Government elected through
free and fair elections, based on the right to self-determination of the people of Afghanistan;
8. Further urges all the Afghan parties to ensure that United Nations programmes are carried out
without discrimination against women either as participants or as beneficiaries;
9. Demands that all the Afghan parties fulfil their obligations and commitments regarding the safety
of all personnel of diplomatic missions, the United Nations and other international organizations, including
their premises in Afghanistan, and that they cooperate fully with the United Nations and associated bodies
as well as with other humanitarian organizations and agencies;
10. Urges all the Afghan parties to provide efficient and effective remedies to the victims of grave
violations of human rights and of accepted humanitarian rules and to bring their perpetrators to trial in
accordance with internationally accepted standards;
11. Recognizes that the promotion and protection of human rights should be an essential element
in the achievement of a comprehensive solution to the crisis in Afghanistan, and, therefore, invites the
Special Mission and the Special Rapporteur to exchange relevant information and to strengthen their
mutual consultation and cooperation;
12. Urges all the Afghan parties fully to respect international humanitarian law, to protect civilians,
to halt the use of weapons against the civilian population, to refrain from storing munitions in residential
areas, to prohibit the drafting and recruitment of children as para-combatants, to ensure their reintegration
into society and to stop the practice of using people as human shields;
13. Invites all the Afghan parties to support the International Committee of the Red Cross, in
particular by providing access to all prisoners, and to release all non-criminal civilian prisoners;
/...

A/RES/52/145
Page 4

14. Expresses its deep concern about reports that, despite continuing demining programmes by the
international community, new landmines have been laid, and appeals to all parties to stop deploying such
devices, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week, mostly innocent and defenceless civilians,
especially children;
15. Urges all States to respect the full national unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan;
16. A p p e a l s t o M e m b e r States and to the international community to provide, on a
non-discriminatory basis, adequate humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan and to the Afghan
refugees in neighbouring countries, pending, and with a view to encouraging, their voluntary repatriation,
and requests all the parties in Afghanistan to lift the restrictions imposed on the international aid
community and to allow the free transit of food and medical supplies to all populations of the country;
17. Expresses its deep concern about reports of the deterioration of the cultural heritage of
Afghanistan, notes that all the parties share the historical responsibility to protect and safeguard this
common heritage, and requests Member States to take appropriate measures to prevent the looting of
cultural artifacts and to ensure their return to Afghanistan;
18. Urges all the Afghan parties to extend their cooperation to the Commission on Human Rights
and to its Special Rapporteur;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur;
20. Decides to keep the situation of human rights in Afghanistan under consideration at its fifty-third
session, in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
