A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/107
23 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 111
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/629)]
48/107.

United Nations Development Fund for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/125 of 14 December 1984, by which it decided
to establish the United Nations Development Fund for Women as a separate and
identifiable entity in autonomous association with the United Nations
Development Programme,
Reaffirming the catalytic role of the Fund in increasing opportunities
and options for women in developing countries to participate more effectively
in the development of their countries, in line with national priorities,
Recognizing the important contribution the Fund continues to make in
galvanizing efforts of the organizations of the United Nations system, as well
as other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to formulate
and support innovative activities that directly benefit and empower women,
Recognizing also the initiatives of the Fund to provide technical
assistance to national machineries for issues related to women and to other
relevant line ministries in development planning with sensitivity to gender
considerations, and to facilitate national preparatory activities for the
Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace,
to be held in 1995,
Emphasizing the position of the Fund as a specialized resource base for
development cooperation linking the needs and aspirations of women and
resources, programmes and policies for their economic development,
Noting the focused and responsive interventions of the Fund within its
regional priority framework and its overall strategic approach to women in
development,
/...

A/RES/48/107
Page 2

1.
Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General 1/ transmitting
the report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on
the activities of the United Nations Development Fund for Women;
2.
Commends the Fund for its support of catalytic and innovative
projects that strengthen national capacity to improve the situation of women;
3.
Encourages the Fund to continue to promote initiatives that
incorporate the dimension of women in the agendas of the mainstream
development efforts of Governments, United Nations organizations,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector;
4.
Also encourages the Fund to continue its support of initiatives
regarding women in politics, especially within the democratization process in
developing countries;
5.
Welcomes the advocacy initiatives of the Fund, including its
contribution to and participation in the follow-up to Agenda 21, 2/ adopted by
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 3/ adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights, in particular with respect to efforts to combat violence
against women;
6.
Also welcomes the appointment of an adviser from the United
Nations Development Fund for Women to the Department of Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat;
7.
Commends the Fund for its recent signing of a memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which should contribute to the development of meaningful and lasting
solutions to the problem of refugee women and children;
8.
Endorses the role of the Fund in promoting the strategic
importance of the empowerment of women;
9.
Commends the Fund’s initiative to assist developing countries in
their preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for
Equality, Development and Peace, including the preparation of national
reports;
10.
Stresses the importance of the role of the Fund in the
preparations for the International Conference on Population and Development
__________
1/

A/48/279.

2/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I, Vol.
I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
3/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

/...

A/RES/48/107
Page 3

and the World Summit for Social Development, the results of which should
constitute a major contribution to the Fourth World Conference on Women;
11.
Notes with satisfaction the steady increase in contributions to
the Fund and urges Governments and public and private donors to continue to
extend their support to the Fund through voluntary contributions and pledges
to its programmes;
12.
Welcomes the establishment of new national committees for the Fund
in Canada, Liechtenstein and Switzerland and urges other developed countries
to encourage the establishment of national committees;
13.
Stresses the importance of the work of the Consultative Committee
on the United Nations Development Fund for Women in policy and programme
directions related to the activities of the Fund;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session a report on the activities of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, to be submitted in accordance with its resolution
39/125.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
