UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
FORTiETH

CO’UNCIL

RECORDS
YEAR

2577th

MEETING:

8 MAY 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/25771. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..e.*.............

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Letter dated 6 May 1985from the Permanent representative of Nicaragua to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a..**..*....#...........
(S/‘17156). . . ..a..........

I

SIPV.2577

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojjkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2577th MEETZNG

Held In New York on Wednesday, 8 May 1985, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Birabhongse KASEMSRI

Mexico, Nicaragua, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

(Thailand).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt,
France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet S0ciah.t Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.

ProvIsional agenda (S/Agenda125771

At the inv. ation of the President, Mr. Chamorro
Mora (Ncaragua)
took u place at the Council table;
Mr. Djoudi (Algeria), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Albornot (Ecuador), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. MuAoz Ledo
(Mexico), Mr. Lweno (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 6 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17156).

4. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 6 May 1985 from the representative of Nicaragua to the President of the Security Council [S/17156]. 1 should also like to draw
the attention of members of the Council to document
S/17163, which contains a letter dated 7 May from the
representative of India to the Secretary-General. Members have also received photocopies of a note verbaie
dated 8 May from the representative of Brazil to the
Secretary-General. That note and its annex will be circulated as document S/17166.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Expression of thank-s to the retiring President

I. The PRESIDENT: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this month, I should like at the very
outset to pay a warm tribute, on behalf of the Council
and on my own behalf, to my predecessor, Mr. Javier
Arias Stella, the representative of Peru, for his dedicated service as President of the Council for the month
of April. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing our deep admiration and appreciation to Mr. Arias Stella for the recognized diplomatic
skill and unfailing courtesy with which he conducted
the Council’s business last month.

5. The first speaker is the representative of Nicaragua, upon whom 1 call.

2. As the representative of Thailand, I should also like
to express my sincere appreciation to all those representatives who have been kind enough to welcome
Thailand asa new member of the Security Council since
Thailand took its seat in this Chamber.

6. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) finferprefafion from Spanish): I wish to begin. Sir. by congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I am certain that with your
ability, skill and wisdom you will be able successfully to
gmde the Council’s proceedings. 1take this opportunity
also to congratulate Mr. Arias Stella of Peru-a Latin
American colleague with whom we shared concerns,
anxiety and disquiet in the Security Council-on, the
excellent work he did last month as President of this
MY.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

crmaacat Rcpre8cllLet&rdated6May1985fromtbP
tatlve of Nkaragua to the United Nations addressedto
the Prddent of the Security Counell (sll7lSaI

7. I recently told the non-aligned members of the
Security Council that on none of the nine occasions on
which my country turned to this body had it wanted to
be compelled to call for meetings of the Council to
denounce the constant acts of aggression against us

3. The PRESIDENT: 1should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Brazil, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
I

resulting from the rash policies of the present United
States Administration.
1 told them also that ourjustified
complaints had become so numerous that they were
becoming more permanent than the permanent members of the Council, but that we hoped that this would
be the last time we called them together, since we
ventured to hope-intuitively,
if not through a process
of reasoning and intelligence-that
the present United
States Administration
would understand that we must
learn from history and from OUL errors, and not repeat
them mechanically.

community,
this Council and ourselves, to explain
whether on those occasions they were unaware of the
intention to overthrow
us, which was subsequently
made public by their President, in the same way as they
Here unaware of the facts when they denied purticipation in the mining of the ports, which several days later
was publicly acknowledged
by high officials of their
Government.
13. We should like to ask the representatives of the
United States-since
they are much given to using
inverted Orwellian
metaphors-who
it is that is corrupting the language. Who is twisting words? Who is
trying to undermine legitimacy bnd to overthrow our
Government?
Who murders innocent people, who
stands for truth. and who lies shamelessly?

8. We want you and the international
community to
judge whether we are right to wish for and aspire to an
end to the cruel and inhuman war that we have endured
for more than four years. We want it to be you, not we,
who decide whether the present United States Administration truly possesses the political will to achieve a
negotiated agreement to the problems facing the region,
problems which the Contadora Group is working so
zealously to solve. So that we can judge on the basis of
words and facts, 1 shall quote statements made in this
very Council by various United States representatives.
9. During the March
said,

14. Until just a few months ago Nicaragua was among
the non-permanent
members of the Security Council.
We participated in the difftcult work and deliberations
that are the lot of this body. We shared with some
members concern at the grave problems affecting mankind and endangering international
peace and security.
We were aware of the hop% placed by many peoples
and Governments of the third world in the decisions of
the Council, and we saw and shared their occasional
feelings of frustration when solutions to their grave
problems could not be found.

1983 debate, Mrs. Kirkpatrick

“I should like to reply . . . that the Umted States
Government has no aggressive designs against the
Government of Nicaragua, against the Nicaraguan
people; that the United States indeed has no intention of invading anyone or of conducting an armed
action against anyone, or of occupying any other
country.‘* [See 2423rd meeting. para. /6&J

IS. We feel deep anguish and frustration
when,
despite our complaints and accusations, despite our
desire for peace, we face the imperial intransigence
and overwhelming
power of those who obstinately and
cynically lie-or,
at least, hide the truth from their
colleagues on the Council and, what is worse, from
the international
community-and
of those who, by
abusing their veto Rower, which they constantly confuse with the power to perpetrate aggression and to
harass, arrogantly isolated themselves from the international community during the debate provoked by the
mining of our harbours.

IO. During the debate which followed our complaint
of 4 September 1984, Mr. Sorzano said, “I shall conclude by stating once more that the United States is not
trying to overthrow the Sandiuist Government,”
[See
2557th meeting, para. 73. ] So that the implications of
that statement may be understood, I shall repeat it:
“1 shall conclude by stating once more that the United
States id not trying to overthrow the Sandinist Government.”

16. We understand and share the concern of permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council to
contribute
to a solution of the problems affecting
mankind. We too are aware of the imperative need to
contribute earnestly to a strengthening of international
peace and security and to the effective invigoration of
this body and the complete implementation
of its resoiuiivns.

II. Only months later, on 21 February 1985 to be
exact, the recently re-elected President Reagan, perhaps thinking himself possessed of a divine mandate,
replied when asked at his first press conference
whether his Administration’s
aim was to remove the
Government of Nicaragua: “Well, remove it in the
sense of its present structure, in which it is a communist
totalitarian State, and it is not a Government chosen by
the people”. When asked again whether the aim of the
United States was to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government, he said: “Not if the present Government
would turn around and say ‘all right’, if they’d say
‘uncle’ “, which in American slang is a declaration of
surrender.

17. It is precisely for that reason that we have once
again come to the Council to denounce the constant
criminal, immoral acts of aggression part and parcel of
the dirty, undeclared war waged by the Reagan Administration against our country, which. though poor. small
and underdeveloped,
has dignity and is non-aligned.
WC turr to the Council in the hope that the for:e of
reason, sense, wisdomand intelligence will prevail ovet
imperialist
intransigence
and insensitivity,
which,
motivated by the desire for domination, endanger international peace and security.

12. We should like to ask the representatives of the
United States, in order to enlighten the international
2

18. For Nicaraguans the objectives of the Reagan
Administration with regard to the people’s Sandinist
revolution have been clear from the very outset. It is
precisely that clarity that explains why we have on
numerous occasions resorted to the Security Council,
the General Assembly and other bodies of the United
Nations system, such as the International Court of
Justice and the General Agreement on Tartis and
Trade.

media in an effort to create in the minds of the American
public and the international community the subjective
conditions that will permit it to carry out its militaristic
plans and justify its imperialist policies and actions in
Central America.
23. The first pretext for the refusal of the United
States to accept in the Central American region-which
it abusively calls its backyard-an independent, democratic and non-aligned State, and for its consequent aim
of overthrowing the Nicaraguan Government, wasthat
our country was exporting its revolution to various
Central American countries, countries that for decades
have been suffering from poverty, misery and oppression. That pretext wasused by the Reagan Administratie? to justify the creation through the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of a huge mercenary force, which
has been amply financed through tSe economic resources of the people of the United States. It was used
tojustify the construction of a large permanent military
infrastructure on Honduran territory. It served as justification for the presence of a large number of United
States troops on Honduran territory. It was used to
establish permanent military manoeuvres with Honduras on land, sea and air and to justify the constant
blocking of the peace efforts of the Contadora Group.
In sum, it was used to justify the massacre of our
people.

19. If any members of the international community
and any United States experts and politicians had
doubts about those objectives, the statement made by
President Reagan on 2 I February gave a perfect explanation of the goals of the present United States Administration, to achieve which it has used various arguments and pretexts, almost reaching levels of paranoia,
to secure the endorsement of its own people and of the
international community for its warlike and interventionist policies in Central America, and particularly
against Nicaragua.
20. To justify its unlawful actions, the United States
Administration has resorted throughout these years toa
variety of arguments and pretexts that are prototypes of
what the American historian Richard Hosstadtet has
described as the “paranoic style of United States policy”. According to that distinguished historian, characteristics of that paranoic style of government include
the characterization of the enemy as an implacable,
satanic force; the constant leap of the imagination,
always at a critical moment, to analyse the facts in
such a way as to take thean from the undeniable to the
incredible; the extraordinary significance given to
rebels against the enemy cause; a magnetic attraction
for self-styled intellectuals, who, with pedantic insistence, offer a vision of the facts that is much more
coherent than the real world and leaves no room for
error, misjudgement or ambiguity; and finally, a sense
of urgency, of constantly living at the decisive moment,
in a now-or-never situation, in facing up to the conspiracy of enemy forces.

24. However, being unable to show that Nicaragua
was exporting its revolution to other Central American
countries, or that it posed a threat to those countries,
the United States Administration, in its zeal tocontinue
to justify its interventionist activities in violation of
international law, accused us, among other things, of
being totalitarian and repressive. Those and many other
falsehoods reflect the paranoid policy of the United
States and the Orwellian distortions invoked to justify to the American people and the international cornmunity its criminal behaviour in Central America.
25. I shall not at this time dwell on what it has meant
for our people to suffer the undeclared and illegal war
that the greatest military Power on earth is waging
against non-aligned Nicaragua, a proud country that,
above all, lives with dignity despite its many sufferings.

21. I leave it to the representatives of the States members of this Council to judge whether such characteristics are or are not present in current United States
policy towards Nicaragua. I leave it to them to judge
who is paranoid-the Government of a country with
scarcely 3 million people, poor and poorly armed, or the
Administration of a super-Power which does not hesitate to decree a national state of emergency to confront
what it considers, to quote the actual words of President Reagan, “an unusual and extraordinary threat to
the foreinn oolicv and national security of the United
States”.

26. 1 shall not go into detail concerning the more than
8,ooO victims we have had to add to the long list of
martyrs from among our people, nor the more than
$1 billion in material damage, nor the many orphans and
disabled persons, nor the systematic financial blockade
!n w&h

we are

king

auhj@ed

en

a petmane

nt bapis,

the latest manifestation of which occurred in the InterAmerican Development Bank, with the pressures
brought to bear by Mr. Shultz, the Secretary of State, in
a letter he addressed to the President of that body. Nor
shall I refer to the almost complete reduction of the
sugar quota, the closing of our consulates, the mining of
our ports and the destruction of fuel tanks in the port of
Corinto.

22. We do not claim to be able to explain the present
United States foreign policy in psychological terms.
Suffice it lo say that this paranoid style is merely a
device by which the present Administration distorts the
facts, constantly inventing pretexts or adducing fallacious arguments and masterfully manipulating the mass
3

27. By the same token, I shall not elaborate on the
illegality and immorality of the almost $100 million
given to the CIA for its dirty undeclared war, nor shall
1 dwell on the military installations which have been
built on a massive scale in Honduras in the last two
years in the form of training centres, military bases,
hospitals, and roads to be used for military purposts. Neither shall I speak at length on the more than
lomassive military manoeuvres, on the nearly constant
mini-manoeuvres or on the personnel permanently stationed on Honduran territory, numbering approximately 2,tXlO men.
28. I merely wish to repeat before the Council that the
gigantic resources the United States Government has
invested in the Central American region are not aimed
at stopping an alleged flow of armaments from Nicaragua or at establishing a democracy in a country that
in any event is not United States territory and in whose
internal affairs that Government should not interfere.
Rather, those funds have been thus invested to compel
us-to use the words of the President of the United
States-to “say uncle”.
29. I cannot fail, on this occasion, to voice grave
concern, which I am sure is shared by all members
of the Council, at the extremely grave situation confronting the Central American region, and in particular
the ever-increasing threats to Nicaragua. We are concerned at the fact that, after its failure to demonstrate a
non-existent flow of arms and to prove its trumped-up
chargesof Nicaraguan intervention, the Government of
the United States-which is itself engaged in intervention-has in the last few months increased the level of
rhetoric and public threat, presenting us as a danger to
its security and strategic interests, and that it has publicly avowed its intention to overthrow us..
30. Such rhetoric to the effect that we have become a
threat to the national security of his country has led
President Reagan to state that Nicaragua is “the greatest challenge for the United States in the post-war
era”. How is it possible for a small country of barely
130.000 square kilometres and 3.5 million peoplewho
have suffered so many threats, so much destruction and
death-to be such a threat, to be the challenge he tries
to depict us to be? If we were to follow President
Reagan’s thinking, such statements might lead us to
conclude that if force was used in Viet Nam, which in
its time was also the greatest challenge to the United
States, then such force will be used in Nicaragua-and
sooner rather than later.
31. Iant April marked the tenth annivers? of the
victory of the Vietnamese people over the Invading
troops of the Government of the United States. Ten
years of history should have been enough to lead to a
reasoned evaluation of the outcome of the policy that
was pursued in Viet Nam. However, it would appear
that the present United States .4dministration has not
given suficient thought to what that intervention
implied for its people and what it meant for the people of

Viet Nam, or the falsehood of the argument that Viet
Nam posed a danger to the security of the United
States. Calm analysis of these three issues ought to lead
the United States Administration to engage in a more
constructive policy in the Central American region.
32. Regrettably, instead of learning from history,
President Reagan has stubbornly been pursuing a holy
war against my country without regard to the means
he uses or the damage caused to our people. Fortunately, President Reagan’s efforts have come up
against growing resistance on the part of the American people and the international community. This was
expressed in the United States Congress when it recently refused to grant the present Administration more
funds to continue to finance the counter-revolution and
thus inflict a blood bath upon the people of Nicaragua.
33. In his attempt to obtain the $14 million for the
counter-revolution, President Reagan decided to submit a so-called peace plan for Nicaragua which contemplated approval of the funds by Congress and a commitment to use such funds for humanitarian aid, provided
the Government of Nicaragua would commit itself to
undertaking negotiations with the assassins of its people-that is, with the former Somozist guards. If those
talks did not lead to positive results within 60 days, the
funds intended for humanitarian aid would be used for
military aid to the counter-revolution.
34. As the President of Nicaragua, Commander of the
Revolution Daniel Ortega Saavedra, said in his letter to
the heads of State of the Contadora countries [S/17098,
annex] that “peace plan”
“constitutes not only an ultimatum and a dictatorial
interference in the affairs of a sovereign country, but
also an express and full recognition that the United
States Government is pursuing a war of aggression
against Nicaragua through an organized army directed and armed by that Government.”
President Ortega also said:
“Nicaragua cannot agree to the ultimatum presented
by President Reagan, nor can it accept the interventionist policy of aggression, threats and coercion
aimed at making Nicaragua abandon its sovereignty,
self-determination and independence. Furthermore,
to accept that policy would mean not only to reduce
our country to a neo-colonial status as a protectorate,
but also to recognize a breach of international law”.
In that same letter the President of Nicaragua reaffirmed our support for the Contadora process and demanded that the United States immediately resume the
bilateral talks in Manzanillo, Mexico, whereby that
country could put forward and discuss any proposal.
35. There is, on the one hand, the correctness of
Nicaragua’s reply and, on the other, President Reagan’s

shameless

manipulation-in

his eagerness

to

Nicaragua represents a threat to the security of Central American countries and of the United States, and
I stressed the adsurdity of such an assertion. However,
and even taking into account that absurdity, the United
States Government, in further aggression against Nicaragua, has once again used this form of paranoia in its
foreign policy. This time, in the Executive Order taking
the coercive economtc measures against Nicaragua,
President Reagan has decreed “that the policies and
actions of the Government of Nicaragua constitute an
unusual and extraordinary
threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States”. Therefore, he has declared a national emergency to deal with
that threat.

obtain the $14 million-of
statements made by heads of
State.and other high offtcials regarding his peace plan.
as has been demonstrated in the clarifications and corrections those persons were forced to make before
international public opinion which would, in any event,
make the most seasc.ned poiitician among them blush.
36. Despite all those efforts the results were not favourable to the Administration
since, for the time
being, the United States Congress has refused to tinance the military and paramilitary operations of the
mercenary bands. The main reason for this refusal is the
fact that, for certain circles in the United States, something which has always been quite clear to us is now
becoming apparent: the decision of the current United
States Administration
to overthrow
the legitimate
Government
of the Republic of Nicaragua by any
means, including, if necessary, the use of military
force.

41. 1 do not think that President Reagan’s words deserve further comment by me. 1 am convinced that the
members of the Security Council will know full well
how to assess them and will give serious thought to
whether Nicaragua, a poor, underdeveloped
country,
could at any time in its history ever be or ever have been
a threat to the United States of America.

37. The vote in the House of Representatives
and
Nicaragua’s reply were two excellent catalysts for responsible and mature thought on a new approach in the
relations between the United States and Latin America
in general and Nicaragua in particular. That was the
ideal time to move from a policy of aggression, domination and power to one of mutual respect, co-operation
and understanding-something
which no doubt would
have led to a genuine relaxation of the tensions .with
which we have had to live for the past five years.

42. The measures taken by the Administration
are so
unreal and out of proportion that it has been impossible
for it to convince any country whatsoever of their justice. We have time and again demonstrated that Nicaragua is not and can never be a threat to the security of
the United States and that, rather, the reverse is true:
the United States constitutes a threat to the very existence of Nicaragua. It is therefore absurd to declare a
national emergency on the basis of a threat that exists
only in the minds of a handful of United States leaders,
including, regrettably, the President of that country. It
is the Nicaraguans who have lived in a constant state of
emergency. It is we who have had to witness the death
of our children, our women and our old people, the
destruction of our centres of production, the mining of
our ports, the blockade in international banking circles
and now, finally, a total economic embargo, which is
from everey point of view imperialist and illegal. It is
the Nicaraguans who have suffered all this.

38. Nevertheless, the bellicose, imperialist attitude of
power prevailed. On I May this year, the President of
the United States notified Congress of his decision to
impose a total trade embargo upon Nicaragua. The day
before, our Embassy in Washington received a note
verbale from the State Department which, in accordance with article XXV, paragraph 3, of the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation’ between the
United States and Nicaragua, declared the termination
of that instrument at the end of one year from the date of
the note verbale.

43. The United States Government has shamelessly
stated that all its actions in Central America, and in
particular its actions against Nicaragua, are in keeping
with the Charter of the United Nations and the charter
of the Organisation of American States, which it thus
stretches or constrains according to its imperialist
objectives.

39. The latest measures decreed by the Reagan
Administration
include: “The prohibition of all imports
into the United States of goods and services of Nicaraguan origin: all exports from the United States
of goods to or destined for Nicaragua, except those
destined for the organ&d
democratic resistance, and
transactions relating thereto.” This democratic resistance, as representatives are aware, is President Reagan’s so-called freedom fighters who are conducting a
democratic struggle, even though they are torturing and
murdering the people of Nicaragua. They also prohibit
“Nicaragua carriers from engaging in air transportation
to or from points in the United States, and transactions
relating thereto”.
Finally, they prohibit “vessels of
Nicaraguan registry from entering into United States
ports. and transactions relating thereto”.

44. Aware that international
law and the principles
governing international
relations are on our side, our
Government went to the International Court of Justice,
whne

iwiadicti~fr
..------.-.

ha!

&.n

r+xtd

hy

the

IJnited

States Government,
contrary to the obligations
it
has entered into. We cannot understand why this
happened, if United States actions in Central America
and against Nicaragua have been governed by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

40. Earlier, I referred to the United States Administration’s insistence that the legitimate Government of

45. The coercive
economic
measures
recently
adopted against Nicaragua are all part of the same
5

illegal conduct. which violates the fundamental norms
governing political and economic relations and cooperation between States. The United States has violated the principle of the self-determination
of peoples
and the principle that no State may interefere in the
internal affairs of another State by attempting to force
the people and Government of Nicaragua to submit to it
and accept the ignominious conditions laid down by the
Reagan Administration
for the cessation of its acts of
aggression against Nicaragua.

51. Finally, 1 should like to refer to the violation by
the United States of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation that exists between the two
Governments. Article XIV, paragraph 2, of that Treaty
states that neither patty shall impose prohibitions
or
restrictions of any kind to the importation of any product of the other party nor to the export of any product
coming from the territory of the other party unless the
importation of a similar product into all other countries be equally restricted or forbidden. Similarly, article XIX, paragraph 1, of the same Treaty stipulates that
there will be freedom of commerce and navigation between the territories of the two patties. Lastly, article XXV, paragraph 3, which the Government of the
United States has invoked in denouncing the Treaty,
stipulates quite clearly as follows:

46. The United States has violated the principle of the
peaceful settlement ofdisputes betweeen States. It has
time and again resorted to force and pressure of all
kinds to settle its differences with Nicaragua. Why, if
the United States believes that it has the law on its side
and that its security is threatened, does it not come
before this ‘;ody and explain to the international community that the small country of Nicaragua is trying to
commit aggression against it? Why, if the United States
respec!: international law, does it not use the means
for the ;reaeeful settlement of disputes provided for in
the Charter? The answers to these questions are quite
obvious.

“Either Party, by giving one year’s written notice
to the other Party, may terminate the present Treaty
at the end of the initial ten-year period or at any time
thereafter.”
That article makes it clear that the Treaty is still in effect
and that the measures decreed constitute a flagrant
violation of both its spirit and its letter.

47. Tile United States has violated the principle that
States must fulfil their international obligations in good
faith. It did so when it adopted internationally
coercive
economic measures, thus violating not only the Charter
but also the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation entered into by Nicaragua and the United States
in January 1956.

52. There is no need to mention the many resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly that have been disregarded by the Government of the United States in its
recent measures taken and decreed against my country.
Suf%e it to mention only resolution 2625 (XXV), to
which is annexed the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
ofthe United Nations; resolution 3281 (XXIX), with the
Chatter of Economic Rights and Duties of States; and
resolution 39/210, on economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion against developing
tmmries.

48. Also violated has been the charter of the Organization of American States, an organization which the
United States itself created and tried to develop in its
own image. Article I9 of that charter states the following:
“No State may use or encourage the use of coercive measures of an economic or political character
in order to force the sovereign will of another State
and obtain from it advantages of any kind.”

53. The measures taken run so counter to international order, and particularly
to international
economic order and security, that my country, as I have
said, is taking formal legal action against the United
States under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade and is preparing to take action against it in the
International Court of Justice. My country also deems
it necessary that the Latin American Economic System
-an organization dedicated to strengthening co-operation in the regior+intervene
in the matter, and we have
therefore called for it to convene a meeting at the ministerial level.

49. Many of the provisions of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade have also been violated, in particular article I, on general most-favoured nation treatment; article II, on the schedule of concessions; article III, on national treatment of internal taxation and
regulations; article V, on freedom of transit in the territory of the contracting parties by whatever means of
transportation;
article XI, on the general elimination
of quantitative restrictions; article XIII, on nondiscriminatory administration
of auantitative restrictions;
article XXXVI.
on principles and objectives of trade
and development; article XXXVII,
on commitments;
and article XXXVIII,
on joint action by the contracting
parties.

54. However, 1 would emphasize that, in addition to
our concerns of the moment, we are coming before the
Security Council to denounce these coercive economic
measures, which violate the Charter of the United Nations, threaten regional peace and security and affect
the peace process now under way in Central America,
particularly the efforts of the Contadora Group. We
wish to point out that the recent embargo decreed by
the Government of the United States against Nicaragua

50. Therefore my Government has decided to take
formal action against the United States Government in
this body.
6

has a clearly political meaning and constitutes an
additional step, one with dangerous implications.
in
the aggression being unleashed by the United States
against my country, an aggression whose final objective
is the toppling of our revolutionary
Government-not
to mention other, more serious action, whether economic. military or political, that we may well have to
face in the future because of the folly of the present
American Administration.

mountains of Nicaragua, in our cities, small towns,
hamlets, centres of production, co-operatives, valleys and villages to defend the homeland which is our
right-a
right which no one can any longer refuse
us.”
57. We wish to state once again something that is a
central pillar of the foreign policy of my Govemmeut.
which is based on the policy, principles and tenets of
non-alignment,
That central pillar is constituted by our
open and complctc support for the efforts of the ContadoraGroup;
our willingness to sign forthwith the Act
of 7 September and scrupulously to abide by all the
commitments contained therein, including those concerning the mechanisms for verification and control;
and our demand for the immediate resumption of the
bilateral talks at Manzanillo,
with a view to the restoration of normal relations between the United States and
Nicaragua, thus fostering a climate of detente in the
area that will be conducive to the success of the efforts
of the Contadora Group.

55. In the context of a critical regional situation, the
measures in question represent a clear-cut threat to the
peace and stability of Central America. At the same
time they constitute a hard blow to the process undertaken by the Governments of the Contadora Group.
which have for more than two years been making a
tremendous effort to find a political and negotiated
solution to the grave problems of the region. Furthermore, these measures make more remote the possibilities for the continuation of the bilateral talks that have
been held in Manzanillo. Mexico. Against the backdrop
of the threat these measures pose to world order and
international
peace and security, Nicaragua believes
that the Security Council should intervene. This clearly
political situation and the danger of these actions have
been fully understood by many Governments, individuals, congresses and political groupings that have
spoken out to reject such measures and are in overwhelming agreement in their thinking.

58. Once again we aftlrm our desire for peace. If the
blindness and adventurism of the present United States
leaders result in the outbreak of the uncontrollable
tires
of war in Central America, it will be the peoples of
Central America and Latin America, the people of the
United States itself and history who deliver the verdict
ofetemal condemnation,
and the hateful recollection of
their names will be engraved on the memory of generations of people.

56. As the leadership of the Sandinist National Liberation Front stated in its message addressed to the
people of Nicaragua on 4 May, National Dignity Day,
the boycott decreed by President Reagan against our
small and proud nation is a premeditated step by the
United States Government down the road of direct
military intervention
against Nicaragua. It may be
inferred from the text of the official note of I May sent
to the Nicaraguan Foreign Offtce by the United States
State Department that, if Nicaragua does not take concrete steps to comply with the requirements setforth in
that note, the prospects for a peaceful settlement in
Central America will diminish. This means that, if
Nicaragua does not bow to the will of the United States,
then President Reagan will arrogate to himself the right
to engage in military intervention in Nicaragua and to
declare total war against us. The message to the people
of Nicaragua says:

59. Approximately
a year ago we requested a meeting
of the Securitv Council to denounce the mining of the
Nicaraguan ports, an action carried out by t6e CIA
which ran counter to the right to freedom of navigation
and freedom of trade. This represented a qualitative
shift in terms of both the level of military involvement,
through the participation
of United States forces, and
its economic implications, since in the throes of panic it
tried to blockade my country. The justice and seriousness of our denunciation
at that time resulted in the
unanimous support of the international
community.
This was clearly demonstrated by a vote in the Security
Council (2529rh meeting] in which the United States
was isolated; there were I3 votes in favour of a draft
resolution submitted by my Government, one abstention and only one vote against-that
of the United
States. We are convinced that at this time. when my
Government is facing a situation that is similar to that of
a year ago-in
which we are the victims of a further
escalation of the constant acts of aggression by the
United States Government.
an escalation that has a
,-,-r:..a--.
^- e-..
~~~~r~r~
&,&o&t
“1,
l,CC .,,.A,
,IWC --:hc :.d..-,.r:..r,,
I,,trC,,SOI8”..U, ^^d
cv,*.munity, through the Security Council, will support
Nicaragua’s efforts in the quest for peace in Central
America and will reject measures such as those I have
described, which infringe the right to self-determination and the right to sovereignty and independence of
each and every one of our countries.

“The time has come to hold back, through the
force of reason, laws and international
norms, the
boot that is being used so blindly and unthinkingly
to try to destroy this people, to force it to submit, to
L2-- 1,
:r ._
:.- AUKS.
,.---,.,-L-I, ll”L
__I pa
-_. ““WI,
A -_-.- “,I
-- ““I
-_-“‘,U&
L” ,LS
“7c; 3,141~
knees and bow to any kind of force whatsoever. We
shall stand up for the right of weak peoples not to
submit to such treatment. Behind the law and reason,
which are on our side, is our will to struggle, our will
to win, our will to use weapons, the weapons which
thousands of patriots are now brandishing
in the
7

60. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply and I call on him.

United States would prefer to respond tomorrow, when
we make our presentation.
The meering rose at 5.40

61. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America):
There is much in what the Nicaraguan representative
has said that deserves and will have a response. But the

p.m.

NOTE
’ United Nations.

8

Treaty Series. vol. 367, No. 5224.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

N&m
Cons&

COMMENT

UMlED

NATIONS

PUBLICAllON.9

publications
ma! be obtained
from booksmrec
and disWtbuIors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or WIIC IO: Umted Naclont
.%I- Sectton. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

I.&S PUBLICATIONS

DES NATiONS

UNIE!4

Les publications
des Nations Unies son1 en venue darts let Itbrairis
et les agences dCpositaimdu
monde entier. Informez-vous
sup& de votre libraIre ou adresez-vow
I : Nations Unies. Section
des vemes. New York ou G&W.

COMO

CONSEGUIP

PUBLlCAClONES

Las publiiones
de bs Nacionee
&xlas partee &I mundo. Con&&e
Nueva York o Gin&~.

DE LAS NACIONES

U&as
e&n en nnta en libreti
a su librero o didjase a: Nociom

UNIDAS
y casas diuribuidotas
tn
Unidae, Secci6n de Vent.

!334143~March

195’2-2,050
