Reaolutiom adopted on reports of the Third Committee
Con.sidering that the recommendations it has adopted
at its seventh session do not represe--it the only steps
that can be taken to promote respect for such right,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
ask the Commission on Human Rights to continue preparing recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples to self-determination,
and particularly recommendations relating to the steps
which might be taken, within the limits of their resources and competence, by the various organs of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to develop
international respect for the right of peoples to selfdetermination ;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit through the Economic and Social Council its
recommendations to the General Assembly.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

638 (VD). Integration of refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Taking note of the observations and information

contained in the report• of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the problem of assimilation of refugees in the countries of their residence,
Considering that the voluntary repatriation or the
resettlement in countries of immigration of refugees
under the mandate• of the High Commissioner, while
constituting valuable elements for the solution of the
refugee problem, are not sufficient in themselves under
the present conditions to offer within a reasonable time
a permanent solution of that problem,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the governments of the countries of present residence oi
refugees towards their as~imilation, as well as the
studies and plans of the High Commissioner directed
towards the same objective,
Considering that, in view of the heavy financial burdens involved in the execution of int~ration pro~ e s , international funds may play a useful role
1n the successful execution of long-term projects for
.the assimilation of refugees,
lflflit,s the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in consultation with the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, to examine the
situation with a view to exploring, with the governments directly concerned, what sources of funds might
be available and the most effective means by which
such funds might be utilized.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

27

639 (VII). Report of the United Natiom High
Commissioner for Refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Concerned with the persistence of a serious refugee
problem which is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations,
1. Noles with appreciation the second annual report 10 of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;
2. Takes note of the fact that contributions thus
far received by the High Commissioner for assistance
to refugees under the authority given to him by General Assembly resolution 538 B (VI) of 2 February
1952 will not be sufficient to provide in 1953 for
emergency aid to the most needy groups of refugees
under his mandate in Europe, the Near East and the
Far East, particularly in Shanghai ;
3. Notes with appreciation the contributions al~ea?~ made by governments, organizations and private
md1v1duals to the fund for emergency aid to refugees;
4. Expresses the hope that furtlter contributions
will be forthcoming to that fund so as to enable the
High Commissioner to carry out his plans of assistance
to the most needy groups of refugees;
. 5: Reiterat!s its appeal to all governments, spec1al1zed agencies and other inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations interested in migration
to give to ~fugees under the mandate of the. High
Commissi?ner every possible opportunity in and benefit
from projects to promote migration, including such
measures as will facilitate the transit, resettlement and
employment of refugees in occupations suitable to their
training and skills.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

640 (VII). Convention on the Political Rights of
Women
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Considering that the peoples of the United Nations
are determined to. promote equality of ri~hts of men
and women, in conformity with the principles embodied in the Charter,
Believing that an international convention on the
political rights of w?men will ~onstitute an important
step towards the universal attamment of equal rights
of men and women,
R,.ffirming its resolution S6 {I) of 11 December

1946,
Decides to open tne attached Convention for signature and ratification at the end of the present session.

409th plnary m•mng,
20 D,cnnb,r 195~.
• See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gmtf"ol Ass,mbl;y,· Srventli Sission, S11pplfflllnt No. l6.
• See resolution 428 (V).

10 See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gntn'ol Ass1tnbl;y, Sn.•intlt
Session, S11,Pllfnfflt No. l6.
