Rnolatlom adopted on the reportl of the Foarth Committee

109

10. RecommeRds tha! all Governments should inNoting with :atisfaction the further increase in contensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
tributions to the Programme and the corres~nding
organizations within the United Nations system of
increase in assistance for the education and training of
which they are members to ensure the full and effective
persons froip. the Territories concerned,
implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Adresolutions of the United Nations and, in that convisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
nexion, should accord priority to the question of proand Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
viding assistance on an emergency basis to peoples in
work they have accomplished in strengthening and
the colonial Territories and to their national liberation
expanding the Programme;
movements;
2. Endorses the conclusions of the Advisory Com11. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
mittee based on the recommendations of the Evaluaagencies and other organizations within the United
tion Group;28
Nations system, with a view to facilitating the imple3. Notes, in particular, the conclusion to the effect
mentation of paragraph 10 above, to formulate and
that the Programme has been a significant and worthsubmit to their respective governing bodies or legiswhile effort of the international community, and that
lative organs, as a matter of priority and with the
a continuation and expansion of the Programme is
active .co-operation of the Organization of African
desirable to meet the increased needs arising from
Unity, concrete proposals for the full imJ?lementation
recent developments in the Territories concerned;
of the relevant United Nations decisions, 1D particular
4. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
specific programmes of all possible assistance to the
made voluntary contributions to the Programme and
peoples m colonial Territories and their national llberappeals to all States, organizations and individuals to
ation movements;
make generous contributions to the Programme in
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
order to ensure its continuation and expansion, par(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
ticularly during this moS t important period;
concerned with related aspects of the present item, with
5. Decides that, as a transitional measure, provision
the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
shall be made, under the regular budget of the United
organizations within the United Nations system, a reNations for the financial year 1976, for an amount of
port on the action taken since the circulation of his
$US 100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme
previous report in implementation of the relevant reso- ' pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions.
lutions of the United Nations, including the present
2431st plenary meeting
resolution;
8 December 1975
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
3423 (XXX). Offers by Member States of study
and other organizations within the United Nations
and training facilities for inhabitants of
system in working out appropriate measures for imNon-Self-Governing
Territories
plementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thhty-first session;
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3302 (XXIX) of 13 Decem13. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
ber 1974,
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
on offers by Member States of study and training faciliand other organizations within the United Nations systies for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,14
tem in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
General Assembly;
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide edu14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
cational and training facilities at all levels for the inexamine this question and to report to the General
habitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431st plenary meeting
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
8 December 1975
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabi3422 (XXX). United Nations Educational and
tants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
Training Programme for Southern Africa
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
The General Assembly,
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particuRecalling its resolutions on the United Nations
larly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
Africa, in particular resolution 3301 (XXIX) of 13
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
December 1974,
widespread
and continuous dissemination in the TerriFurther recalling its request to the Advisory Comtories
under
their administration of information relating
mittee on the United Nations Educational and Training
to offers of study and training facilities made by States
Programme for Southern Africa to arrange, in conand to provide all the necessary facilities to enable
sultation with the Secretary-General, for an evaluation
students
to avail themselves of such offers;
of the achievements of the Programme and of the ways
5.
Requests
the Secretary-General to report to the
and means for its further development,
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the imTaking note of the report of the Secretary-General
plementation of the present resolution;
on the Programme for• 1974/75,12
22 A/10331.

23 Ibid., paras. 27 and 28.
24 A/10329 and Add.I and Add.I/Corr.I.

110

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the· Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3424 (XXX). Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,25
Having heard the statement of a petitioner, Mr. A. M.
Azahari, President of the People's Party of Brunei
( Partai Rakyat Brunei), 26 which, in the 1962 election,
received 98 per cent of the votes cast,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United.. Nations relating to the Territory, including in
particular the consensus on the question adopted by
the General Assembly on 13 December 1974, 27
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Brunei to self-determination and independence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Brunei;
3. Calls upon the administering Power, consistent
with its responsibility as the administering Power, to take
all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously
the holding of free and democratic elections by the
appropriate government authorities in Brunei in consultation with and under the supervision of the United
Nations, in accordance with the inalienable rights of
the people of Brunei to self-determination and independence, and further calls, prior to the elections, for
the lifting of the ban on all political parties and the
return of all political exiles to Brunei so that they can
participate freely and fully in the elections;
4. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
5. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3425 (XXX). Question of '.\lontserrat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtierh Sessio11, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XX.
.
26 Ibid., T!1irtieth Session, Fourth Commi1tee, 2167th meeting.
2; Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),
p. 117, item 23.

Independence to. Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 28 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
May 1975 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, 29

Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,3?
Having also heard the statement of the Chairman of
the Visiting Mission, 31
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comm~ttee on the Situatic::m with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Montserrat; 32
2. Notes with satisfaction the conclusions and rrcommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission
dispatched to the Territory in May 197533 and expresses
its appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission
for the constructive work accomplished and to the
administering Power and the Government of Montserrat for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;
3. Requests the administering Power to continue to
take all necessary measures to expedite the process of
decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
4. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
measures to promote the economic development of
Montserrat, within a framework of regional co-operation, are, inter alia, an important element in the process
of self-determination, and expresses the hope that the
administering Power will continue to intensify and
expand its programme of budgetary and development
aid;
5. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and the organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its 1976 session in
the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time, in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
28 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 ( Al 10023/
Rev .1) , chaps. IV and XXVIII.
29 Jbid., chap. XXVIII, annex.
so Ibid., Tl,irtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
a1 Ibid., 2170th meeting.
32 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al 10023/
Rev.l), chap. XXVIll.
as Ibid., annex, paras. 101-124.
