V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

entitled "Development aspects of the reverse transfer
of technology"; 137
5. Urges all Member States to give at the fifth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development urgent consideration to the elaboration of measures on the development aspects of the
reverse transfer of technology;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session on the results achieved by the Conference at
its fifth session on the item entitled "Development
aspects of the reverse transfer of tec~nology" and in
particular on the work referred to m paragraph 5
above.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/152.

Assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis•
Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/186 of 19 December
1977, in which it, inter alia, stressed the urgency of
rendering all necessary assistance to t~e peoples ?f
Antigua, Dominica, St. Kitts-Nevis-Angmlla, St. Luc~a
and St. Vincent in their efforts to strengthen the1r
national economies,
Emphasizing the special problems faced by Antigua,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent
with regard to territorial size, geographical loca!ion
and limited economic resources, as well as the senous
adverse effects of recent world-wide economic and
financial problems,
Mindful that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of their development objectives,
Aware of the fact that a conference of several Governments and agencies interested in economic development in the Caribbean was held at Washington, D.C.,
on 14 and 15 December 1977, with the purpose of
reviewing the economic development needs of the
Caribbean region, and that, as a consequence, a Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development was established,
Recalling also its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 entitled "Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples",
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to these Territories and peoples,
Noting with appreciation the recent attainment of
independence by Dominica,
Recalling that the question of the Territories of Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent is currently under consideration in the relevant
and competent organs of the United Nations,
1. Emphasizes the urgency of rendering all necessary assistance to the peoples of Antigua, St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent in their efforts to strengthen their national economies and calls
137 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. II, annex II.

115

upon the Government of the Unite~ Kingdom . of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 111 consultation
with the freelv elected representatives of the peoples
of Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lu~ia and
St. Vincent, to take adequate steps to estabhsh and
finance an appropriate programme of development
of those Territories;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, international financial institutions and aid
donors, to intensify their assistance within their respective spheres of competence to the peoples of those
Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/153.

United Nations Conference on Restrictive Business Practices

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, particularly paragraph 37, in which 31 December
1972 was the date set for attaining concrete and significant results in the control of restrictive business
practices,
Recalling further section I, paragraph 10, of its
resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Taking into account the significant progress made
in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the formulation of a set of principles
and rules pursuant to section III of Conference resolution 96 (IV) of 31 May 1976,138
I. Takes note of Trade and Development Board
resolution 178 (XVIII) of 17 September 1978,130 in
which it was decided to convene a further session of
the Third Ad Hoe Group of Experts on Restrictive
Business Practices, in order to enable the Group to
complete its work on the set of principles and rules
and to make further progress on a model law, or
laws, on restrictive business practices;
2. Decides to convene, in the period between September 1979 and April 1980, under the auspices of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a United Nations Conference on Restrictive
Business Practices to negotiate, on the basis of the
work of the Third Ad Hoe Group of Experts, and to
take all decisions necessary for the adoption of, a set
of multilaterally agreed equitable principles and rules
for the control of restrictive business practices having
adverse effects on international trade, particularly that
of developing countries, and on the economic development of those countries, including a decision on the
legal character of the principles and rules;
188 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Il.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
.
139 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtythird Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. II, annex I.

116

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session,

3. Authorizes the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, at its fifth session, to take
appropriate action for the United Nations Conference
on Restrictive Business Practices, including decisions
on relevant issues and, in particular, the determination
of the precise dates for the Conference within the
period referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the wo~k
of all international conferences convened under its
auspices in the capacity of observers to participate in
the Conference in that capacity in accordance with
Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November
1974 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation
movements recognized in its region by the Organization
of African Unity to participate in the Conference in
the capacity of observers in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of
4 November 1977;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs
of the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;

(f) Intergovernmental bodies in consultative status
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to be represented by observers at the Conference;

5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
endeavour to find ways to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of the least developed
countries in the Conference by seeking extrabudgetary
funds to finance travel expenses of two representatives
from each least developed country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of representatives of
the organizations referred to in paragraph 4 (b) and
( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions
for their travel expenses and per diem;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding the Conference
at Geneva, to submit to the Conference all relevant
documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff,
facilities and services that it will require;
8. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/154.

Fifth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, as amended, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, 31/
159 of 21 December 1976, 32/174 of 19 December
1977 and 32/197 of 20 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolution 32/189 of 19 December 1977, whereby it accepted with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of the Philippines to
hold the fifth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at Manila and decided
that the fifth session of the Conference should be held
from 7 May to 1 June 1979, with a pre-Conference
meeting of senior officials at Manila on 3 and 4 May
1979,
Considering that a number of important issues relating to the establishment of the new international
economic order are under negotiation or consideration
in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, notably the Integrated Programme for
Commodities, including the establishment of the Common Fund, economic co-operation among developing
countries, the debt problem of developing countries,
the transfer of real resources to developing countries,
access to markets, the interrelationship between trade,
development, money and finance, the international
code of conduct on the transfer of technology and
equitable principles and rules for restrictive business
practices, and a convention on international multimodal transport,
Reaffirming the major role of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development as envisaged
in resolution 90 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the Conference, 140 as an organ of the General Assembly for
deliberation, negotiation, review and implementation
in the field of international trade and related areas of
international economic co-operation,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Trade and Development Board on the second and
third parts of its ninth special session and the second
part of its seventeenth session 141 and on its eighteenth
session; 142
2. Welcomes the adoption by the Trade and Development Board at its eighteenth session of the provisional agenda for the fifth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as
well as of the arrangements for the organization of
the session; 143
3. Considers that the fifth session of the Conference will provide an important and timely occasion
for:
(a) Review of progress and developments relating
to the major ongoing negotiations and agreement on
appropriate further action;
140 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Sessio11, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Il.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
141 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. r.
142 Jbid., vol. II.
143 Ibid., annexes II and III.
