A/77/942

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 June 2023
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 124
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly
Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

II.

Proceedings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

Thematic debate on the selection and appointment of the Secretary -General and other
executive heads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

Thematic debate on strengthening the accountability, transparency and institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

III.

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

IV.

Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Updated inventory chart of General Assembly resolutions on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly, issued pursuant to resolution 75/325 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

A.
B.

Annex

23-12551 (E)

260723

*2312551*

A/77/942

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 75/325, the General Assembly decided to establish, at its
seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions, an ad hoc working group on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the Assembly, inter alia, by building on progress achieved in past
sessions as well as on previous resolutions, including evaluating the status of their
implementation, with the primary focus on:
(i) During the seventy-sixth session: role and authority of the General
Assembly, and working methods;
(ii) During the seventy-seventh session: strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly and selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and
other executive heads.
2.
The General Assembly further decided that the Ad Hoc Working Group should
continue its review of the inventory of Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed
to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the seventy-fifth session
(A/75/973) and, as a result, continue to update the inventory to be attached to the
reports to be submitted at the seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions of the
Assembly, including the separate indication of relevant provisions that were not
implemented, with reasons therefor. The present report is submitted pursuant to the
provisions of that resolution.
3.
During the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, the President of
the General Assembly appointed the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitchell Fifield, and the Permanent Representative of El Salvador to
the United Nations, Egriselda González López, as Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group.

II. Proceedings
4.
The Working Group held a total of three formal meetings, on 9 February,
15 March and 7 July 2023.
5.
The programme of work consisted of two thematic meetings on the following
themes:
(a)
heads;

Selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive

(b) Strengthening the accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
6.
In addition, one meeting was held on 7 June 2023 as part of the interactive
dialogue between permanent missions and the Secretariat. All formal meetings and
the dialogue between permanent missions and the Secretariat were webcast.

A.

Thematic debate on the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General and other executive heads
7.
The Co-Chairs convened a thematic debate on the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General and other executive heads on 9 February 2023. In their opening

2/99

23-12551

A/77/942

statements, the Co-Chairs highlighted the importance for the General Assembly, as
the chief policy and deliberative organ of the United Nations, of examining innovative
ways to enhance and improve the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary General and other executive heads of the United Nations system. They also
encouraged members to discuss the implementation of relevant mandates associated
with the third pillar of the revitalization process, as well as to elaborate new proposals
for inclusion in the resolution of the seventy-seventh session.
8.
As requested in paragraph 69 of resolution 75/325, a briefing was provided by
the Director of the Global Strategy and Policy Division of the Office of Human
Resources of the Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance on the
gender and geographical distribution of the executive heads of the United Nations
system and the Senior Management Group. A document containing information on
geographical diversity and gender parity was circulated to delegations on the same
day. In his presentation, the Director noted some progress in the number of Member
States within the desirable range. An increase in the number of unrepresented and
overrepresented Member States was observed during the same period. He noted two
main challenges faced in attaining equitable geographical distribution, namely the
supply of applicants from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States, and
the systemic and structural shortcomings of the staff selection system, which would
require the rectification of policies, processes and technology. The Director also
provided an update on gender parity. In January 2023, women staff members
composed 44 per cent of the Secretariat and 33 per cent of the field. In the field, while
gender parity among resident coordinators was reached in 2019, and among senior
management in 2021, the pace of change in lower grades was slower.
9.
In an interactive segment, 11 delegations and the Co-Chairs posed questions and
sought clarification on several issues. Several delegations enquired about measures
taken by the Secretariat to address the two main challenges faced in at taining
equitable geographical distribution. Some delegations asked for clarification of the
difference between talent pools and rosters and noted the lack of transparency
regarding the recruitment process through those methods. One delegate highlighted
the fact that no female candidate had been appointed as Secretary -General and
enquired about efforts made to address that. The Co-Chair and a few other delegations
raised the issue of diversity representation among staff, in particular for persons with
disabilities and Indigenous Peoples. Several Member States advocated the increased
participation of young people in the Secretariat, identification of the barriers
preventing youth from opportunities and expansion of the ways for young
professionals, especially those from developing countries, to enter the system. In
response, the Director outlined the efforts made by the Secretariat to focus on
diversity, multilingualism, disability inclusion and youth in its selection processes.
While highlighting the progress that the Secretariat had made in making its selection
process more transparent and timely, he acknowledged that it would require much
more time to overhaul the decades-old decision-making practices in place. He
underlined the importance of outreach and partnership initiatives towards regional
groups to dispel existing myths about the recruitment process of the United Nations
and to reach talents in areas where there were gaps.
10. In the subsequent debate, 23 delegations made statements, including on behalf
of four groups, focused on the selection and appointment of the Secretary -General
and other executive heads, and the geographical and gender-balanced representation
in the Secretariat. Delegations underlined the central role of the Gene ral Assembly,
as the main and deliberative policy-making body of the Organization, in the process
of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, and expressed their support for
efforts aimed at reinforcing and strengthening the role of the Assembly in that regard.
Several delegations indicated that the process should be well structured, with
23-12551

3/99

A/77/942

sufficient time for preparation and considerations, and for the process to be concluded
well before the beginning of the next mandate. Most speakers noted that, as
recognized in paragraph 68 of resolution 75/325, a woman Secretary-General had yet
to be appointed, and reiterated the invitation to Member States to bear that in mind in
the future, when nominating candidates for the position of Secretary-General. One
group called upon the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council to reinforce that call in future processes.
11. Delegations reiterated the need to provide the process of sele ction and
appointment of the Secretary-General with clear, transparent and sufficient timelines,
including for the publishing of the joint letter by the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council containing the submission o f
candidatures; for a deadline for the submission of candidatures; for the completion of
Assembly hearings with all candidates; and for the Council recommendation and the
resolution from the Assembly regarding the appointment of the Secretary -General.
Some groups welcomed the recommendation in resolution 75/325 encouraging
Member States to publicize the call for nominations, including with civil society and
other stakeholders with the aim of identifying potential candidates. It was proposed
that candidates voluntarily disclose funding resources relating to their candidacy to
add transparency to the process. Speakers called upon the President of the General
Assembly to continue to hold informal dialogues betw een candidates and Member
States, and to further improve the dialogues by making them more interactive in terms
of time allotted to candidates to reply and for civil society and other stakeholders to
ask questions. Some acknowledged that the selection proc ess benefited from the
increasing role of civil society, and encouraged its representatives to continue to
provide important contributions to improving the selection process.
12. One group called for thorough discussions on the following improvements to
the selection process: that the Secretary-General, upon recommendation of the
Security Council, be appointed through secret ballot in the General Assembly; that
the Council be encouraged to submit more than one name for the consideration of the
Assembly; and that a single, longer and non-renewable term for future SecretariesGeneral be established. That call was echoed by other speakers. A few speakers called
for transparency from the Council during the selection and appointment process of
the Secretary-General, inviting the President of the Security Council to promote a
more inclusive and transparent selection process.
13. With regard to the selection and appointment of the executive heads of the
United Nations system and the Senior Management Group of the O rganization,
delegations underlined the importance of maintaining the highest standards of
efficiency, competence and integrity, and the need for equal and fair distribution in
terms of gender, linguistic and geographical balance. Speakers called for due r egard
to continue to be given to regional and geographical rotation and to gender equality,
as stipulated in past resolutions, to address persisting historical imbalances, including
the underrepresentation of developing countries in leadership positions. O ne group
and several delegations shared the view that the Secretary-General should exercise
full independence in the selection of senior officials while ensuring the transparency
of a merit-based selection process and geographical and gender balance. They added
that the practice of reserving certain senior appointments for nationals of particular
Member States should be discontinued in line with resolution 46/232. In addition, one
group proposed making an open call for nominations to a given position to
supplement any search and consultation processes carried out by the Secretariat, as
well as conducting interactive meetings with candidates running for those posts. The
group called for greater consultations with Member States to ensure both consensus
outcomes and the appointment of the best suitable candidates to senior management
positions.
4/99

23-12551

A/77/942

B.

Thematic debate on strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly
14. The Co-Chairs convened a thematic debate on strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly on 15 March 2023. The President of the General A ssembly delivered
opening remarks, followed by the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly
and Conference Management who gave a briefing on the functioning of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly, including recommendations for considera tion
by Member States, in follow-up to the report of the Task Force convened by the
Secretary-General in November 2015, as mandated in paragraph 78 of resolution
75/325. The written update with recommendations requested on the same paragraph
was circulated to Member States on 3 March 2023.
15. In his opening remarks, the President of the General Assembly spoke about the
functioning of and challenges faced by his Office. He shared his observation that the
setting of the agenda of the Assembly was a repetitive and routine exercise without
long-term planning. He highlighted the limitations on the scope of what the President
could accomplish during his or her one-year term, as most of the programme and
mandates of the President for the session were determined before he or she took
office. He added that the current system did not incentivize providing strategic
continuity and institutional memory between presidencies. With regard to the funding
of operations and expenditures, the President shared that 15 per cent of the expenses
of the operations of his Office were funded by the regular budget, while 85 per cent
came from the trust fund in support of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly, which relied on voluntary contributions from a handful of Member States.
He shared that about $2 million was needed during one term and that the President
relied on funding from his or her respective country or on contributions from other
Member States. The President took the opportunity to express concerns about how
certain services, such as the use of a teleprompter or the convening of a press stakeout,
were provided by service providers in a monopolistic position and came with a
prohibitive price.
16. With regard to the process of selecting the President of the General Assembly,
the President proposed: having a vacancy announcement for the post with concrete
criteria while preserving regional rotation; encouraging Member States to put forward
more women candidates; and considering a mandatory suspension of all other
positions held by the candidate, once elected. With regard to the timing and tenure of
the Presidency, the President encouraged Member States to consider the possibility
of re-election or biennial terms to enable Presidents to see their mandates and
processes through. Regarding the mission and priorities of the President of the
General Assembly, he underlined the importance of close cooperation between
incumbent Presidents and Presidents-elect and their teams. He added that early
consultations between the President-elect and the Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral, starting no later than the day of the election, as well as regular consultations
with Member States, were necessary for priorities to be shaped accordingly. With
regard to staffing the Office of the President of the General Assembly, he shared that
one third of the staff serving in his office had served under previous presidencies. He
underlined that having the highest possible number of Uni ted Nations staff members
and seconded personnel serve in consecutive terms would result in better
transparency, institutional memory and institutional culture in the Office. He
suggested establishing an upper limit in the number of staff and avoiding the
proliferation of high-level jobs. In closing, the President highlighted some
achievements: the practice of frequent consultations with former and incoming

23-12551

5/99

A/77/942

Presidents of the General Assembly and their teams; and the creation of informal
platforms for interactions with Member States, such as the organizing of civil society
forums the opening of informal meetings of the General Committee to all Member
States, as well as the creation of an online oversight platform to keep track of ongoing
mandates.
17. In response to the statement by the President of the General Assembly, the
Co-Chair expressed his disappointment regarding the circumstances under which the
President and his office had to operate, citing the example of the President having to
pay to use the teleprompter in the General Assembly Hall or to do press stakeouts,
and quipping that free speech was, in fact, not free. He added that the situation was
emblematic of a bigger problem: the President and Member States, whom the United
Nations comprised, were treated as tenants in the building. He welcomed the
statement of the President as being timely and useful in the deliberation on how to
revitalize the Assembly, and emphasized that the support to the Office of the General
Assembly was key to its fulfilling its functions.
18. The Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference
Management gave a briefing on the support provided by the Secretariat for the
functioning of the Office of the President of the General Assembly, specifically the
sources of the funding and staffing of the Office. With regard to staffing, the Under Secretary-General stated that the regular budgetary resources in support of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly comprised staff recruited under the authority
of the President and staff seconded from other departments and offices and agencies,
funds and programmes. That was complemented by advisers and experts in their
respective fields, seconded by their governments in their capacity as gratis personnel,
as well as external consultants, to provide expertise not available within the
Secretariat. The Department for General Assembly and Conference Management also
supported the Office by administering general temporary positions using funds
allocated to the Department to support the Office of the President. In line with
resolution 58/126, five posts were available to the Office on an annual basis to
supplement support: two at the D-2 level, one at the D-1 level, one at the P-5 level
and one at the General Service level. The Under-Secretary-General stated that the
President had full flexibility in the assignment of responsibilities and key functions
within the office and may establish additional temporary positions during a financial
year, including by using extrabudgetary resources available through the voluntary
contributions of Member States to the trust fund in support of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly. In addition, several departments provided the
following staffing and services: the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management: the services of translators and text processors, as well as
protocol and correspondence and policy guidance and human resources support from
the Executive Office; the Department of Operational Support: a car and driver for
official purposes; the Department of Safety and Security: two security officers; the
Department of Global Communications: a spokesperson for the term of office; and
the Office of Legal Affairs: legal assistance and guidance.
19. The Under-Secretary-General added that the Secretariat also provided office
space and equipment, including transitional office space for Presidents -elect during
the interim period between their election in June and the o pening of the session in
September, as well as temporary space for the incoming and outgoing staff and other
personnel. With regard to funding, the Under-Secretary-General gave a briefing on
the fact that funding of the Office of the President of the Gener al Assembly was
provided through the appropriation of resources under section 1 of the programme
budget. He recalled that, effective 1998, the Assembly had approved the amount of
$250,000 per annum for the Office under segment (b) for the President of the General
Assembly, to be adjusted for inflation and approved reductions. The Under-Secretary6/99

23-12551

A/77/942

General stated that the regular budget continued to be complemented by
extrabudgetary resources received from the trust fund in support of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly. With regard to other support provided by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, the UnderSecretary-General mentioned that, to facilitate the transition between sessions, the
Department had assumed the lead role within the Secretariat in putting together an
induction programme commencing with the Office of the President of the seventy first session. In addition, the General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs Division of the Department served as the repository of institutional memory
of best practices and past precedents and as the substantive backstopping office for
the Office of the President.
20. The Co-Chair followed up after the intervention and asked for the basis on
which the President of the General Assembly was charged, whereas the SecretaryGeneral was not being charged for equivalent services. The Under-Secretary-General
responded that there were mandates for those services to be provided to the Secretary General and related resources appropriated, whereas resources for the President had
not evolved since the fifty-second session. All those arrangements had been decided
by Member States.
21. In an interactive segment, seven delegations and the Co -Chair posed questions
to the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management
on a few issues. With regard to budget and staffing, delegations asked for details on
the allocation of the regular budget provided to backstop the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, and how the five posts funded under the regular budget were
assigned and managed. Another delegation enquired about existing oversight
mechanisms related to financial and human resources matters and the methods of
reporting to the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. One
speaker asked the Secretariat to provide a comparison of the number of resolutions
adopted and meetings mandated in the General Assembly over recent years. The
Co-Chair again raised the question of why the President of the General Assembly was
required to pay for the use of the teleprompter in the General Assembly Hall. In
response to the questions, the Under-Secretary-General reiterated that the funds
approved by the Assembly to support the President of the Ge neral Assembly during
the fifty-second session had not changed since, except for adjustments for inflation.
With regard to the five posts funded from the regular budget, authority and flexibility
were given to the President to allocate and define the funct ions of the aforementioned
posts. The Under-Secretary-General assured delegations that the financial,
administrative and human resources matters of the Office of the President were
handled by his department and audited regularly by the Board of Auditors an d the
Office of Internal Oversight Services. Addressing the question on the increase in the
volume of work of the Assembly, he stated that, while the number of resolutions
adopted remained the same, the number of mandates and processes given to the
President to lead had increased drastically. With regard to the issue of the
teleprompter, the Under-Secretary-General clarified that, while services for calendar
meetings were provided without charge, non-calendar meetings, under which most of
the meetings organized by the President fell, did not have allocations from the regular
budget approved by Assembly.
22. In a subsequent debate, 23 delegations took the floor, including on behalf of
three groups, with statements focused mostly on the funding and staffing i ssues faced
by the Office of the President of the General Assembly. Most delegations called for
adequate human and financial resources to be allocated to the Office. A speaker
pointed out that the Assembly, as the only universal policymaking body of the Un ited
Nations, must be treated with the importance that its critical role deserved in the
multilateral system. Proposals to increase both the amount and percentage of funds
23-12551

7/99

A/77/942

allocated to the Office from the regular budget were made by several delegations. A
few speakers cautioned that overreliance on the voluntary trust fund could erode the
accountability and transparency of the Office and that staying dependent on voluntary
contributions and the secondment of staff from Member States might discourage
countries lacking resources from seeking the Presidency. One speaker underlined that
the provision of funding from the regular budget for non-calendar meetings was vital
to the functioning of the President and his office. With regard to staffing, calls for an
increase in funding from the regular budget for permanent posts in the Office of the
President were made, including a recommendation to place a cap on the size of the
Office. Delegations stressed the importance of keeping a core group of staff, and
asked Member States to consider the creation of additional posts at the P-5 level.
Diversity, geographical balance, a balance in gender and in different regions and
groups of Member States in terms of numbers and level of responsibility, as well as
transparency in secondments to the Office of the President, were named as priorities
by several delegations.
23. Some delegations highlighted the oath of office of the President of the General
Assembly, the disclosure of financial information upon the assumption and
completion of duties, and the code of ethics stipulated in paragraph 58 of resolution
70/305 as milestones for ensuring the transparency and accountability of the
President. One delegation proposed the expansion of such practices to other senior
posts in the Office of the President. Another delegation called for the continuation of
the practice of circulating the Summary of the Presidency of the General Assembly
on the recommendations of Member States made in the annual report of the Security
Council, as had been done by the Presidents at the sixty-ninth and seventy-fifth
sessions. Member States welcomed the continued publishing of all relevant
documents, including speeches made by the President, letters, and info rmation on his
or her mandates and travels, on the United Nations website. With regard to the
election of the President, one delegate welcomed the commitment of candidates to
sharing a vision statement and holding interactive dialogues with the Assembly du ring
their candidacy, which could be further strengthened by the inclusion of civil society
in those dialogues.
24. Emphasizing the importance of institutional memory, delegations appreciated
the efforts made by the Office of the President in that regard, such as the annual retreat
between Presidencies, the handover reports of the Presidents, the induction
programmes organized by the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, and the training programme organized by the United Nations Institu te
for Training and Research for the transition of the Presidency of the General
Assembly in partnership with the Permanent Missions of Ecuador, Finland and
Malaysia. Others commended the convening of the informal dialogue with former
Presidents of the General Assembly held on 22 February 2023. With regard to the
term of the Presidency, some delegations stated that it was difficult to see the
completion of mandates through within one year, and called upon the Assembly to
look into the possibility of the Presidency going beyond one session. One speaker
said that Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations did not prohibit re -election
and that the principle of regional rotation would not be infringed. However, another
delegate said that having a one-year term would allow Presidents to present fresh
ideas and create a sense of urgency to advance their priorities. One delegation
recommended that the rotation of the Presidency and of the Chairs of the Main
Committees occur on 1 January of each year while retaining high-level week in
September and the end of the main session in December. That would allow the
President and the Chairs adequate time to be prepared for their work.
25. Some delegations touched on other priorities, such as gender balance and
multilingualism. Delegations underlined the importance of striving for gender balance
8/99

23-12551

A/77/942

when it came to the composition of the Office of the President, the composition of
panels for high-level meetings and, more important, putting forward nominations for
female candidates for the position of President at future sessions. Recalling that
multilingualism was a fundamental principle of the Charter of the United Nations,
one speaker emphasized that the composition of the Office, as well as the modalities
of its work, should reflect the cultural and linguistic diversity of the membership.
Another delegate pointed out that most of the documents of the Office of the President
existed only in English, and called for greater efforts to be made to have documents
available in all official languages. One delegation encouraged Member States to
strengthen the engagement of civil society, youth, the private sector and other
stakeholders across the board. Member States expressed their readiness to continue
to support all continuing efforts to strengthen the central role and authority of the
General Assembly, and called upon the Co-Chairs to work towards an ambitious and
consensus draft resolution that would also enjoy the widest possible support of
Member States.

III. Conclusion
26. In accordance with its mandate, the Working Group endeavoured to identify key
issues of concern and possible consensus, to examine the current status of
implementation of those issues and either to take action or to indicate possible further
action to be taken.
27. At its final meeting, held on 7 July 2023, the Working Group considered and
adopted the present report, including the draft resolution contained in section IV (see
para. 29).
28. At the same meeting, the Secretary read out a statement on the programme
budget implications of the draft resolution.

IV. Recommendation
29. On the basis of a draft resolution circulated by the Co-Chairs, the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembl y formulated
the resolution set out below.
30. At its final meeting, held on 7 July 2023, the Working Group concluded its work
for the seventy-seventh session. The Working Group recommended that the Assembly
adopt the following draft resolution:

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the role and authority of the General Assembly as a principal
organ of the United Nations and the importance of its effectiveness and efficiency in
fulfilling its functions under the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is a
critical component of the overall reform of the United Nations,
Welcoming continued calls to increase the efficiency of the work o f the General
Assembly through streamlining its agenda, including by elimination of duplication
and overlap of agenda items,

23-12551

9/99

A/77/942

Welcoming also the efforts of the President of the General Assembly to provide
impetus to and promote the process of revitalization of the work of the Assembly
during its seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions in favour of strengthening
multilateralism,
Recalling the declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, adopted as resolution 75/1 of 21 September 2020,
which reaffirms overarching priorities for the work of the General Assembly,
including the commitment to multilateralism and to continue to work to revitalize the
General Assembly,
Recalling also its resolution 76/6 of 15 November 2021, in which it welcomed,
as a basis for further consideration by Member States, the submission of the rich and
substantive report of the Secretary-General entitled “Our Common Agenda”, 1 as
requested by Member States in the declaration on the commemoration of the seventy fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
Mindful of the importance of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
which continue to guide its work,
Recognizing that multilingualism, as a core value of the Organization, contributes
to the achievement of the goals of the United Nations, as set out in Article 1 of the
Charter,
Underlining the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the General Assembly to address the evolving global challenges,
1.
Reaffirms its resolution 75/325 of 10 September 2021 and all other
previous resolutions adopted without a vote relating to the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly;
2.
Welcomes the reports of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly issued during the seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions 2 and the updated inventory of Assembly resolutions on revitalization
annexed thereto, which continues to form a basis for Member States’ deliberation
under the item on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly;
3.
Requests the Secretariat to continue updating regularly and equally the
multilingual web page devoted to the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly in all six official languages and its substantive content w ithin existing
resources in a cost-effective manner, including through the use of existing
capabilities, including but not limited to automation of translation, while ensuring the
accuracy of translation, welcomes efforts already undertaken in this regard, and
encourages the Secretariat to strengthen those efforts;
4.
Decides to establish, at its seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions, in
accordance with the biennialized format agreed in resolution 75/325, an Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly, open to
all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the Assembly, inter alia, by building on the pro gress achieved in past
sessions as well as on previous resolutions, including evaluating the status of their
implementation, with the primary focus on:
(i) During the seventy-eighth session: role and authority of the General
Assembly, and working methods;
__________________
1
2

10/99

A/75/982.
A/76/946 and A/77/942.
23-12551

A/77/942

(ii) During the seventy-ninth session: strengthening the accountability,
transparency and institutional memory of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly and selection and appointment of the Secretary -General and
other executive heads;
(b) To also place the primary focus on implementation of the present
resolution during the seventy-eighth session, and to submit a report thereon to the
Assembly at its seventy-ninth session;
(c) To consider the next resolution during the seventy-ninth session and
biennially thereafter;
5.
Welcomes the efficiencies of the biennialized format and recent
innovations in the working methods of the Ad Hoc Working Group, including
informal interactive dialogues with former Presidents of the General Assembly, and
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research workshops for Member States,
and encourages further efforts to improve the Working Group with a view to
enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the General Assembly;
6.
Reiterates its decision to hold annually an interactive and comprehensive
dialogue between the Permanent Missions and the Secretariat as mandated in
resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017, during the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, and strongly emphasizes the importance of the follow-up on issues raised
during the dialogue aimed at improving the work of the Secretariat in its interaction
with Permanent Missions, including the circulation of these follow -up measures to
Permanent Missions;
7.
Decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall continue its review of the
inventory of General Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the seventy-seventh session and, as a result,
continue to update the inventory to be attached to the reports to be submitted at the
seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions of the Assembly, including the separate
indication of relevant provisions that were not implemented, with reasons therefor;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit an update on the provisions of
the General Assembly resolutions on revitalization addressed to the Secretariat for
implementation that have not been implemented, with an indication of the constraints
and reasons behind any lack of implementation, for further consideration by the Ad
Hoc Working Group at the seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions;
9.
Recognizes the importance of strengthening the institutional memory of
the General Assembly revitalization process, including the Ad Hoc Working Group,
and of enhancing the basis for discussions at its future sessions, and requests the
Secretariat to develop an online searchable repository of the recommendations of the
Ad Hoc Working Group, including its previous reports and the inventory charts issued
since the sixty-second session;
10. Requests the Ad Hoc Working Group, during the seventy-eighth session,
to examine whether the format, name and mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
including discussions on agenda alignment, remain fit for purpose, and explore
further options for strengthening its work;
Role and authority of the General Assembly
11. Reaffirms the role and authority of the General Assembly and the strict
respect of the Charter-based prerogatives and division of work among the principal
organs of the United Nations;
12. Welcomes the decision of the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session to select “A watershed moment: transformative solutions to
23-12551

11/99

A/77/942

interlocking challenges” as the theme of the general debate, and also welcomes the
decision of the President-elect of the General Assembly to select “Rebuilding trust
and reigniting global solidarity: accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its
Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and
sustainability for all” as the theme of the general debate of the seventy -eighth session
of the Assembly;
13. Stresses the importance of implementing the resolutions of the General
Assembly on a non-selective basis, including those related to the revitalization of its
work that require a follow-up or further actions, as shown in the updated inventory of
Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the President of the General Assembly to reinforce
synergy, coherence and complementarity between the agendas of the Assembly and
its Main Committees, and the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies,
also welcomes regular interaction and enhanced coordination between the Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in this regard, and encourages the continuation of this practice;
15. Also welcomes the initiatives by Member States to support capacitybuilding and awareness on the relationship between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, including through a workshop in the context of th e revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly;
16. Stresses the need for United Nations intergovernmental bodies, within
their respective mandates, to effectively address the full implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development 3 and its Sustainable Development Goals, and
deepen efforts to regain momentum for their attainment within internationally agreed
time frames, including, where possible, through provisions to accelerate its
implementation in relevant resolutions;
17. Underlines the urgent need to preserve the primacy, significance and
established practice of the general debate of the General Assembly, and:
(a) Stresses the need to limit the number of high-level events held in the
margins of the general debate to those of key significance that require immediate
attention from Heads of State and Government, to enable the meaningful participation
of all countries in the general debate;
(b) Calls upon the President of the General Assembly, Member States, the
Secretary-General and heads of other relevant United Nations bodies to be mindful
of those aspects when planning and coordinating the events of the high -level week in
September and to be guided by the existing mandates agreed upon by Member States;
(c) Calls upon Member States and the United Nations system to singly and
collectively limit the number of side events in parallel with or in the margins of the
general debate, as well as other high-level sessions, and encourages informal prior
consultations to identify side events on similar topics in an effort to minimize overlap
and inform the Secretariat of the details of planned side events;
(d) Invites Member States and United Nations system entities to join the
voluntary pledge, contained in annex II to the present resolution, t o limit the number
of side events held in parallel with or in the margins of the general debate, and
requests the President of the General Assembly to circulate the pledge to Member
States annually ahead of the general debate and to provide information on States that
have signed the pledge on the website of the Office of the President;
__________________
3

12/99

Resolution 70/1.
23-12551

A/77/942

(e) Requests the Secretariat to continue the practice of uploading information
on the side events, when indicated by the organizers, in the Journal of the United
Nations, and to do so in all six official languages when provided by the organizers;
18. Recognizes the value of holding interactive inclusive thematic debates on
current issues of critical importance to the international community, calls for the
rationalizing of such debates to ensure high-level attendance, calls upon the President
of the General Assembly to be mindful of the regular agenda of the Assembly as well
as the need to enable the participation of all countries, and urges Member States to
refrain from mandating recurring high-level and commemorative meetings where
possible, and to consider establishing sunset clauses upon review, including for those
already mandated;
19. Urges Member States, when considering establishing new mandates for
meetings of the General Assembly, to be mindful of existing mandated meetings, and
in this regard requests the Secretariat to advise the Member States of any existing
mandated meetings that overlap in date or theme, with the aim of minimizing the
overall number of high-level, thematic and commemorative meetings;
20. Requests the Secretariat to draw the attention of the General Assembly and
its subsidiary organs to overlapping high-level meetings of the Assembly prior to
action on proposals that mandate the holding of meeting s of the Assembly on specific
dates, and to advise co-chairs and co-facilitators appointed by the President of the
General Assembly during the scheduling of informal consultations if such meetings
or consultations overlap with other meetings of the Assembl y already scheduled, to
also take this guidance into account;
21. Strongly encourages the President of the General Assembly, supported by
the membership, to achieve gender parity across all the co -chairs and co-facilitators
appointed for intergovernmental processes, as well as among the invited speakers and
panellists for all meetings of the General Assembly;
22. Encourages the President of the General Assembly to continue the practice
of selecting one representative from a developed country and one repre sentative from
a developing country when appointing two co-chairs or co-facilitators, and strongly
encourages the President to strive for geographical balance among the invited
speakers and panellists for all meetings of the General Assembly;
23. Invites the President of the General Assembly to publish the outcome of
efforts to implement paragraphs 21 and 22 in a consolidated format on the website of
the Office of the President;
24. Requests the President of the General Assembly to continue scheduling the
plenary meetings of the Assembly on the report of the Secretary -General on the work
of the Organization and on the report of the Security Council in close coordination
with the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council so as to avoid
overlap with other important and related events on the same day, including, notably,
the election of the non-permanent members of the Security Council, so that
discussions of these important reports are no longer conducted in a perfunctory
manner;
25. Recognizes the timely submission of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly and, when necessary, special reports to the General Assembly,
in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
recalls resolution 69/321 of 11 September 2015 and other relevant resolutions of the
Assembly, and reiterates the importance of the Security Council continuing its efforts
to provide its annual report to the Assembly in accordance with resolutions 51/193 of
17 December 1996 and 58/126 of 19 December 2003, and relevant measures outlined
in notes S/2017/507 and S/2019/997 by the President of the Security Council, to
23-12551

13/99

A/77/942

enable scheduling its timely consideration by the General Assembly in June of each
year;
26. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with the support of the
Secretariat, to resume the practice of preparing a summary of the recommendations
expressed by delegations during the General Assembly plenary meeting dedicated to
discussing the report of the Security Council to the General Assembly and for onward
transmission;
27. Recognizes the functions, powers and role of the General Assembly in
matters related to the maintenance of international peace and security, consistent with
the Charter, without any prejudice to the functions and powers of the Security Council
as set out in Article 24 of the Charter;
28. Recalls its resolution 76/262 of 26 April 2022, adopted without a vote, in
which it invited the Security Council, in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of
the Charter, to continue the practice of submitting special reports, including in
connection with the casting of a veto by one or more permanent members of the
Security Council, at least 72 hours before the relevant discussions in the Assembly;
29. Welcomes the practice of providing a live list of speakers for the Security
Council open debates, taking into account the need to facilitate greater participation
of Member States, and notes the guiding role of open debates and their contribution
to enhancing interaction and synergies among principal organs;
30. Underlines the continued need to foster interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, in accordance with their respective mandates ,
and the necessity for greater access by Member States to practical information and
institutional memory, and requests the President of the General Assembly, with the
support of the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations entities, to consider
providing, within existing resources, a digital handbook or accessible outlines on past
practices, data and recommendations for the fulfilment of the functions and powers
of the General Assembly as outlined in Chapter IV of the Charter;
31. Requests the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat and
its network of United Nations information centres to continue to take measures to
provide accurate, impartial, comprehensive, balanced, timely and accessible
information to the public on the tasks and responsibilities of the General Assembly
throughout its session in all six official languages and, within existing resources, in
as many non-official languages and platforms as possible, and requests the Secretary General and the President of the General Assembly to continue to make efforts to
ensure that multilingualism is not undermined, in order to enhance public awareness
and understanding of the role, work and decisions of the Assembly;
32. Notes with appreciation the progress made in automating the publication
of information about the work of the General Assembly, including the list of
resolutions, and requests the Department of Global Communications, in collaboration
with the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the
Secretariat, to continue to explore new ways to make such information available,
within existing resources;
Working methods
33. Stresses the desirability of the General Assembly streamlining its agenda
and dedicating more time for holding substantive and interactive dialogues, as well
as the review of the implementation of the resolutions it adopts;
34. Recognizes that urgent and concerted efforts are required to streamline the
agenda of the General Assembly, where appropriate, and in this regard:
14/99

23-12551

A/77/942

(a) Recalls the analysis of the agenda of the General Assembly published as
an outcome of resolution 58/126, and requests the Secretariat to prepare a conference
room paper during the seventy-eighth session outlining the evolution of the agenda
of the General Assembly to facilitate deliberations on the further biennalization,
triennalization, clustering and elimination of items or on their labelling as items that
remain on the agenda for consideration upon notification in accordance with
paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, for the consideration
of Member States;
(b) Emphasizes that the General Assembly and its Main Committees, at each
session, in consultation with Member States, need to make concrete proposals for the
further biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of items on the
agenda of the Assembly or for their labelling as items that remain on the agenda for
consideration upon notification in accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to
resolution 58/316, including through the introduction of a sunset clause, with the clear
consent of the sponsoring State or States, taking into account all the relevant
recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group;
(c) Encourages the President of the General Assembly to steer a more active
General Committee in this regard, in line with the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
and further requests the President to continue the practice of convening informal
meetings of the General Committee throughout the session to elaborate concrete
proposals for the further biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination
of items or for their labelling as items that remain on the agenda for consideration
upon notification in accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to resolution
58/316, where appropriate, for the consideration of the General Assembly each year,
taking into account the consent of the sponsoring States;
(d) Requests the Secretariat to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventyeighth session of the General Assembly on the implementation of past decisions
regarding the streamlining of the agenda of the Assembly, including those related to
the role of the General Committee, to further address the issue of the increasingly
overloaded agenda of the Assembly;
35. Reaffirms the need to continue to improve the working methods of the
Main Committees, and in this regard:
(a) Invites each Main Committee to further discuss its working methods, as
appropriate, under the agenda item on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly earlier at the seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions, including the
possibility of holding substantive and interactive dialogues, and in this regard also
invites each Main Committee to submit to the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
seventy-eighth and seventy-ninth sessions a written update, as appropriate, on
progress achieved since the previous update in the efforts aimed at improving the
working methods of the Committees, including which recommendations from the Ad
Hoc Working Group were adopted;
(b) Invites the Chairs of the Main Committees to continue briefing the Ad Hoc
Working Group, on an annual basis, on best practices and lessons learned with a view
to improving working methods and to brief their Committees on practices from other
committees that could be incorporated into their own working methods;
36. Notes the important role of information and communication technologies
in carrying out the work of the United Nations, including the General Assembly,
stresses the importance of being mindful of the proper use of such technologies to
ensure full and equal participation of Member States, and requests the Secretariat to
provide for the consideration of the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly a briefing on the use of information and
23-12551

15/99

A/77/942

communications technologies in the work of the General Assembly, with a view to
ensuring better preparedness in exceptional circumstances;
37. Stresses the necessity of aligning the agendas of the General Assembly and
its Main Committees and the Economic and Social Council to avoid current overlaps
and duplication, consistent with paragraphs 15 and 32 to 44 of resolution 75/325, and
encourages the General Assembly and its Main Committees and the Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary bodies to examine, on a case-by-case basis, all the
resolutions and agenda items that focus on the same area, based on their purpose,
relevance and content;
38. Requests the General Committee, while exercising its functions under rule
40 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and within its mandate, to
discuss gaps, overlaps and duplication and make recommendations annually to the
General Assembly for its consideration;
39. Expresses its appreciation to the President of the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session for strengthening the role of the General Committee with the
holding of informal meetings aimed at promoting close coordination and
collaboration between the appointed co-chairs and co-facilitators of different
intergovernmental processes, and encourages the President of the General Assembly
at future sessions to continue this practice;
40. Acknowledges the President of the General Assembly at its seventyseventh session for convening scientific briefings, and strongly encourages Member
States to consider the application of a science-based approach to inform the
negotiations and decision-making processes of the Assembly;
41. Acknowledges the Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
and seventy-seventh sessions for convening the Advisory Board on Gender Equality
and the General Assembly Platform of Women Leaders, and encourages the
continuation of these initiatives at future sessions of the Assembly;
42. Welcomes the increasing number of women candidates nominated for the
subsidiary organs of the General Assembly in seeking to promote gender parity, and
encourages Member States to continue to do so;
43. Reiterates the need to produce the Journal of the United Nations in all six
official languages in strict compliance with rule 55 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, and in that regard emphasizes the importance of the extension of
the information in the Journal published in the six official languages, reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group, on a yearly
basis, on the progress achieved in this regard, and requests the Secretariat to continue
to explore cost-neutral options to that effect;
44. Invites the main sponsors of draft resolutions that are submitted for the
consideration of delegations to consider the procedural practices applied during
previous sessions with the aim of enhancing the efficiency of the work of the General
Assembly and its Main Committees and the Economic and Social Council and its
subsidiary bodies, and requests the Secretariat to advise main sponsors of draft
resolutions on its guidelines for the preparation, co-sponsorship and submission of
proposals for consideration in the plenary of the General Assembly;
45. Recalls the provisions related to its resolutions, contained in resolutions
60/286 of 8 September 2006 and 66/294 of 17 September 2012, and recommends that,
in order to ensure that they are effectively implemented and have greater political
impact, General Assembly resolutions should be short, in particular as regards the
preambular parts, and should focus more on action-oriented operative paragraphs;

16/99

23-12551

A/77/942

46. Reaffirms its request in paragraph 47 of resolution 75/325 regarding
e-deleGATE modules, and:
(a) Requests the Secretariat to consolidate e-services provided to delegates
under the e-deleGATE platform to provide a single point of entry for such services;
(b) Calls upon its subsidiary organs to use, as much as possible, existing
e-deleGATE modules;
(c) Requests the Secretariat to regularly brief and organize demonstrations for
delegates on the use of the e-deleGATE platform and other online tools used by
delegates;
(d) Also requests the Secretariat to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
current and future functionality of the e-deleGATE platform;
47. Recalls all relevant accessibility-related resolutions of the General
Assembly, including resolutions 76/154 of 16 December 2021, 4 76/273 of 29 June
2022, 5 77/189 of 15 December 2022 6 and 77/240 of 16 December 2022, 7 and
encourages the Secretariat to make the United Nations more accessible for persons
and representatives with disabilities, in line with paragraphs 33 to 37 of resolution
73/341 of 12 September 2019;
48. Requests the Secretariat to establish a centralized point of contact to
manage reasonable accommodation requests, and in this regard to create a webform
hosted on e-deleGATE to allow the registration of reasonable accommodation
requests;
49. Also requests the Secretariat to conduct a full assessment of the digital
accessibility of United Nations documents and to report back at the seventy -eighth
session, including providing an update on the progress with executable options;
50. Further requests the Secretariat to conduct an accessibility assessment,
including on all entrances and exits, and to provide for the consideration of the Ad
Hoc Working Group at the seventy-eighth session a briefing on any specific
considerations impeding accessibility for persons with disabilities and providing
executable options to enhance accessibility;
51. Recognizes the progress made in the archiving of past statements, and
requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure open access to all documents uploaded
to PaperSmart and its replacement, the eStatements module of the Journal of the
United Nations, and the United Nations Digital Library, and to provide materials in
accessible format;
52. Notes the use of digital repositories to strengthen the institutional memory
of the subsidiary organs of the General Assembly, including the implementation status
of their outcomes, reaffirms that working methods of its subsidiary organs are within
their competence and encourages those organs to consider the further development of
such digital repositories and to ensure that they are accessible, and requests the
Secretariat to provide assistance in this regard;
53. Requests the Secretary-General, during the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly, to assess and report on executable options for consideration by the
__________________

Resolution 76/154, entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto: participation”.
5
Resolution 76/273, entitled “Enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities to conferences
and meetings of the United Nations system”.
6
Resolution 77/189, entitled “Inclusive development for and with persons with disabilities”.
7
Resolution 77/240, entitled “Promoting and mainstreaming easy-to-understand communication
for accessibility for persons with disabilities”.
4

23-12551

17/99

A/77/942

General Assembly on making available to all Member States the bulk registration of
participants in official conferences and meetings of the United Nations, without
prejudice to the current available option in this regard;
54. Recalls resolution 76/269 of 20 June 2022, and recognizes the important
contribution that women make to diplomacy, including to the work of the United
Nations, and the importance of accurately reflecting their work in the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly;
55. Requests a briefing by the Secretariat at the seventy-eighth session
assessing the impact of the entry into effect of the earlier start date of the General
Assembly at the seventy-eighth session, and on the expected impact of possibly
moving the start date to late August, and decides to discuss during the seventy -ninth
session options regarding an earlier start date of the regular session;
Selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive heads
56. Reaffirms the important role played by the Secretary-General in the
context of current global challenges and in the implementation of the three pillars of
the United Nations, namely, peace and security, human rights an d sustainable
development;
57. Reaffirms its commitment to continue, in the Ad Hoc Working Group, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter, its thorough consideration
of the issues under the third thematic cluster of the Working Group, on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, including the examination of
innovative ways to improve the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary General and other executive heads in all its aspects, and recalls all relevant
resolutions, reaffirming the applicable procedures set out in the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, in particular rule 141, and acknowledging existing relevant practices
of the Assembly;
58. Encourages future Presidents of the General Assembly to actively
contribute to the implementation of provisions guiding the selection and appointment
of the next Secretary-General, as contained in all relevant resolutions, in particular
resolutions 69/321 of 11 September 2015 and 70/305 of 13 September 2016, and
stresses the need for the selection and appointment process of the Secretary -General
and other executive heads to be guided by the principles of transparency and
inclusiveness;
59. Welcomes the progress achieved in the selection and appointment process
of the Secretary-General in resolutions 69/321, 70/305, 71/323 of 8 September 2017
and 72/313 of 17 September 2018, adopted without a vote, in full compliance with
the General Assembly mandate under Article 97 of the Charter, and reaffirms prev ious
resolutions referring to gender balance and regional rotation in the course of the
identification and appointment of the best candidate for the post of Secretary -General;
60. Recalls the letters dated 15 December 2015 8 and 5 February 2021, 9 and
recommends that the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council continue the practice of circulating joint letters on the selection and
appointment process of the Secretary-General, including outlining notional events,
and consider concluding in sufficient time to allow the Secretary -General-designate
to prepare for their term in office;

__________________
8
9

18/99

A/70/623-S/2015/988.
A/75/780-S/2021/179.
23-12551

A/77/942

61. Encourages Member States to publicize the call for nominations, including
with civil society and other stakeholders with the aim of identi fying potential
candidates;
62. Decides that, in order to be circulated in a joint letter by the President of
the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council pursuant to the
process established in resolution 69/321, nominations of candidates must be
submitted by at least one Member State, in accordance with paragraph 56 of
resolution 75/325;
63. Requests the presentation of a vision statement by all candidates for the
position of Secretary-General, including when seeking a second term, and the holding
of an open informal dialogue with Member States and observers of the General
Assembly on its content, notes with appreciation the engagement o f civil society, and
encourages the continuation of such practices;
64. Invites candidates during future processes to voluntarily disclose any
funding sources they have relating to their candidature;
65. Decides to further assess during the seventy-ninth session of the General
Assembly the selection and appointment process of the Secretary -General, to
consolidate the advances gained in the relevant Assembly resolutions and to explore
possible steps to improve future processes, including the collaboration between the
Assembly and the Security Council, consistent with Article 97 of the Charter;
66. Requests the Secretariat to establish, within existing resources, a dedicated
webpage in all six official languages to serve as a repository of the relevant
information, including vision statements, joint letters and General Assembly
resolutions related to the selection and appointment process of the Secretary-General;
67. Notes that the Secretary-General-designate shall take an oath of office
before the General Assembly during a swearing-in ceremony, as detailed in annex I
to the present resolution;
68. Welcomes again the ongoing efforts and progress already made by the
Secretary-General towards achieving equal and fair distribution in terms of the gender
and geographical balance of the executive heads of the United Nations system and
the Senior Management Group of the Organization, while securing the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, in accordance with Article 101 of
the Charter and its resolutions 46/232 of 2 March 1992, 51/241 of 31 July 1997 and
71/263 of 23 December 2016, commends in particular the fact that gender parity was
achieved in the Senior Management Group, and requests that f urther measures be
taken in this regard;
69. Supports the request of the Secretary-General for Member States to submit
the names and résumés of nationals who may be considered for positions of executive
heads and senior management of the Secretariat, and notes the creation of the Senior
Leadership Talent Pool in that endeavour;
70. Reiterates the need to follow best practices in all senior appointments,
including a public call for candidates, notably women, notes the development of the
Senior Leadership Vacancies portal, and encourages its further development,
including by identifying innovative ways to publicize such calls;
71. Requests the Secretariat to provide a briefing to the Ad Hoc Working
Group at the seventy-ninth session on the Senior Leadership Talent Pool, the Senior
Leadership Vacancies portal and other measures taken to bring greater transparency
and accessibility to the selection and appointment of executive heads;

23-12551

19/99

A/77/942

72. Reaffirms that no post should be considered the exclusive preserve of an y
Member State or group of States and that the Secretary-General should ensure that
this principle is applied faithfully in accordance with the principle of equitable
geographical distribution;
73. Welcomes the fact that gender parity has been maintained in the Senior
Management Group, commends the Secretary-General’s commitment to reach gender
parity and to recruit staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible across the United
Nations Organization, recalls the efforts made in the Secretary-General’s system-wide
strategy on gender parity, and encourages the Secretary-General to increase efforts in
this regard;
74. Notes with concern that gender parity and geographical balance have not
yet been reached in the appointment and election of the executive h eads of the United
Nations system, and encourages the Secretary-General to take further steps to address
these issues;
75. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue the ongoing
efforts to ensure equitable geographical distribution in the Secretariat and to ensure
as wide a geographical distribution of staff as possible in all departments and offices
and at all levels, of geographic posts, including at the Director and higher levels of
the Secretariat;
76. Reiterates the need to ensure equal and fair distribution based on gender
parity and as wide a geographical basis as possible, while also being diverse from a
multilingual perspective, and in this regard recalls its resolutions 46/232, 51/241,
71/263, 72/254 of 24 December 2017 and 77/278 of 18 April 2023, adopted without
a vote, which contain the principles that the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity are the paramount considerations in the recruitment and
performance of international civil servants, and that candidates’ independence should
be considered;
77. Notes that there is yet to be a woman Secretary-General, and strongly
encourages Member States to bear this in mind during the next and in subsequent
selection processes, when nominating candidates for the position of SecretaryGeneral;
78. Requests the Office of Human Resources of the Secretariat to continue the
practice of providing a briefing to the Ad Hoc Working Group during the seventy ninth session of the General Assembly on the gender and geographical balance of the
executive heads of the United Nations system and the Senior Management Group of
the Organization, as well as a breakdown showing those originating from the States
that are permanent members of the Security Council, and to provide a written update
prior to the briefing with details on the process for appointing and electing each of
the executive heads, to facilitate greater understanding of the opportunities for
Member States and respective governing bodies to nominate candidates for those
executive heads that are elected;
Strengthening of the accountability, transparency and institutional memory of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
79. Emphasizes the important role of the President of the General Assembly
within the United Nations Organization, as well as in the strategic guidance and the
overall success of the work of the Assembly;
80. Decides to discuss, at its seventy-ninth session, questions related to the
term assigned to the President of the General Assembly and the financial and
logistical implications thereof;

20/99

23-12551

A/77/942

81. Notes that only four women have been elected as President of the General
Assembly since the foundation of the United Nations, and strongly encourages
Member States to nominate women as candidates for the position of President of the
General Assembly, and encourages Presidents-elect to continue to strive for both
gender and geographical balance within the Office of the President of the General
Assembly;
82. Recalls with appreciation the decision of Member States to fund the
transition period, the trust fund in support of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly, seconding national staff as well as the convening of annual retreats and
transition workshops;
83. Welcomes the induction programme delivered to the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, and calls upon the Secretariat to strengthen the programme
through enhanced content and increased delivery time;
84. Also welcomes the initiatives by Member States to support the
strengthening of the Office of the President of the General Assembly, including
through a transition workshop that includes revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly among its central components;
85. Further welcomes the disclosure of staffing information provided on the
website of the Office of the President of the General Assembly in recent years,
including with regard to the status, level and funding of personnel, and encourages
the continuation of this practice;
86. Acknowledges the heavy reliance of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly on voluntary contributions to deliver on a growing number of
mandates entrusted to it by the Assembly;
87. Recalls that the activities and mandates assigned to the President of the
General Assembly have increased in recent years, also recalls the provisions
regarding the support for the Office of the President of the General Assembly in
previous resolutions, and expresses continued interest in seeking ways to further
support and strengthen the Office in accordance with existing procedures, in
particular rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly;
88. Recognizes the need to consider strengthening the institutional memory of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly in order to ensure the effective
implementation of the mandates entrusted to the President of the General Assembly,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a proposal in this regard, including on
additional positions, funded through the regular budget, and on extending the current
overlap period by an additional month for all general temporary assistance positions
in the Office of the President of the General Assembly beginning in the context of the
revised budget estimate for 2024 and the proposed programme budget for 2025 and
thereafter, in accordance with existing procedures, in particular rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the Assembly;
89. Invites the President of the General Assembly to consider maintaining
existing staff members from the preceding Office of the President of the General
Assembly, and encourages Member States and United Nations system entities to offer
secondments, including for periods that go beyond a single General Assembly session,
with a view to strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly;
90. Encourages the President of the General Assembly to issue
communications in all six official languages, whenever feasible, and to emphasize the
multilingual nature of the United Nations, including the Office of the President of the
General Assembly;
23-12551

21/99

A/77/942

91. Requests the Secretary-General to provide to the President of the General
Assembly adequate administrative, technical, technological, logistical and protocol related support necessary to effectively execute the mandates entrusted to the
President of a principal organ of the United Nations;
92. Requests that the support provided to the President of the General
Assembly include the full provision of services to ensure coverage of all calendar
meetings and up to 45 non-calendar meetings by session without prejudice to the
ability of the President of the General Assembly to convene further meetings as
appropriate, with an intention to review the number of meetings during the seventy ninth session of the General Assembly, and further stresses the nee d to promote
multilingualism, including through coverage and archiving official meetings webcasts
on the United Nations website in all six official languages;
93. Requests the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to preserve
and further strengthen the institutional memory of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly and the General Assembly revitalization process, through utilizing
existing United Nations record-keeping and archiving facilities, including websites,
in particular in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management and the Department of Global
Communications of the Secretariat;
94. Requests the Secretariat to issue, during the seventy-ninth session, within
existing resources, in coordination with the Office of the President of the General
Assembly, a compendium of best practices of past Presidents that could serve to
contribute to strengthening the institutional memory of the Office;
95. Requests outgoing Presidents to continue the practice of circulating a
handover report for the institutional memory of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly in accordance with resolution 69/321 and other relevant mandates
contained in resolutions on the revitalization of the work of the Assembly, and
encourages the President to do so in all six official languages;
96. Welcomes the good practice of the organization by the President of the
General Assembly of informal interactive dialogues of the Member States, with the
engagement of civil society, with the candidate(s) for the position of President of the
General Assembly based on his or her vision statement.
Annex I
Oath of office of the Secretary-General
I, [name], solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience
the functions entrusted to me as Secretary-General of the United Nations, to discharge
these functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only
in view and in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, without seeking or
accepting any instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any
Government or other authority external to the Organization.
Annex II
Voluntary pledge on limiting side events
Recognizing the high number of side events held in the margins of the general
debate of the General Assembly which, prior to the coronavirus disease (C OVID-19)
pandemic, exceeded 400 events in a single session,
Welcoming the acknowledgement by the General Assembly in its resolution
75/325 of 10 September 2021, and in previous resolutions on the revitali zation of the

22/99

23-12551

A/77/942

work of the General Assembly, of the urgent need to preserve the primacy,
significance and established practice of the general debate of the General Assembly,
Stressing the need to limit the number of high-level events held in the margins
of the general debate,
We, the signatories, pledge:
1.
To voluntarily limit the number of side events hosted, sponsored or
co-sponsored by our delegations in the margins of the general debate;
2.
To consult, as much as possible, other delegations when pla nning side
events to identify events on similar topics or issues in an effort to minimize overlap
and avoid duplication;
3.
To provide details, as appropriate, of any side events organized by our
delegations in a timely fashion to the Secretariat for incl usion in the Journal of the
United Nations;
4.
To apply the above commitments to all side events, regardless of format,
which may include virtual events and those organized outside of United Nations
Headquarters.
All Member States and observers of the General Assembly and United Nations
system entities are invited to express their commitment to this voluntary pledge.
Furthermore, the President of the General Assembly is requested to make
available a copy of this voluntary pledge on the website of the Off ice of the President,
including maintaining an updated list of signatories.

23-12551

23/99

A/77/942

Annex
Updated inventory chart of General Assembly resolutions
on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
issued pursuant to resolution 75/325
Explanatory note by the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
(seventy-seventh session)
1.
In accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 75/325, in
which the Assembly decided that the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly should continue its review of the inventory of
Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group submitted to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session (A/75/973) and, as a
result, continue to update the inventory to be attached to the reports of the Ad Hoc
Working Group at the seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions, the Co-Chairs,
assisted by the Secretariat, have prepared the updated inventory chart for
consideration by Member States.
2.
The present inventory chart has been updated to reflect the progress achieved
since the adoption of resolution 75/325.
3.
The Co-Chairs, assisted by the Secretariat, obtained updated information, where
possible, from relevant entities responsible for implementation.
4.
The updated inventory chart retains the following two-part structure, which was
also utilized in the report submitted at the seventy-third session:
(a) The first part contains unimplemented provisions, in order to focus on their
follow-up;
(b) The second part contains implemented provisions, both those that required
one-time action and those to be implemented on an ongoing basis, in order to keep
track of previous achievements and provide the means to compare with and learn from
past experience.
5.
The inventory chart does not have a definite character and may be amended at
any time by Member States through the Ad Hoc Working Group. Furthermore, it is
not intended to, and does not, have any legal effect. It should serve only as a tool to
facilitate discussions on the follow-up to the implementation of the previous related
resolutions.

24/99

23-12551

A/77/942

Part I
Provisions requiring follow-up
Cluster I: role and authority of the General Assembly
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

C. Provisions related to the annual report of the Security Council
(see also part II)
1.

60/286, annex,
para. 7
Also in:
59/313, para. 2 (d);
and 58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 2

Invites the Security Council
to submit periodically, in
accordance with Articles 15
and 24 of the Charter, special
subject-oriented reports to the
General Assembly for its
consideration on issues of
current international concern.

Member States
(Security
Council)

Since the adoption of resolution
60/286 no special subjectoriented reports have been
formally submitted to the
General Assembly. The special
subjects, however, are to some
extent covered by the monthly
assessments by the President of
the Security Council.

Implementing entity

Comments

Member States

Provision to be implemented by
the Member States, bearing in
mind the sovereign right of
Member States to submit
proposals in the context of the
rules of procedure of the
General Assembly.

Cluster II: working methods
Number.

Resolution

Text of provision

F. Provisions related to documentation: resolutions
(see also part II)
2.

60/286, annex,
para. 23
Also in:
58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 5

23-12551

Encourages Member States to
submit draft resolutions in a
more concise, focused and
action-oriented form.

25/99

A/77/942

Part II
Provisions that have been implemented or are being
implemented on an ongoing basis
Cluster I: role and authority of the General Assembly
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

A. General provisions related to the role and authority of the General Assembly
3.

72/313, para. 6
Also in:
75/325, para. 9;
73/341, para. 7;
71/323, para. 6;
70/305, para. 6;
69/321, para. 6;
68/307, para. 6;
66/294, para. 4;
65/315, para. 4;
64/301, para. 4;
60/286, annex,
para. 1; and
59/313,
para. 2 (b)

4.

75/325, para. 8
Also in:
73/341, para. 18;
72/313, para. 10;
71/323, para. 10;
70/305, para. 10;
and 69/321,
para.10

26/99

Reaffirms the role and authority
of the General Assembly,
including on questions relating to
international peace and security,
in accordance with Articles 10 to
14 and 35 of the Charter of the
United Nations, where
appropriate, using the procedures
set forth in rules 7 to 10 of the
rules of procedure of the
Assembly, which enable swift
and urgent action by the
Assembly, bearing in mind that
the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the
maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter.

Member States

Ongoing provision. The
General Assembly has a
number of items on its agenda
that fall under the heading
“Maintenance of international
peace and security”. Since this
provision was first adopted,
the tenth and eleventh
emergency special sessions
have held plenary meetings.

Reiterates its decision to hold
annually an interactive and
comprehensive dialogue
between the Permanent
Missions and the Secretariat as
mandated in resolution 71/323
of 8 September 2017, during the
work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, and strongly emphasizes
the importance of the follow-up
on issues raised during the
dialogue aimed at improving
the work of the Secretariat in its
interaction with Permanent
Missions, including the
circulation of these follow-up
measures to Permanent
Missions.

Ad Hoc Working
Group

On 15 March 2016, the
President of the General
Assembly convened an
informal meeting to consider
ways and means to further
enhance the cooperation
between permanent missions
and the Secretariat, which
included briefings from senior
managers. A summary of the
meeting was transmitted to the
Secretary-General and all
Member States.
At the first thematic meeting of
the Ad Hoc Working Group
during the seventy-first session,
on 15 March 2017, senior
Secretariat officials gave a
briefing to the membership on
the follow-up actions taken by
the Secretariat pursuant to the
informal meeting of the General
Assembly of 15 March 2016.
The meeting included an
interactive question-and-answer
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

segment to provide an
opportunity for dialogue. In
response to the call for a
continuation of the interactive
dialogue, on 15 May 2017, the
Co-Chairs convened a separate
informal meeting dedicated to
the interaction between
permanent missions and the
Secretariat.
Subsequently, the membership
was informed of the
establishment of a focal point
in the Office of the UnderSecretary-General for
Management as the contact
person for Member States to
express their concerns and/or
address any other queries they
might have.
During the seventy-second,
seventy-third, seventy-fifth,
seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions, the Working
Group convened interactive
dialogues between permanent
missions and the Secretariat.
During the seventy-fourth
session, the interactive dialogue
was cancelled because of the
impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and given the fact that periodic
briefings on business continuity
were provided by the Secretariat
in other formats.
5.

75/325, para. 27
Also in:
74/303, para. 4

Notes the important role of
information and
communications technologies in
carrying out the work of the
United Nations, including the
General Assembly, on an
exceptional basis, during the
COVID-19 pandemic, and:

Secretariat

Briefings were provided
during the seventy-fifth,
seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions as part of the
interactive dialogue between
the permanent missions and
the Secretariat.

(a) Recognizes the use of
information and communications
technologies in holding
interactive inclusive thematic
debates during the COVID-19
pandemic, and encourages the
23-12551

27/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Ad Hoc Working
Group

Ongoing provision.

Invites Member States to
Ad Hoc Working
submit, through the Co-Chairs
Group
of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
and prior to the holding of the
interactive and comprehensive
dialogue, specific issues on
which action by the Secretariat
might be needed, and requests
the Secretariat to provide
comprehensive answers within a
reasonable amount of time on
the possible actions, and
impediments, if any, to solve the
issues raised.

Ongoing provision.

Welcomes, in this regard, the
active participation by the
Secretariat during the seventysecond session, and in particular
notes with appreciation the
establishment of a “one stop
shop” as a single entry point for
requesting meetings services,
while encouraging the Secretariat
to make similar arrangements for
other services provided.

In a note verbale dated
19 March 2018 addressed to
all the permanent missions,
the Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management announced the
official launch of gMeets, also
known as the “one-stop shop”
portal.

President of the General
Assembly to be mindful of the
proper use of such technologies
to ensure full and equal
participation of Member States
when organizing such events;
(b) Requests the Secretariat to
brief the Ad Hoc Working
Group at the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly
on lessons learned from the
COVID-19 pandemic, including
the use of information and
communications technologies,
with a view to ensuring better
preparedness in exceptional
circumstances.
6.

72/313, para. 11
Also in:
71/323, para. 11

7.

72/313, para. 12
Also in:
71/323, para. 12

8.

72/313, para. 13
Also in:
71/323, para. 13

28/99

Reiterates its decision to hold
thematic dialogues periodically
during the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group and to review
this arrangement at the seventythird session of the General
Assembly.

Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

The Ad Hoc Working Group is
given a briefing as part of an

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

overall update regarding the
e- services provided to
delegations, usually as part of
the interactive dialogue with
the permanent missions.
B. Provisions related to the election of the President of the General Assembly and members of the
General Committee
9.

71/323, para. 43
Also in:
70/305, para. 30;
69/321, para. 29;
68/307, para. 22;
and 67/297,
para. 22

10.

72/313, para. 50
Also in:
71/323, para. 44

11.

70/305, para. 31
Also in:
69/321, para. 30

23-12551

Requests the Ad Hoc Working
Group to prepare long-term
arrangements concerning the
election of the Chairs and
Rapporteurs of the Main
Committees of the General
Assembly with the aim of
establishing a predictable,
transparent and fair mechanism,
in consultation with regional
groups, and that it submit them
to the Assembly no later than at
the seventy-second session, and
in this regard invites Member
States to present proposals and
begin at an early stage to devote
attention to the matter of
concluding a future
arrangement, which would
come into effect at the seventyfourth session of the Assembly,
with the annex to resolution
68/307 of 10 September 2014
containing the guidelines on the
election of the Chairs and
Rapporteurs of the Main
Committees to be considered in
this context.

Ad Hoc Working
Group, regional
groups

At its seventy-second session,
on the recommendation of the
Ad Hoc Working Group, the
General Assembly decided to
establish the pattern for the
rotation of the Chairs of the
Main Committees for the
seventy-fourth to eighty-third
sessions (resolution 72/313,
para. 48), as contained in the
annex to the resolution.

Continues to encourage
Member States to seek gender
balance in the distribution of
the Chairs and bureau members
of the Main Committees as well
as the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly, where
applicable.

Member States

Ongoing provision.

Encourages Member States to
seek gender balance in the
distribution of Chairs of the
Main Committees and in the
position of the President of the
General Assembly.

Member States

Ongoing provision.

29/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

12.

72/313, para. 48

Decides to establish the pattern General
for the rotation of the Chairs of Assembly,
the Main Committees for the
regional groups
forthcoming 10 sessions of the
General Assembly, namely from
the seventy-fourth to the eightythird session, as contained in
the annex to the present
resolution.

Ongoing provision to be
implemented from the
seventy-fourth to the eightythird session.

13.

72/313, para. 49

Also decides to prepare
arrangements concerning the
rotation of the Chairs of the
Main Committees for the
following sessions no later than
at its eighty-second session.

Ad Hoc Working
Group, regional
groups

To be implemented no later
than the eighty-second session
of the General Assembly.

14.

68/307, para. 21

Decides to reiterate the interim
arrangement adopted in General
Assembly decision 68/505 of
1 October 2013 recommending
the pattern for the rotation of
the Chairs of the Main
Committees for the forthcoming
five sessions, namely from the
sixty-ninth to seventy-third
sessions, as well as the
guidelines on the election of the
Chairs and Rapporteurs of the
Main Committees contained in
the annex to the present
resolution.

General
Assembly,
regional groups

Implemented. In its decision
68/505 of 1 October 2013, the
General Assembly, on the
proposal of its President,
decided to approve an interim
arrangement concerning the
rotation of the Chairs of the
Main Committees for the
forthcoming five sessions of
the Assembly. Concerning the
Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), the
General Assembly furthermore
adopted decision 69/524 of
5 December 2014, entitled
“Rotation of the post of
Rapporteur of the Special
Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth
Committee) for the seventieth
to seventy-third sessions of
the General Assembly”.

30/99

Implementing entity

Comments

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

15.

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 9

In accordance with paragraph 2
(a) and (c) of resolution 56/509,
the General Assembly elects the
President of the Assembly, the
Vice-Presidents of the
Assembly, and the Chairs of the
Main Committees at least three
months before the opening of
the session in which they will
serve. In order to foster better
advance planning and
preparation of the work of the
Main Committees, the full
Bureaux of the Main
Committees shall similarly be
elected three months in advance
of the next session.

Member States

Ongoing provision. Provision
implemented as from the
fifty-eighth session. This
provision as well as rules 30
and 99 (a) apply to the
election of the President of
the General Assembly and the
Vice-Presidents.

C. Provisions related to the annual report of the Security Council
(see also part I)
16.

72/313, para. 17
Also in:
69/321, para. 13;
68/307, para. 11;
67/297, para. 10;
66/294, para. 11;
65/315, para. 10;
64/301, para. 9;
60/286, annex,
para. 4; and
58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 3

Commends improvements in
the quality of the annual report
of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, including as
presented in the note by the
President of the Security
Council, and welcomes the
willingness of the Council to
continue to consider other
suggestions concerning
improvements to the annual
report.

Security Council

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. See the notes
by the President of the
Security Council contained in
documents S/2015/944 and
S/2017/507.
Further to the measures
contained in the notes by the
President of the Security
Council of 26 July 2010
(S/2010/507) and 5 June 2012
(S/2012/402), presidents may
consider organizing interactive
informal exchanges of views
with the wider membership
prior to the adoption of the
report.
In the 1990s the report was
changed to reflect changes in
the working methods of the
Security Council. Since 2000,
further changes have been
introduced; inter alia, the
introductory part has been
added. Since then, the Council
has focused more on the
introduction to the report. In
2006, information on special
political missions was added
to the report.

23-12551

31/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

17.

60/286, annex,
para. 5

In carrying out the assessment
of the debate on the annual
report of the Security Council
called for in paragraph 12 of the
annex to resolution 51/241, the
President shall inform the
General Assembly of his
decision regarding the need for
further consideration of the
report of the Council, including
in respect of the convening of
informal consultations, on the
need for, and content of, any
action by the Assembly based
on the debate, as well as on any
matters to be brought to the
attention of the Council.

President of the
General Assembly

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

Invites the Security Council to
update the General Assembly
on a regular basis on the steps it
has taken or is contemplating
with respect to improving its
reporting to the Assembly.

Member States,
Security Council

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. Information on
the steps taken by the Security
Council is provided during the
meetings with the President of
the General Assembly, as well
as included in the monthly
assessments by the Presidents
of the Security Council. See
also the note by the President
of the Security Council
(S/2015/944).

To consider the annual reports
as well as special reports of the
Security Council, in accordance
with Article 15, paragraph 1,
and Article 24, paragraph 3, of
the Charter, through substantive
and interactive debates.

General Assembly

See above.

Also in:
58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 4;
and 51/241,
annex, para. 12

18.

60/286, annex,
para. 6
Also in:
59/313,
para. 2(e)

19.

59/313,
para. 2 (c)
Also in:
59/313,
para. 2 (f)

32/99

The President of the General
Assembly provides opening
remarks and a closing
assessment of the debate. At
the sixty-ninth session, the
President of the General
Assembly, after the debate,
transmitted to Member States
a list of proposals concerning
the analytical nature, the
presentation of the report and
practices, expressed during
the debate.
See also the note by the
President of the Security
Council (S/2015/944), which,
inter alia, stated that the
report to be presented to the
General Assembly at its
seventy-first session would
cover the period from
1 August 2015 to
31 December 2016.
Thereafter, the period of
coverage for all future reports
would be from 1 January to
31 December.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

20.

51/241, annex,
para. 11

The agenda item entitled “Report General Assembly
of the Security Council” shall
continue to be considered in
plenary meetings of the General
Assembly.

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

21.

51/241, annex,
para. 14

The monthly forecast of the
programme of work of the
Security Council shall be
circulated for the information of
members of the General
Assembly.

Security Council

Implemented on an ongoing
basis. The programme of
work is uploaded on the
website of the Security
Council.

22.

51/241, annex,
para. 13

The agenda item shall not be
closed but shall remain open to
enable further discussion as
necessary during the year,
bearing in mind, inter alia, the
submission of additional reports
as and when necessary.

Member States
(General
Assembly)

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

Requests the President of the
General Assembly to continue
scheduling the plenary meetings
of the Assembly on the report
of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization and
on the report of the Security
Council in close coordination
with the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security
Council, so that discussions of
these important reports are not
conducted in a perfunctory
manner.

President of the
General
Assembly,
President of the
Security Council

See S/2019/997. More
delegations make statements
now compared with the two
delegations that spoke at the
session immediately before
the adoption of resolution
73/341 (see A/72/PV.114).

23.

75/325, para. 22
Also in:
73/341, para. 17

Implementing entity

Comments

Since the sixty-second session,
the agenda item entitled
“Report of the Security
Council” has remained open at
every session.

D. Provisions related to the annual report of the Economic and Social Council
24.

60/286, annex,
para. 8
Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 15

23-12551

Invites the Economic and Social
Council to continue to prepare
its report to the General
Assembly in accordance with
Assembly resolution 50/227,
striving to make it more concise
and action-oriented by
highlighting the critical areas
requiring action by the
Assembly and, as appropriate,
by making specific
recommendations for
consideration by the Member
States.

Member States
(Economic and
Social Council)

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

33/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

E. Provisions related to the annual report of the International Court of Justice
25.

51/241, annex,
para. 16

The report of the International
Court of Justice shall continue
to be considered in plenary
meetings of the General
Assembly. The Assembly shall
continue to support the role of
the International Court of
Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the Organization, in
accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. The
Assembly shall also continue to
encourage the progressive
development and codification
of international law.

General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. Since the fiftysecond session, the report has
continued to be considered in
plenary meetings of the
General Assembly.

Requests the Secretariat to
continue updating regularly and
equally the multilingual web
page devoted to the
revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly in all six
official languages and its
substantive content within
existing resources in a costeffective manner, including
through the use of existing
capabilities such as automation
of translation, while ensuring
the accuracy of translation.

Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management,
Department of
Global
Communications

Implemented. The
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management periodically
provides updated content, in
all six official languages, to
the Department of Global
Communications for
uploading to the United
Nations website.

Requests the Department of
Global Communications of the
Secretariat to continue to take
appropriate measures to further
enhance public awareness of the
role and activities of the
Assembly throughout its
session in all six official
languages, including on as
many platforms as possible,
requests the Secretary-General
and the President of the General
Assembly to continue to make
efforts to ensure that
multilingualism is not
undermined by the measures
taken in response to the
liquidity situation and the
COVID-19 pandemic, and

Secretariat,
Department of
Global
Communications

The Department of Global
Communications provides
extensive coverage of the
work of the General
Assembly, its Main
Committees and all major
subsidiary bodies through
print, online, audio, photo and
video news media and social
media platforms, in the six
official languages, as well as
Hindi, Kiswahili and
Portuguese.

F. Provisions related to public relations activities
26.

75/325, para. 3
Also in:
74/303, para. 2;
73/341, para. 3;
72/313, para. 2;
71/323, para. 2;
70/305, para. 2;
69/321, para. 2;
68/307, para. 2;
and 67/297,
para. 16

27.

75/325, para. 24
Also in:
73/341, para. 20;
72/313, para. 18;
71/323, para. 18;
70/305, para. 14;
69/321, para. 14;
and 68/307,
para. 12

34/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Secretariat,
Department of
Global
Communications

The Department of Global
Communications provides
comprehensive press releases,
in English and French, of all
meetings of the General
Assembly, its Main
Committees and its subsidiary
bodies, which are also
included in the daily media
alert, and statements made by
Member States are made
available to the press.

requests the Secretariat to
continue to explore cost-neutral
options to that effect.
28.

67/297, para. 11
Also in:
66/294, para. 22;
65/315, para. 18;
64/301, para. 20;
63/309, para. 8;
60/286, annex,
para. 14; and
58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 8

Encourages the Secretariat,
including the Department of
Public Information, to continue
its efforts to raise the visibility
of the General Assembly and to
enhance world public and
media awareness of its work,
and in this regard recalls
paragraph 10 of its resolution
67/124 B of 18 December 2012,
in which it noted the efforts of
the Department to continue to
publicize the work and
decisions of the General
Assembly and requested the
Department to continue to
enhance its working
relationship with the Office of
the President of the General
Assembly.

The annual press kit on the
incoming President of the
General Assembly is
produced in digital format in
the six official languages, as
well as several non-official
languages.
The Department of Global
Communications provides
gavel-to-gavel live feeds to
broadcasters worldwide of the
meetings of the General
Assembly, as well as related
press conferences. This
coverage is made available on
the United Nations webcast
platform.
Through its weekly briefing
programme for the
non- governmental
community, the Department
spotlights issues that are
before the General Assembly.
The global network of United
Nations Information Centres
provides communications
support to the President of the
General Assembly during
his/her official missions to the
countries in which they
operate. The centres also
carry out public information
activities to enhance
awareness of the General
Assembly’s work.

23-12551

35/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

A staff member at the
Professional level is regularly
seconded by the Department
to provide communications
support for the President of
the General Assembly.
In addition, the Committee on
Information continues to
consider ways and means to
enhance the visibility of the
work of the General
Assembly, including through
the recommendations of the
Ad Hoc Working Group.
29.

66/294, para. 14
Also in:
60/286, annex,
para. 15

30.

60/286, annex,
para. 16

Urges the Secretariat to continue Secretariat
its efforts to raise the visibility of
the General Assembly, reaffirms
paragraph 15 of resolution
60/286, and decides that the
announcements about the work
of the principal organs of the
United Nations should appear in
the Journal of the United
Nations in the order stipulated in
Article 7 of the Charter.

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

Encourages the Presidents of
the General Assembly to
increase their public visibility,
including through enhanced
contacts with representatives of
the media and civil society, thus
promoting the activities of the
Assembly, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue
the practice of providing to the
Office of the President of the
Assembly a Spokesperson for
the President of the Assembly
and an assistant to the
Spokesperson.

Ongoing provision. Since the
sixtieth session, for example,
the Presidents of the General
Assembly have periodically
given a briefing to
representatives of civil
society on the programme of
work of the Assembly at its
current session.

President of the
General Assembly,
Secretary-General

Presidents of the General
Assembly have also regularly
convened press conferences
for the purpose of giving a
briefing to the media.
A staff member at the
Professional level is regularly
seconded by the Department
of Global Communications to
serve as the Spokesperson for
the President of the General
Assembly, in addition to
providing support to the
President and his/her Office
by other means.

36/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

G. Provisions related to the General Assembly cooperation with civil society and others
31.

71/323, para. 14
Also in:
70/305, para. 11;
69/321, para. 11;
68/307, para. 9;
and 60/286,
annex, para. 12

32.

60/286, annex,
para. 13

Reaffirms the importance and
benefit of continuing interaction
between the General Assembly
and international or regional
forums and organizations
dealing with global matters of
concern to the international
community, as well as with civil
society, where appropriate, and
encourages the exploration of
appropriate actions or
measures, while fully
respecting the
intergovernmental nature of the
Assembly, in conformity with
its relevant rules of procedure.

General Assembly

Ongoing provision. For
example, informal interactive
hearings with civil society take
place within the framework of
the preparations for high-level
meetings of the General
Assembly, in accordance with
the respectively applicable
resolutions on modalities. The
General Assembly also
periodically hears briefings by
the current Chair of the Group
of 20 on its recent activities.

Encourages, where appropriate,
continued cooperation between
the General Assembly and
national and regional
parliaments, particularly
through the Inter-Parliamentary
Union.

General Assembly

Provision has been
implemented on an ongoing
basis. Numerous meetings
have been held between the
President of the General
Assembly and visiting
parliamentarians. The InterParliamentary Union also
participates as an observer in
the General Assembly.

Ad Hoc Working
Group

At its seventy-second session,
the Ad Hoc Working Group
decided to continue to
consider, within the Working
Group, the potential concept
and scope of guidelines on
how to conduct the election
campaigns by Member States,

Since the sixtieth session, the
Presidents of the General
Assembly have periodically
given briefings to
representatives of civil society
on the programme of work of
the Assembly. On 2 December
2022 and 20 April and 27 June
2023, the President of the
seventy-seventh session
organized town hall meetings
with civil society
organizations, in coordination
with the Civil Society Unit of
the Department of Global
Communications.

H. Provisions related to the organization of work
33.

72/313, para. 51
Also in:
71/323, para. 45

23-12551

Decides to continue to consider,
within the Ad Hoc Working
Group, the potential concept
and scope of guidelines on how
to conduct the election
campaigns by Member States,
with a view to improving the

37/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

standards of transparency and
equity.

34.

55/285, annex,
para. 19
Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 28

Comments

with a view to improving the
standards of transparency and
equity. Consideration
continued during the seventythird session.

In order to implement fully
paragraph 28 of the annex to
resolution 51/241, the President
of the General Assembly is
encouraged to make greater use
of facilitators, where appropriate.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

35.

51/241, annex,
para. 27

The General Assembly is the
highest political body with
universal membership of the
Organization. Consideration of
agenda items directly in plenary
meetings shall be reserved for
urgent issues or issues of major
political importance, bearing in
mind paragraphs 1 and 2 of
annex I to General Assembly
resolution 48/264.

General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

36.

51/241, annex,
para. 28

The President of the General
Assembly, with a view to
ensuring that there is a
systematic and transparent
process for participation by
delegations in discussions on
action to be taken on items
considered directly in plenary
meetings, shall assess the
debate in plenary meetings.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. Usually, the
President of the General
Assembly provides an
assessment of the debates in
plenary meetings whenever
items considered are of
particular importance or
special interest to Member
States.

37.

51/241, annex,
para. 29

The Secretariat shall ensure, in
consultation with the President,
that priority is accorded to the
availability of a meeting room
and services to facilitate these
consultations.

Secretary-General

Provision is being
implemented on an ongoing
basis by the Secretariat.

38.

72/313, para. 39

Calls upon all officers chairing
or facilitating
intergovernmental processes to
seek to conduct informal
negotiations during regular
working hours, in order to
allow for the active and
constructive participation of all
Permanent Missions in the work
of the United Nations.

Officers chairing
or facilitating
intergovernmental
processes

Ongoing provision.

38/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Recognizes the value of holding
interactive inclusive thematic
debates on current issues of
critical importance to the
international community, calls
for the rationalizing of such
debates to ensure high-level
attendance, calls upon the
President of the General
Assembly to be mindful of the
regular agenda of the Assembly
when organizing such debates,
and urges Member States to be
mindful of existing mandates
when considering new
mandates for meetings of the
Assembly and, in this regard, to
refrain from mandating
recurring high-level and
commemorative meetings
where possible.

President of the
General
Assembly,
Member States

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The Presidents
of the General Assembly
regularly make a preliminary
announcement of their
intention to convene
interactive thematic debates,
including in their acceptance
speech when elected.
Subsequently, they inform
Member States by letter of the
format and agenda of
forthcoming thematic debates
whose outcomes are posted on
the website of the President of
the Assembly. For a list of
thematic debates convened
during each session, please
refer to the websites of the
Presidents of the General
Assembly.

Requests the President of the
General Assembly to limit highlevel meetings to current issues
of critical importance to the
international community, with
the interest of the wider
membership in mind and with a
focus on the most vulnerable,
while encouraging the
allocation of events of a strictly
sectoral or thematic nature to
the six Main Committees.

President of the
General Assembly

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

Requests the President of the
General Assembly, in order to
enhance transparency, to
continue to attach the list of
speakers at high-level thematic
debates organized by the
President to the summary of
those events.

President of the
General Assembly

Ongoing provision.

I. Provisions related to interactive/thematic debates
39.

75/325, para. 20
Also in:
72/313, para. 14;
71/323, para. 15;
70/305, para. 12;
69/321, para. 12;
68/307, para. 10;
67/297, para. 7;
66/294, para. 7;
65/315, para. 6;
64/301, para. 5;
60/286, annex,
para. 3; 59/313,
paras. 3 (a) and
12; and 58/126,
annex, sect. B,
para. 3

40.

72/313, para. 16
Also in:
71/323, para. 16

41.

72/313, para. 45
Also in:
71/323, para. 39

23-12551

39/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

J. Provisions related to the cooperation between the main organs
42.

72/313, para. 8
Also in:
71/323, para. 8;
70/305, para. 8;
69/321, para. 8;
68/307, para. 8;
66/294, para. 10;
65/315, para. 9;
64/301, paras. 7
and 8; 60/286,
annex, para. 2;
58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 6;
55/285, annex,
para. 21; and
51/241, annex,
para. 43

43.

58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 5

Reaffirms that the relationship
between the principal organs of
the United Nations is mutually
reinforcing and complementary,
in accordance with and with full
respect for their respective
functions, authority, powers and
competencies as enshrined in
the Charter, and in this regard
stresses the importance of
further ensuring increased
cooperation, coordination and
the exchange of information
among the Presidents of the
principal organs and also with
the Secretariat, in particular the
Secretary-General.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The President
of the General Assembly
meets with the President of
the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the
President of the Economic
and Social Council on a
regular basis.

The President of the General
Assembly should continue to be
briefed regularly by the
President of the Security
Council on the work of the
Council. The President of the
Assembly may wish to inform
Member States about the
substantive issues raised during
these meetings.

President of the
Security Council,
President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The President
of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security
Council are meeting at
monthly intervals.

K. Provisions related to the implementation and follow-up of resolutions
44.

75/325, para. 6
Also in:
74/303, para. 5;
73/341, para. 5;
72/313, para. 4;
71/323, para. 4;
70/305, para. 4;
69/321, para. 4;
68/307, para. 4;
67/297, para. 3;
66/294, para. 3;
65/315, para. 3;
and 64/301,
para. 3

40/99

Further decides that the Ad Hoc
Working Group shall continue
its review of the inventory of
General Assembly resolutions
on revitalization annexed to the
report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group submitted at the seventyfifth session (A/75/973) and, as
a result, continue to update the
inventory to be attached to the
reports to be submitted at the
seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions of the
Assembly, including the
separate indication of relevant
provisions that were not
implemented, with reasons
therefor.

General Assembly
(Ad Hoc Working
Group)

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

45.

75/325, para. 7

Requests the Secretary-General
to submit an update on the
provisions of the General
Assembly resolutions on
revitalization addressed to the
Secretariat for implementation
that have not been
implemented, with an
indication of the constraints and
reasons behind any lack of
implementation, for further
consideration by the Ad Hoc
Working Group at the seventysixth and seventy-seventh
sessions.

Secretary-General

An update was provided to
the Working Group at its
seventy-seventh session.

Requests the Secretary-General,
under relevant agenda items, to
bring to the attention of
Member States constraints that
have prevented the SecretaryGeneral from implementing
those provisions of General
Assembly resolutions that are
addressed to the Secretariat.

Secretary-General

Ongoing provision. The
reports of the SecretaryGeneral issued pursuant to
intergovernmental mandates
reflect on all aspects of their
implementation.

Also in:
73/341, para. 6;
72/313, para. 5;
71/323, para. 5;
70/305, para. 5;
69/321, para. 5;
68/307, para. 5;
67/297, para. 3;
66/294, para. 3;
65/315, para. 3;
and 64/301,
para. 3
46.

72/313, para. 19
Also in:
71/323, para. 19;
70/305, para. 15;
and 69/321,
para. 15

47.

59/313, para. 1

Stresses the need to
demonstrate political will to
ensure the effective
implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly.

Member States

Ongoing provision. Provision
does not contain a request for
specific action.

48.

58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 9

Member States and the
Secretariat should consider
initiatives that might be taken
for better monitoring of the
follow-up of resolutions of the
General Assembly, such as the
provision of timely inputs for
reports of the Secretary-General
and giving effect to proposals
that would advance the followup of major United Nations
conferences and summits.

Member States,
Secretary-General

Communications from the
Secretary-General have been
sent to Member States on an
ongoing basis to ask for
pertinent information.

23-12551

41/99

A/77/942

Cluster II: working methods
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

A. General provisions related to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
49.

72/313, para. 47

Requests the Secretary-General
to submit to the General
Assembly at its seventy-third
session a report on the possible
alternative dates for the
beginning of the regular session
of the Assembly and the
financial and logistical
implications thereof, as well as
on potential benefits and
shortcomings of various
options, based on the premise
that any such change will not
have an effect on the beginning
of the general debate in
September.

Secretary-General

The report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Opening of
the regular sessions of the
General Assembly”
(A/73/723) was issued before
the first meeting of the
Working Group. The General
Assembly took note of the
report in its resolution 73/341
(para. 38).

50.

75/325, paras. 46
and 48

Reiterates the need to produce
the Journal of the United
Nations in all six official
languages in strict compliance
with rule 55 of the rules of
procedure of the General
Assembly, and in that regard
emphasizes the importance of
the extension of the information
in the Journal published in the
six official languages, reiterates
its request to the SecretaryGeneral to brief the Ad Hoc
Working Group, on a yearly
basis, on the progress achieved
in this regard, and requests the
Secretariat to continue to
explore cost-neutral options to
that effect.

Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

During the seventy-second
session, Member States
reviewed the revised format,
production and editing of the
Journal of the United Nations
as part of the deliberations of
the Working Group.

Also in:
73/341, para.31;
72/313, paras. 61
and 62; and
71/323, paras. 54
and 55

Recognizes the need to have
open access to the archive of
past statements, and requests the
Secretariat to ensure open
access, by the end of the
seventy-sixth session, to all
documents uploaded to
PaperSmart and, further, to
ensure its replacement with the
eStatements module of the
Journal of the United Nations.

42/99

By resolution 71/323, the
General Assembly decided
that during the calendar year
2018, official meetings of the
day, forthcoming official
meetings and summaries of
official meetings shall be
published in the Journal in all
six official languages; and all
other meetings and
information shall be published
in the languages currently
used from January to August.
By resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly
emphasized the importance of
the extension of the
information in the Journal of
the United Nations published
in the six official languages,
reiterated its request to the
Secretary-General to give a
briefing to the Ad Hoc
Working Group, on a yearly
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

basis, on the progress
achieved in this regard, and
requested the Secretariat to
continue to explore costneutral options to that effect.
Briefings were provided as
part of the interactive dialogue
between the permanent
missions and the Secretariat.
51.

72/313, para. 55

Takes note of the introduction
of real-time updates with
respect to the cancellation and
postponement of meetings, and
requests the continuation of this
practice with further
improvements, in particular
with the introduction of the
possibility of subscribing to
relevant agenda items with
automatic notifications to
subscribers on their status.

Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Ongoing provision. A briefing
was provided to the Ad Hoc
Working Group on 9 April
2019 (see the letter from the
President of the General
Assembly dated 18 April
2019).

52.

60/286, annex,
para. 24

Requests the Secretary-General
to issue the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly in a
consolidated version in all
official languages, in print and
online.

Secretary-General

The consolidated version of
the rules of procedure
(A/520/Rev.20) is available
both in print and online. As of
the nineteenth revision, the
digital version has been
enhanced with intra-document
hyperlinks to facilitate
navigating from one reference
to a rule to another.

Also in:
75/325, para. 50;
and 59/313,
para. 14

53.

60/286, annex,
para. 24

Requests the Office of Legal
Affairs of the Secretariat to
make precedents and past
practice available in the public
domain with respect to rules
and practices of the
intergovernmental bodies of the
Organization.

Secretary-General,
Office of Legal
Affairs

Implemented.

54.

72/313, paras. 58
and 59

Takes note with appreciation of
the changes to the format,
production and editing of the
Journal of the United Nations,
and requests the Secretariat to
continue the improvement of
the Journal in accordance with
requirements provided in
paragraph 51 of resolution
71/323 and to brief the Ad Hoc

Secretariat,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

On 28 March 2017, the
Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and
Conference Management
presented proposals in
accordance with resolution
70/305 (see the letter from the
President of the General
Assembly dated 3 April 2017).

Also in:
71/323, paras. 51
and 52; 70/305,
para. 33; and
68/307, para. 24

23-12551

43/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Working Group at the seventythird session on the outcomes
of that improvement.

Comments

Subsequently, during the
seventy-first session, the
Co-Chairs established a
Group of Friends of the
Journal, which convened two
meetings. Consultations
continued during the
negotiation of the draft
resolution of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, the outcome
of which is reflected in
paragraphs 51 to 55 of
resolution 71/323.

Affirms the principle that the
Journal shall provide an
overview of all meetings taking
place at the United Nations, and
requests that meetings be listed
under the established categories
in contiguous order and that all
meetings organized by States be
included, provided that
information has been submitted
to the Journal unit in due time,
and clarifies that the existence
of web pages for sessions of
bodies should not preclude the
announcement of side events.

As from 1 January 2018, the
Journal is published, both in
print and in a streamlined
digital version, in accordance
with paragraph 51 of
resolution 71/323.
At the seventy-second
session, the General Assembly
took note of the possibility for
Member States to publish
their side events under a
dedicated section of the
digital version of the Journal
of the United Nations
(resolution 72/313, para. 41).

55.

72/313, para. 60
Also in:
71/323, para. 53

56.

72/313, para. 34
Also in:
71/323, para. 32

44/99

Calls upon all relevant
intergovernmental bodies to
continue to review the need for
and content of the Journal
summaries of their meetings
and other announcements, and
to take the steps necessary with
a view to ensuring a more
streamlined format for the
Journal of the United Nations.

Main Committees,
General Assembly
subsidiary bodies,
Economic and
Social Council,
Security Council

Ongoing provision.

Also recalls rule 72 of the rules
of procedure of the General
Assembly, and calls for strict
adherence by each speaker to
the time limits in the Assembly,
where applicable, bearing in
mind that all speakers shall get
the same opportunity to deliver
their statements within the
allocated time limit, as set out
in the rules of procedure of the
Assembly.

Member States

Ongoing provision.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

57.

72/313, para. 35

Reiterates its invitation to the
Chairs of meetings of the
General Assembly and United
Nations conferences, especially
when there is very limited time
available for debate, to consider
recommending the “all protocol
observed” principle, whereby
participants are encouraged to
refrain from listing standard
protocol expressions during
their statements.

President of the
General
Assembly,
presiding officers,
Member States

Ongoing provision.

Decides to amend rule 92 of the
rules of procedure of the
General Assembly by deleting
its second sentence.

Secretary-General

Implemented (see
A/520/Rev.19).

Also in:
71/323, para. 33

58.

71/323, para. 46

B. Provisions related to the organization of meetings: plenary, General Committee, Main Committees
59.

72/313, para. 53

Notes the practice implemented
during the secret vote-counting
procedure, whereby no use of
mobile phones or other
electronic communication
devices is permitted in the room
where counting is being
conducted, thus ensuring the
confidentiality of elections and
the integrity of secret ballots,
and requests the continuation of
this practice.

Secretariat,
Member States
(tellers)

Ongoing provision.

60.

71/323, para. 47

Further decides that the names
of candidates for election by the
General Assembly or by the
Main Committees shall be
communicated to the
Secretariat, where possible, at
least 48 hours prior to an
election unless otherwise
required by specific rules
governing the elections
concerned, and that those
names shall be printed on the
ballot papers, while additional
space shall be provided on the
ballot paper for inscribing other
names, where applicable.

Member States,
Secretariat

Implemented. In its resolution
72/313, the General Assembly
welcomed the efficient
implementation of paragraphs
47 and 48 of resolution
71/323 relating to the conduct
of elections in the General
Assembly and the Main
Committees (para. 52).

23-12551

45/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

61.

71/323, para. 48

Decides that on the day of
election in the General
Assembly or in the Main
Committees the campaign
materials distributed in the
General Assembly Hall or in the
Committee meeting room shall
be limited to a single page of
information regarding the
candidates, with a view to
preserving the decorum of the
Assembly.

Member States

Ongoing provision. In its
resolution 72/313, the General
Assembly welcomed the
efficient implementation of
paragraphs 47 and 48 of
resolution 71/323 relating to
the conduct of elections in the
General Assembly and the
Main Committees (para. 52).

62.

71/323, para. 42

Also decides that, with due
consideration given to
accessibility issues, in all
plenary meetings of the General
Assembly, including plenary
meetings of high-level events,
the seating arrangement of
Member States shall follow
English alphabetical order,
beginning with the name of the
country selected by lot each
year and avoiding distinctions
between Member States as to
the rank of the head of
delegation.

President of the
General
Assembly,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

33. Decides that all meetings
of the General Assembly and its
subsidiary organs should make
provisions for accessible
seating for representatives with
disabilities through the
following process:

Secretariat,
Member States
(General
Assembly and
other principal
organs of the
United Nations
and their
subsidiary organs)

Ongoing provision. Language
in the Journal of the United
Nations was updated during
the seventy-sixth session.

Also in:
70/305, para. 29

63.

73/341, paras. 33
and 34 and 36
and 37
Also in:
75/325, para. 49

(a) Upon a request by a
delegation for accessible seating,
the seating order in a given
meeting room is changed in such
a way as to allow the requesting
delegation to move to the closest
accessible seat from the one it
occupies in accordance with the
order established for each
session of the Assembly, and the
seating order for the rest of the
delegations is moved by one
seat;

In accordance with paragraph
49 of resolution 75/325, the
Secretariat will give a briefing
to the Ad Hoc Working Group
during the seventy-sixth
session of the General
Assembly on the progress
reached so far and on ways to
improve the accessibility of
the United Nations
Headquarters premises for
persons with disabilities.

(b) Should there be more than
one request for accessible
seating, the delegations
46/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

President of the
General Assembly,
Main Committee
Chairs, Member
States, SecretaryGeneral

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

requesting such seats will move
to the accessible seats which are
closest to their respective seats,
which they occupy in accordance
with the order established for
each session of the Assembly,
and the seating order for the rest
of the delegations is moved by
the corresponding number of
seats, omitting the ones newly
occupied by the requesting
delegations.
34. Requests, in this regard, the
Secretariat to inform the
Member States as soon as
possible of any changes to the
seating plans of the conference
rooms.
36. Invites other principal
organs of the United Nations and
their subsidiary organs to make
similar accommodations, as
provided in paragraphs 33 and
34 above, for their meetings.
37. Requests the Secretariat to
bring this decision to the
attention of any State,
organization or entity that seeks
to organize a meeting to be held
at the United Nations, and
encourages such State,
organization or entity to make
arrangements for accessible
seating in the manner mentioned
in paragraphs 33 and 34.
64.

75/325, para. 19
Also in:
72/313, para. 44;
71/323, para. 38;
70/305, para. 26;
69/321, para. 27;
68/307, para. 18;
67/297, para. 18;
66/294, para. 20;
and 65/315,
para. 16

23-12551

Underlines the urgent need to
preserve the primacy,
significance and established
practice of the general debate of
the General Assembly, and:
(a) Stresses the need to limit
the number of high-level events
held in the margins of the
general debate to those of key
significance that require
immediate attention from Heads
of State and Government, and
calls upon the President of the
General Assembly, Member
States, in close coordination

The President of the seventysecond session appointed the
Permanent Representative of
Ghana to lead the informal
consultations on the General
Assembly draft decision on the
high-level meetings of the
Assembly in September 2019
(seventy-fourth session). At
the 110th plenary meeting of
its seventy-second session, on
6 August 2018, the Assembly
decided to transmit the draft
47/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

with the Secretary-General and
heads of other relevant United
Nations bodies, to be very
mindful of these aspects when
planning the events of the highlevel week in September and to
be guided by the existing
mandates agreed upon by
Member States;
(b) Encourages Member States
and the United Nations system
to singly and collectively limit
the number of side events held
in parallel with or in the
margins of the general debate,
as well as other high-level
sessions, including by
consulting one another to
identify side events on similar
topics in an effort to minimize
overlap and informing the
Secretariat of the details of
planned side events;
(c) Requests the Secretariat to
upload information on the side
events, when indicated by the
organizers, in the Journal of the
United Nations;
(d) Invites Member States to
continue discussions on efforts
to limit the number of side
events held in parallel with or
in the margins of the general
debate and other high-level
sessions, with a view to taking
stock and exploring further
improvements, as necessary,
during the seventy-eighth
session of the General
Assembly.

48/99

Implementing entity

Comments

decision to the Assembly at its
seventy-third session for
action (see decision 72/559).
At the 52nd plenary meeting
of its seventy-third session, on
13 December 2018, the
Assembly, on the proposal of
its President, adopted the draft
decision, as orally revised (see
decision 73/522).
The Secretariat takes an active
role in providing advice, as
requested, in the consultations
on modalities for high-level
plenary meetings, high-level
thematic debates and other
events scheduled near the
general debate, to ensure
optimum scheduling and
utilization. The Department for
General Assembly and
Conference Management also
regularly gives a briefing to
Member States on
arrangements for the
forthcoming general debate
and other high-level meetings
convened in its vicinity.
Furthermore, the Executive
Office of the SecretaryGeneral has adopted an
internal mechanism to ensure
the coordination of initiatives
emanating from departments
and offices of the Secretariat
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the United
Nations.
The Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management regularly gives a
briefing to senior staff in
other departments on lessons
learned and best practices
regarding the organization
and scheduling of high-level
meetings.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

65.

70/305, para. 19

Welcomes the holding of
elections for non-permanent
members of the Security
Council and members of the
Economic and Social Council
about six months before the
elected members assume their
responsibilities, welcomes the
note by the President of the
Security Council in which the
elected Security Council
members are invited to observe
some of its meetings and
activities as from 1 October
immediately preceding their
term of membership, and also
welcomes such efforts to afford
elected members appropriate
opportunities to prepare for
their tenure in the Security
Council.

General Assembly

To be implemented on an
ongoing basis. Implemented
for the first time at the
seventieth session.

Recalls the practice of holding
periodic informal briefings by
the Secretary-General on his
priorities, travels and most
recent activities, including his
participation in international
meetings and events organized
outside the United Nations, and
invites the Secretary-General to
continue this practice.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The SecretaryGeneral periodically gives a
briefing to Member States in
informal plenary meetings of
the General Assembly on his
priorities, travels and most
recent activities.

Recalls rules 153 and 154 of the
rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, and encourages the
Chairs of the Main Committees
and the Secretary-General to
ensure observance of these rules,
within their respective mandates.

Main Committee
Chairs, SecretaryGeneral

Ongoing provision.

Strongly urges all officers
presiding over meetings of the
General Assembly to start such
meetings on time.

Secretary-General,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat. Periodically, the
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management provides
presiding officers with
statistics on the financial
impact of the implementation
of this provision (A/61/483,
p. 19, and A/62/608).

Also in:
69/321, para. 21;
68/307, para. 17;
and 67/297,
para. 17

66.

72/313, para. 9
Also in:
71/323, para. 9;
70/305, para. 9;
69/321, para. 9;
66/294, para. 9;
and 65/315,
para. 8

67.

72/313, para. 33
Also in:
71/323, para. 31;
70/305, para. 24;
and 69/321,
para. 25

68.

23-12551

59/313, para. 11

In its resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly welcomed
efforts to afford elected
members of the Security
Council appropriate
opportunities to prepare for
their tenure, and also
welcomed the note by the
President of the Security
Council in which the elected
Council members were
invited to observe some of its
meetings and activities as
from 1 October immediately
preceding their term of
membership (para. 26).

49/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

In its resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly urged all
presiding officers and
Member States to strictly
adhere to the scheduled
starting time of meetings of
the General Assembly and its
subsidiary bodies (para. 38).
69.

58/316, annex,
para. 1 (b)

With effect from the fifty-ninth
session of the General
Assembly, the meetings of the
plenary Assembly shall
normally be held on Mondays
and Thursdays.

Secretary-General,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Implemented on an ongoing
basis, as far as possible.

70.

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 2

The work of the Main
Committees of the General
Assembly might benefit if it is
scheduled over two substantive
periods during the session. With
a view to enabling the
Assembly to consider changes
in this regard, with effect from
the sixtieth session of the
Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral is requested to present,
by 1 February 2004, various
options for consideration by the
General Committee, taking into
account the requirements of the
relevant intergovernmental
bodies and the different
locations of their meetings and
the budget cycle.

Secretary-General

One-time action. In response
to this request, the Secretariat
circulated a note entitled
“Options for the rescheduling
of the Main Committees of
the General Assembly”
(A/58/CRP.3), which the
General Assembly considered
at its fifty-eighth session
(A/61/483, p. 12, and
A/62/608, p. 7).

Secretariat
(Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management,
Department of
Safety and
Security)

Implemented on an ongoing
basis. The Secretariat
regularly gives a briefing to
Member States on the
organizational aspects of the
general debate. It also issues
an information note in
advance of the annual highlevel segment.

C. Provisions related to the general debate
71.

71/323, para. 41
Also in:
70/305, para. 28

50/99

Decides that, with sufficient
time before the opening of each
regular or special session of the
General Assembly, the
Secretariat, in particular its
protocol and security services,
shall hold discussions with all
Member States on all aspects
related to the organization of
the high-level segment of the
general debate and any other
activities that may have special
organizational requirements.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

72.

72/313, para. 46

Encourages the scheduling of
future high-level meetings
during the first half of the year,
from within existing resources,
taking into account the calendar
of conferences and without
prejudice to the current practice
of convening one high-level
meeting in September at the
beginning of each session of the
Assembly.

Secretary-General,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

High-level thematic debates
and high-level debates
organized by the President of
the General Assembly are
normally scheduled during the
first half of the year (that is,
during the resumed part of the
session).

Decides to continue to consider
ways to rationalize the number
of side events held during the
high-level segment of the
general debate, bearing in mind
the need to enhance its decorum
and significance, and
encourages the scheduling of
side events at United Nations
Headquarters outside of the
hours when the general debate
is being held.

Ad Hoc Working
Group, Member
States

Ongoing provision.

The preparation of the list of
speakers for the general debate
shall be based on the following
principles:

Secretary-General,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat. The preparation
of the list is based on the
expressions of preference,
traditions and other criteria
(such as written request by a
Member State, level of
representation, previous
speaker slot, gender balance
and geographical diversity).

Also in:
71/323, para. 40;
70/305, para. 27;
69/321, para. 28;
68/307, para. 19;
57/301, para. 2;
and 51/241,
annex, paras. 19
and 20 (a)
73.

72/313, para. 40
Also in:
71/323, para. 34

74.

51/241, annex,
para. 20 (b)–(e)

(b) Member States shall be
invited to indicate three
preferences for speaking times;
(c) Member States wishing to
organize or participate in group
meetings during the general
debate period shall be
encouraged to coordinate their
responses to the request for
preferences and to indicate this
transparently in their responses;
(d) The Secretariat shall be
requested to prepare a list of
speakers based on existing
traditions and expressions of
preference to best accommodate
Members’ needs;
(e) The list of speakers for each
day shall be completed and no
speakers will be rolled over to
the next day, notwithstanding the
implications for hours of work.

23-12551

51/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

75.

72/313, para. 15

Recommends, in this regard,
unless decided otherwise, that
no other agenda items should be
opened during the dates
allocated for the general debate.

General Assembly,
Secretary-General,
Member States

Ongoing provision.

D. Provisions related to the conduct of business: time limits on speeches
76.

59/313, para. 10

Decides that time limits on
speeches in the plenary
Assembly and in the Main
Committees shall be applied in
accordance with rules 72 and
114 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.

Member States,
Secretary-General,
President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat, the President of
the General Assembly and
Member States, bearing in
mind the sovereign right of
each Member State to express
its national position.

77.

59/313, para. 13

Invites Member States that are
aligned with statements already
made by the chair of a group of
Member States, where possible,
to focus additional
interventions that they make in
their national capacity on points
that have not already been
adequately addressed in the
statements of the group in
question, bearing in mind the
sovereign right of each Member
State to express its national
position.

Member States

Provision to be implemented
by the Member States bearing
in mind the sovereign right of
each Member State to express
its national position.

78.

51/241, annex,
para. 22

Outside the general debate there
shall be a 15-minute time limit
in plenary meetings and in the
Main Committees.

Member States

Ongoing provision. Provision
to be applied by Member
States bearing in mind the
sovereign right of each
Member State to express its
national position.

Member States,
Secretariat

Ongoing provision.

E. Provisions related to modern technologies
79.

75/325, para. 47
Also in:
73/341, para. 32;
72/313, para. 54;
71/323, para. 49;
70/305, para. 32;
69/321, para. 31;
68/307, para. 20;
67/297, paras. 20
and 21; 66/294,
paras. 15 and 23;
and 64/301,
para. 19

52/99

Requests the Secretariat to
continue to improve, harmonize
and unify e-services provided to
Member States under
e-deleGATE with a view to
creating a full-fledged
delegates’ online workplace in
all six official languages in
order to save costs, reduce the
environmental impact and
improve the distribution of
documents.

Delegate-facing services for
the plenary and the six Main
Committees have been
centralized through the
e-deleGATE portal. This
includes e-Speakers,
e-Sponsorship, e-List of
Participants and the
e-Candidatures and Elections
module. The portal provides
easy access to the pre-session,
in-session and post-session
documents of those bodies.
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

The e-deleGATE portal also
provides access to official
correspondence of the United
Nations addressed to the
Member States. The portal is
also being used to share
letters of the President of the
General Assembly, while
keeping a historical record.
In the Main Committees,
delegations are increasingly
making use of the possibility
of circulating their statements
electronically and reading out
shorter remarks. As of the
seventy-sixth session, all
proposals are submitted
electronically through the edeleGATE platform.
Following the adoption of
resolution 75/325, the
Secretariat will make the
static text on e-deleGATE
available in all six official
languages in 2023.
At the seventy-sixth session, a
model was designed to record
the data of intergovernmental
meetings of the General
Assembly, its subsidiaries and
other intergovernmental
bodies. This data-oriented
approach enables the
Secretariat to automatically
update or issue compilations
earlier and to provide new
services.
80.

23-12551

72/313, para. 36

Requests the Secretariat to
ensure the availability through
the e-deleGATE portal of
provisional lists of speakers at
United Nations meetings and
conferences not later than by
the end of the business day
preceding the relevant meeting
or conference.

Secretariat

Ongoing provision. The
provisional lists of speakers
for meetings of the General
Assembly, its Main
Committees and subsidiaries,
and the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiaries
that utilize the e-deleGATE
platform are usually
circulated via email
announcements no later than
the day before.

53/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

As indicated during an
interactive dialogue at the
seventy-sixth session, efforts
are under way to share certain
lists of speakers with
delegations, without requiring
delegates to approach the
Secretariat in conference
rooms.
81.

72/313, para. 42
Also in:
71/323, para. 36

Decides that, in addition to the
general debate and the thematic
meetings, the interactive and
comprehensive dialogue
between the Permanent
Missions and the Secretariat
held within the Ad Hoc
Working Group, as outlined in
paragraph 10 of resolution
71/323, shall be webcast.

Department of
Global
Communications

Ongoing provision.

82.

71/323, para. 35

Requests the Secretariat to
provide a tool to allow Member
States and the United Nations
system to upload and publish
information about side events
organized by them at United
Nations Headquarters
throughout the year.

Secretariat

In its resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly took note
of the possibility for Member
States to publish their side
events under a dedicated
section of the digital version
of the Journal of the United
Nations (para. 41).

83.

71/323, para. 50

Requests the Secretariat to
explore ways to provide
real-time updates with respect
to the cancellation and
postponement of meetings, as
currently provided on the
screens at United Nations
Headquarters, through a userfriendly application for
electronic devices, and to
present possible options to the
Ad Hoc Working Group during
the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly.

Secretariat

Implemented.

54/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

84.

70/305, para. 18

Reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to include, in
his report to be submitted at the
seventy-first session of the
General Assembly under the
agenda item entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, information
regarding the basis for the
current practice whereby
Member States bear the
additional costs of using United
Nations Headquarters
conference services during
business hours.

Secretary-General

Implemented (see A/71/116,
para. 19).

Decides that the Ad Hoc
Working Group shall remain
apprised of options for more
time-effective, efficient and
secure balloting, reiterating the
need to ascertain the credibility,
reliability and confidentiality of
the balloting process, and
requests the Secretariat to
submit an update in case of any
new technological
developments, on the
understanding that the adoption
of any new balloting system in
the future will require a
decision of the plenary of the
General Assembly.

Secretariat,
General Assembly
(Ad Hoc Working
Group)

The Ad Hoc Working Group
receives periodic updates
from the Secretariat in case of
any new technological
developments. During the
seventy-third session, the Ad
Hoc Working Group was
given a briefing by the Office
of Information and
Communications Technology
in the course of informal
consultations.

Calls upon Member States to
respond to the annual review of
the Meetings and Publishing
Division of the Department for
General Assembly and
Conference Management on the
distribution of printed
documents to Missions, bearing
in mind the cost savings, as
well as the reduced
environmental impact, which
may accrue from this exercise,
in order to improve the quality
and distribution of those
documents.

Member States

Ongoing provision. Member
States have been responding
favourably to the annual
review of the Meetings and
Publishing Division, resulting
in decreased requests for hard
copies of parliamentary
documents and an increase in
the number of requests for
e-subscription to digital
copies of documents.

Also in:
69/321, para. 20

85.

66/294, para. 24
Also in:
65/315, para. 19;
64/301, para. 21;
63/309, para. 9;
60/286, annex,
para. 28; 59/313,
para. 15; and
55/285, annex,
para. 24 (a)

86.

23-12551

63/309, para. 7

55/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

87.

55/285, annex,
para. 24 (b) and
(c)

Taking into account the general
support in this regard, the
Secretary-General is requested
to submit proposals to the
General Assembly for its
consideration:

Secretary-General

Implemented. The Official
Document System is now
fully operational.
Furthermore, the eStatements
section of the Journal of the
United Nations, which
replaced the former
PaperSmart portal, provides
electronic access to the texts
of statements of Member
States. In addition to the
Official Document System,
the Journal as well as
relevant websites provide
electronic access to reports
and parliamentary documents
in all official languages.

The Secretary-General is
Secretary-General
requested to pursue an
information technology plan
with a range of options to
provide all permanent missions
to the United Nations and the
wider public with online access
to documents and relevant
United Nations information.
Unless the General Assembly
decides otherwise, hard copies of
documents shall continue to be
distributed to permanent
missions in accordance with
their needs. While welcoming
the progress made by the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Working Group on
Informatics of the Economic and
Social Council, further efforts in
this direction could be pursued
within a specified time frame to
harmonize and improve United
Nations information systems. All
countries, in particular

Implemented. The Official
Document System is fully
operational and accessible. In
addition to distribution via
electronic means, hard copies
continue to be distributed to
permanent missions as
requested.

(b) Wiring of the main
conference rooms at
Headquarters to provide
members of delegations and the
Secretariat with access to the
Official Document System and
other databases of the
Organization, as well as to the
Internet, together with
electronic access to texts of
statements and reports and, in
the case of reports,
simultaneous access to texts in
all official languages;
(c) Other areas of the work of
the Assembly in which the use
of modern technology and
information technology would
contribute to enhancing
efficiency in its working
methods.
88.

56/99

51/241, annex,
para. 45

Regarding the reference to the
Ad Hoc Open-ended Working
Group on Informatics of the
Economic and Social Council,
the last time the Council had
before it a report on the
matter was in 2011. At that
time, the Council took note of
the report, but no proposal
was submitted to it for
consideration. The last time
the item was on the agenda
was in 2012. No
documentation or proposal
was submitted to the
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

developing countries, shall be
assisted in making full use of
this potential access. Adequate
provision should be made for
training delegates. Facilities for
such access by delegations
within the United Nations
premises shall also be expanded
as much as possible. Availability
of information in this manner
should be ensured in all official
languages of the United Nations.
89.

51/241, annex,
para. 46

The Secretary-General is
encouraged to include
information on the impact of
technological improvements in
his report on the
implementation of mandates, by
means of comparing outputs
with objectives.

Comments

Economic and Social Council
for consideration.

Secretary-General

See comments for provisions
87 and 88 above.

F. Provisions related to documentation: resolutions (see also part I)
90.

66/294, para. 21
Also in:
65/315, para. 17

G.

Encourages Member States,
United Nations bodies and the
Secretariat to continue to consult
on the consolidation of
documentation in order to avoid
duplication of work, to exercise
the fullest possible discipline in
striving for concise resolutions,
reports and other documentation,
inter alia, by referring to
previous documents rather than
repeating actual content, and to
focus on key themes.

Member States,
Secretariat

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. This issue is
frequently examined in a
number of intergovernmental
bodies.

Provisions related to documentation: consolidation of reports

91.

60/286, annex,
para. 29
Also in:
59/313, para. 16;
58/316, annex,
para. 6 (c); and
58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 7

23-12551

Requests the Secretary-General
to implement further the
measures set out in paragraph
20 of resolution 57/300 on the
consolidation of reports and in
paragraph 6 of the annex to
resolution 58/316 on
documentation.

Secretary-General

In response to the provision
formulated in resolution
57/300, the Secretariat issued
a note entitled “Control and
limitation of documentation”
(A/58/CRP.7).
Since the adoption of the
resolution, a number of reports,
where appropriate, have been
consolidated (A/61/483, p. 21,
and A/62/608).

57/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

The Main Committees
regularly examine the issue of
consolidation of
documentation, particularly
when considering their
working methods in the context
of the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly.
92.

59/313, para. 16
Also in:
58/316, annex,
para. 6

In the light of its decision in
section B, paragraph 7, of the
annex to resolution 58/126 that
the heavy volume of
documentation that is submitted
to the General Assembly for its
consideration should be
reduced, the Secretary-General
is requested:

Secretary-General

In response to the provision
formulated in resolution
57/300, the Secretariat issued
a note entitled “Control and
limitation of documentation”
(A/58/CRP.7). The note has
not been updated as the
proposed update lacked the
endorsement of Member
States.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat. The annual
memorandum concerning the
implementation of the
resolutions contains a
paragraph on the need for
possible integration of
reports.

(a) To update the note by the
Secretariat, entitled “Control
and limitation of
documentation” (A/58/CRP.7)
in the light of the provisions of
the present resolution;
(b) To submit the updated
version of the note by the
Secretariat for the consideration
of the General Committee,
meeting in open-ended
consultations, so that it may
make recommendations to the
General Assembly at its fiftyninth session.
93.

58/99

55/285, annex,
para. 16

In preparing the annual
memorandum concerning the
implementation of the
resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly, the
secretariat of the Assembly, in
consultation with the
substantive departments of the
Secretariat, should look for
synergies and integration of
reports.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

H. Provisions related to the preparation and issuance of reports
94.

66/294, para. 21
Also in:
59/313, para. 18;
and 49/221 B,
para. 6 (c)

Calls upon Member States,
United Nations bodies and the
Secretariat to observe existing
submission deadlines so as to
allow for the timely processing
of documents to be examined
by intergovernmental bodies.

Member States,
Secretariat

Ongoing provision. In
response to this request, the
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management has entered into
a compact with the SecretaryGeneral which provides for
zero tolerance of late
submission of documents
(A/61/483 and A/62/608).

95.

55/285, annex,
para. 18

The Secretary-General is
requested to make further
suggestions as to how to speed
up the preparation of reports
and to rationalize the
scheduling of meetings. The
Secretary-General shall keep
the President of the General
Assembly and the General
Committee informed on this
issue on a regular basis
throughout the sessions of the
Assembly.

Secretary-General

The Secretary-General
continues to make
recommendations in his
memorandums on
organization of the General
Assembly, adoption of the
agenda and allocation of
items (see, for example, the
most recent memorandum,
A/BUR/77/1).

96.

59/313, para. 17

Encourages Member States,
when seeking additional
information, to request that they
be provided with the information
either orally or, if in writing, in
the form of information sheets,
annexes, tables and the like, and
encourages the wider use of this
practice.

Member States

Provision to be implemented
by the Member States.

97.

55/285, annex,
para. 17

Member States and entities of
the United Nations system
should make a serious effort to
submit their replies and inputs
to requests for information or
views pursuant to resolutions of
the General Assembly within
the prescribed deadlines.

Member States

Provision to be implemented
by the Member States.

23-12551

59/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

I. Provisions related to the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
98.

55/285, annex,
para. 14
Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 7

As regards implementation of
paragraph 7 of the annex to
resolution 51/241, the President
of the General Assembly, after
consideration by the Assembly
of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the
Organization, shall inform the
Assembly of his assessment of
the debate on the report in order
for the Assembly to determine
the need for further action.

President of the
General Assembly

According to practice, the
Secretary-General introduces
his report at the beginning of
the general debate.
Consequently, the President of
the General Assembly presents
his/her assessment at the
conclusion of the general
debate. Any additional
assessment by the President is
provided after plenary meetings
of the General Assembly.

99.

51/241, annex,
para. 4

The introduction to the report
of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization
should be in the nature of an
executive summary
highlighting main issues.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented by the
Secretariat. The introduction
to the report on the work of
the Organization is presented
in the form of an executive
summary highlighting the
main issues.

100.

51/241, annex,
para. 5

The main body of the report
shall be comprehensive,
informative and analytical in a
way that will allow Member
States to examine and assess,
inter alia, through the debate on
the report, the extent to which
mandates given by the General
Assembly have been fulfilled,
as well as to set priorities in the
context of the major political,
economic and social,
administrative and financial
issues on its agenda.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented by the
Secretariat on an ongoing
basis.

The Secretary-General shall
incorporate a forward-looking
section in his report on the work
of the Organization. It shall
describe the specific goals for
the Secretariat in the year ahead
in the context of the workplan
for the Organization in the
coming year, taking into account
the medium-term plan and the
fact that the responsibility for
establishing priorities rests with
the Member States.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat.

Also in:
55/285, annex,
para. 13

101.

51/241, annex,
para. 6
Also in:
55/285, annex,
para. 13

60/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

102.

51/241, annex,
para. 9

The report of the SecretarySecretary-General
General on the work of the
Organization shall, inter alia,
contain an analytical and concise
annex elaborating the costs by
major programmes and activities
of all bodies of the United
Nations system, located both in
and outside New York, according
to their mandates, so as to
improve Member States’
overview of system-wide issues.

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat.

Also in:
55/285, annex,
para. 13

Implementing entity

Comments

103.

51/241, annex,
para. 3

The report of the SecretarySecretary-General
General on the work of the
Organization should be
available not later than 30 days
prior to the opening of the
regular session of the General
Assembly in all official
languages of the Organization so
as to permit due consideration.

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the
Secretariat. During the
seventy-sixth session, the
report was issued on 19 July
2021.

104.

51/241, annex,
para. 7

The report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the
Organization shall be
considered in plenary meetings
of the General Assembly
immediately after the general
debate.

Secretary-General,
Member States
(General
Assembly)

Provision implemented by the
Secretariat on an ongoing
basis. The report is considered
in plenary meetings of the
General Assembly
immediately after the general
debate.

105.

51/241, annex,
para. 10

The Secretary-General is
requested to introduce the
report orally at an appropriate
time under the agenda item
entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization”.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis by the SecretaryGeneral. The SecretaryGeneral introduces his report
orally under the agenda item
entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization”.

106.

75/325, para. 22

Requests the President of the
President of the
General Assembly to continue
General Assembly,
scheduling the plenary meetings Secretary-General
of the Assembly on the report
of the Secretary-General on the
work of the Organization and
on the report of the Security
Council in close coordination
with the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security
Council, so that discussions of
these important reports are not
conducted in a perfunctory
manner.

During the seventy-fourth,
seventy-fifth, seventy-sixth
and seventy-seventh sessions,
the plenary meetings on the
report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the
Organization were convened
in January, instead of
immediately after the general
debate in accordance with
paragraph 7 of the annex to
General Assembly resolution
51/241.

Also in:
73/341, para. 17

23-12551

61/99

A/77/942
Number

J.
107.

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Provisions related to the agenda of the General Assembly
75/325, para. 40
Also in:
73/341, para. 29;
72/313, para. 27;
71/323, para. 26;
70/305, para. 20;
69/321, para. 22;
68/307, para. 16;
67/297, para. 15;
66/294, para. 18;
65/315, para. 14;
64/301, para. 18;
and 63/309,
para. 6

Reaffirms the respective
mandates of the Main
Committees of the General
Assembly, and on that basis,
calls upon those Committees to
continue their consideration, in
consultation with all relevant
bodies, of addressing gaps,
overlaps and duplication in
their respective agendas as they
relate to the 2030 Agenda as a
whole and, in this regard,
invites the Bureaux of the
relevant Main Committees of
the Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council and its
subsidiary bodies to facilitate
the consideration of the
alignment principles by their
respective intergovernmental
bodies and to present concrete
proposals for the consideration
of Member States.

Member States
(General
Assembly), Main
Committees

Ongoing provision. At the
seventieth session, the Second
Committee undertook a
process of informal
consultations on the
revitalization of the work of
the Second Committee.
Separately, the President of
the seventieth session of the
General Assembly appointed a
group of facilitators to find
agreement, in consultation
with Member States, on
strategically aligning the
agenda of future sessions of
the General Assembly with
the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,
including the Sustainable
Development Goals. At the
seventy-fourth session, the
Second Committee undertook
a process of informal
consultations on the
revitalization of the work of
the Second Committee.
At the seventy-fourth,
seventy-fifth, seventy-sixth
and seventy-seventh sessions,
the Assembly adopted
decisions entitled
“Revitalization of the work of
the Second Committee”.

108.

75/325, para. 32
Also in:
73/341, para. 28;
72/313, para. 29;
71/323, para. 28;
and 70/305,
para. 22

62/99

Notes the pilot analysis on
Sustainable Development Goal
2 carried out during the
seventy-fifth session to
examine in depth the coverage
of Goal 2 (zero hunger) and the
mapping developed during the
seventy-third session of the
Assembly, along with the pilot
analysis, which remain relevant
reference documents for the
consideration of Member States
during the seventy-eighth
session of the Assembly.

Member States

The President of the
seventieth session of the
General Assembly appointed a
group of facilitators to find
agreement, in consultation
with Member States, on
strategically aligning the
agenda of future sessions of
the Assembly with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including the
Sustainable Development
Goals.
The President of the seventyfirst session appointed two
co-facilitators whose report,
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

which includes
recommendations for
consideration by the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the
seventy-first session, was
circulated in a letter from the
President of the General
Assembly dated 17 July 2017.
At the seventy-second,
seventy-third, seventy-fourth
and seventy-fifth sessions, cofacilitators were appointed by
the President. At the seventyfifth session, the President
convened an informal meeting
of the General Committee to
discuss the alignment process
(see provisions 109 and 139).
109.

75/325, para. 44
Also in:
74/303, para. 6;
73/341, para. 27;
72/313, para. 31;
and 71/323,
para. 30

110.

23-12551

73/341, para. 23

Requests the President of the
General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session to draw
lessons learned from the
implementation of the
provisions contained in
paragraphs 13 to 18 and 32 to
44 of the present resolution on
the revitalization of the work of
the Assembly and identify
further proposals on alignment,
and, in the interim, requests the
Ad Hoc Working Group, during
both the seventy-sixth and the
seventy-seventh sessions, to
hold one or two dedicated
meetings, as required, on the
progress of the implementation
of the aforementioned
provisions.

President of the
General
Assembly,
Member States,

Stresses the desirability of the
General Assembly further
streamlining its agenda and
dedicating more time for
dialogue as well as the review
of the implementation of the
resolutions it adopts.

Member States
(General
Assembly)

See provision 108.

Ad Hoc Working
Group

Ongoing provision.

63/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

111.

58/316, annex,
para. 2 (a)
and (d)

(a) Pursuant to paragraph 4 of
section B of the annex to
resolution 58/126, the agenda
of the General Assembly shall
be organized under headings
corresponding to the priorities
of the Organization, as
contained in the medium-term
plan for the period 2002–2005
(or in the strategic framework,
as appropriate), with an
additional heading for
“Organizational, administrative
and other matters”;

Secretary-General,
Member States
(General
Assembly)

One-time action. As from the
fifty-ninth session, the agenda
of the General Assembly has
been organized under
headings corresponding to the
priorities of the Organization,
as contained in the mediumterm plan for the period
2002–2005 and, subsequently,
in accordance with the
strategic framework for the
period 2006–2007, with an
additional heading I, entitled
“Organizational,
administrative and other
matters” (A/61/483, p. 13, and
A/62/608).

(d) The provisions of the
present section shall be reviewed
by the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session with a view to
making further improvements, as
appropriate.

During the sixty-first session
no revision was made by the
General Assembly.

112.

58/316, annex,
para. 4

Provisions related to allocation
of agenda items (for details see
resolution 58/316, annex,
para. 4).

Member States,
Secretary-General

One-time action. The
provisions of this paragraph
have been implemented as
from the fifty-ninth session
and reflected in the agenda of
each session (A/62/608, and
resolution 58/316, annex,
para. 4).

113.

55/285, annex,
paras. 3–9

Provisions related to clustering
of agenda items concerning
cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other
organizations (for details see
resolution 55/285, annex,
paras. 3–9).

Member States,
Secretary-General

One-time action. Provisions
implemented as requested and
reflected in the agenda of
each session.

114.

55/285, annex,
paras. 10 and 11

Provisions related to
Member States,
biennialization of agenda items
Secretary-General
(for details see resolution 55/285,
annex, paras. 10 and 11).

One-time action. The
provisions have been
implemented as requested.

115.

55/285, annex,
para. 12

The following item shall be
Member States,
considered by the Third
Secretary-General
Committee, starting at the fiftysixth session: “Implementation
of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social
Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the
General Assembly”.

One-time action. The
provision has been
implemented as requested.

64/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

116.

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 4

With a view to better
Secretary-General,
conceptualization of the content General
of the agenda of the General
Committee
Assembly, the Secretary-General
is requested to submit to the
Assembly, for its consideration
by 1 March 2004, an illustrative
agenda of the Assembly, based
on all the agenda items of the
fifty-eighth session, organized
around the priorities of the
Organization for the period
2002–2005. The General
Committee shall hold openended discussions on the
illustrative agenda before
making recommendations on the
matter to the Assembly for its
decision by 1 July 2004.

One-time action. In response
to this request, the Secretariat
circulated a note entitled
“Illustrative agenda of the
General Assembly”
(A/58/CRP.4), which the
Assembly considered at its
fifty-eighth session
(A/61/483, p. 12).
See also comments for
provision 111 above.

117.

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 5

The President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session, in consultation with the
Secretary-General, and
following consultations with
concerned Member States, is
requested to make proposals for
the further biennialization,
triennialization, clustering and
elimination of items of the
customary agenda of the
Assembly for the consideration
of the General Committee by
1 April 2004. The General
Committee shall hold openended discussions on the
proposals before making
recommendations on the matter
to the Assembly for its decision
by 1 July 2004.

President of the
General Assembly

One-time action. Subsequent
to the adoption of resolution
58/126, the Secretariat
circulated a note entitled
“Analysis of the agenda of the
General Assembly”
(A/58/CRP.6), which was
considered by the General
Committee in open-ended
informal consultations.

118.

55/285, annex,
para. 2

The rationalization and
streamlining of the agenda of
the General Assembly should
continue in order to enable the
Assembly to focus its work on
priority issues. Any change or
suggestion concerning the
agenda is made with the
understanding that Member
States may at any time propose
any issue or item for the
attention and consideration of
the Assembly.

Member States
(General
Assembly)

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 24

23-12551

65/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

119.

51/241, annex,
para. 23

Bearing in mind rule 81 of the
rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, the
requirements for reopening
debate on an agenda item which
the Assembly had decided was
completed will continue to be
as at present and should be
made clear to delegations
through a statement from the
President of the Assembly. A
delegation wishing to reopen
debate on an agenda item
should send a written request to
the President of the Assembly.
The President will then
undertake soundings to
ascertain whether the request
enjoys wide support. In the
light of these soundings, the
President shall announce in the
Journal of the United Nations
the date of the meeting of the
Assembly to consider the
question of reopening debate on
the item, bearing in mind the
requirements of rule 81.

Member States
(General
Assembly),
President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

120.

51/241, annex,
para. 25

As a general rule, agenda items
that could be considered in the
Main Committees shall be
referred to the Main
Committees rather than the
General Assembly in plenary
meetings.

General Assembly,
Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

K. Provisions related to practices and working methods of the Main Committees of the General Assembly
121.

72/313, para. 23
Also in:
71/323, para. 22

66/99

Requests the continuation of the Main Committee
established practice of holding
Chairs
handover meetings of the
outgoing and incoming bureaux
to exchange views on outcomes
and the upcoming agenda, and
of presenting a report by the
Chairs of the Main Committees
to their successors on best
practices and lessons learned.

Ongoing provision.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

122.

72/313, para. 25

Calls for the continuation of the
practice of periodical meetings
between the six Chairs of the
Main Committees during the
session of the General
Assembly to share best
practices and increase the
coherence and complementarity
of the work of the Main
Committees.

Main Committee
Chairs

Ongoing provision.

Appreciates the briefings by the
Chairs of the Main Committees
of the General Assembly to the
Ad Hoc Working Group about
the working methods of their
respective Committees during
the sixty-ninth session of the
Assembly, and in this regard
encourages the Main
Committees:

Main Committees

Main Committees periodically
hold informal meetings on
their working methods.
E- deleGATE provides a tool
for Main Committees to
facilitate their work.

Also in:
71/323, para. 24

123.

69/321, para. 16
Also in:
68/307, para. 13;
60/286, annex,
para. 25; and
59/313, para. 8

(a) To ensure adequate
coordination in their work
while avoiding overlap and
duplication;
(b) To hold elections for the
bureaux of the Main
Committees at least three
months before the opening of
each session, and preferably up
to six months in advance of the
session, and calls upon the
regional groups to proceed with
relevant nominations in a timely
manner and in accordance with
the interim arrangement set out
in Assembly decision 68/505 of
1 October 2013;

In the past, some of the Main
Committees explored ways
and possibilities of enhancing
their cooperation. For
instance, during the sixtieth
and sixty-first sessions there
were joint meetings of the
Bureaux of the Second and
Third Committees.
At the seventy-seventh
session, a joint meeting of the
First and Fourth Committees
was held.

(c) To benefit from their
respective intranet and other
online services to facilitate the
smooth organization and timely
conclusion of their work;
(d) To further enhance sharing
of information on the work and
activities of the Main
Committees within each Main
Committee;

23-12551

67/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Main Committees,
Main Committee
Chairs, Ad Hoc
Working Group,
Secretariat

Implemented on an ongoing
basis. Briefings were
provided to the Ad Hoc
Working Group by the Main
Committee Chairs from the
sixty-fifth to the seventy-sixth
sessions.

(e) To further improve the
management of the negotiation
process for Assembly resolutions.
124.

75/325, paras. 29
and 31
Also in:
73/341, para. 26;
72/313, para. 22;
71/323, para. 21;
70/305, para. 17;
69/321, para. 19;
68/307, para. 14;
67/297, para. 13;
66/294, para. 19;
and 65/315,
para. 15

68/99

Requests each Main Committee
to further discuss its working
methods, and in this regard
invites the Chairs of the Main
Committees to continue briefing
the Ad Hoc Working Group
during the seventy-sixth session
on any best practices and lessons
learned with a view to improving
working methods, and to
coordinate their briefings
through, inter alia, possible
identification of commonalities in
the working methods and the
lessons learned. Requests each
Main Committee to submit to the
Ad Hoc Working Group during
the seventy-sixth session a
written update on progress
achieved so far in the efforts
aimed at improving the working
methods of the Committees,
taking into account
recommendations of the Ad Hoc
Working Group as appropriate,
and encourages the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the
seventy-sixth session to appoint
two focal points who would work
closely with the Chairs and
Bureaux of the Main Committees,
the President of the General
Assembly and the Secretariat to
assist the Co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group in
elaborating practical proposals
for consideration by the Working
Group for the implementation of
paragraphs 29 and 30 of the
present resolution and of reports
submitted by the Main
Committees.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

125.

69/321, para. 17

Calls upon outgoing Chairs of
the Main Committees to brief
incoming Chairs on best
practices and lessons learned
from previous sessions of the
Main Committees and to
provide their written
observations and lessons
learned to their immediate
successors, and encourages the
incoming Chairs and bureaux of
the Main Committees to consult
with Member States shortly
after their election on how the
work will be conducted during
the upcoming session of their
Committee.

Main Committees

Provision is implemented by
the Main Committees on an
ongoing basis. The
observations and lessons
learned are presented during
the informal meetings
between incoming and
outgoing Bureaux of the
respective Committees.

Main Committees shall give
specific attention to the
rationalization of their future
agendas by the biennialization,
triennialization, clustering and
elimination of items, and make
recommendations to the plenary
Assembly for its decision by
1 April 2005.

Main Committees

In response to this request, the
Main Committees at the fiftyninth and sixtieth sessions
made recommendations to the
General Assembly.

Main Committees shall adopt a
provisional programme of work
at the end of the session for the
next session to help them better
to plan, prepare and organize
and, in this context, review the
related documentation
requirements.

Main Committees

Implemented as from the fiftyninth session (information on
the programme of work of the
Fifth Committee is usually not
available owing to the time
frame of the Committee’s
work) (A/61/483, p. 14, and
A/62/608).

The practice of interactive
debates and panel discussions
shall be utilized or expanded, as
appropriate, by all Main
Committees so as to enhance
informal, in-depth discussions
and to bring together experts
from various fields without
prejudicing the progress of the
substantive work of the Main
Committees.

Main Committees

Provision is being
implemented on an ongoing
basis. The Committees make
extensive use of interactive
debates and panels, for
example, panel meetings are
of particular importance for
the work of the Second
Committee.

Also in:
59/313, para. 9

126.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (a)
Also in:
59/313, para. 7;
and 51/241,
annex, para. 26

127.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (b)
Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 30

128.

23-12551

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (c)

69/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

129.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (d)

The practice of “question time”
shall be introduced, as
appropriate, in all Main
Committees to enable a
dynamic and candid exchange
with heads of departments and
offices, representatives of the
Secretary-General and special
rapporteurs.

Main Committees

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. As from the
fifty-ninth session, the Main
Committees introduced
“question time”, which has
significant importance for
their work.

Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 53

130.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (e)

The websites of the Main
Committees shall be enhanced
and thereafter regularly updated
and their content maintained by
the secretariats of the Main
Committees.

Main Committees

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The websites of
the Main Committees continue
to be enhanced and regularly
updated by the respective
secretariats (A/61/483, p. 15,
and A/62/608).

131.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (f)

The bureaux-elect of the Main
Committees shall meet
immediately after their election
in order to discuss the
organization and division of
their work.

Main Committees

Ongoing provision. Provision
implemented as from the
fifty-eighth session.

132.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (g)

With a view to ensuring the
continuity and the effective
organization of their work, the
incoming bureaux of the Main
Committees shall, no later than
two weeks after their election,
meet with the outgoing bureaux
in order to consult on and
review issues relating to the
efficient functioning of the
Main Committees.

Main Committees

Implemented by most of the
Main Committees as from the
fifty-eighth session.

133.

58/316, annex,
para. 3 (h)

Prior to the opening of each
session, informal briefings of
each Main Committee shall be
convened to discuss the
organization of work.

Main Committees

Implemented as from the
fifty-ninth session.

The Main Committees of the
General Assembly are bound by
the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, although
they have different practices
and working methods. With a
view to identifying best
practices and working methods,
and recognizing the ongoing
efforts of the Main Committees

Secretary-General

In response to this request, the
Secretariat circulated a note
entitled “Historical and
analytical note on the
practices and working
methods of the Main
Committees” (A/58/CRP.5),
which was considered by the
General Committee in openended informal consultations

Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 30
134.

70/99

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 8

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

to streamline their work, the
Secretary-General, drawing on
the experience of previous
Chairs of the Main Committees,
is requested to submit a
historical and analytical note on
the practices and working
methods of the Main
Committees for the
consideration of the General
Committee by 1 April 2004.
The General Committee shall
hold open-ended discussions on
the note before making
recommendations on the matter
to the Assembly for its decision
by 1 July 2004.

Comments

(A/61/483, p. 13, and
A/62/608).

135.

51/241, annex,
para. 51

There shall be a more detailed
and structured examination in
the Main Committees of the
relevant reports of the Board of
Auditors, the Joint Inspection
Unit and the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in relation
to the substantive work of these
Committees.

Main Committees

The reports are examined in
the Main Committees on an
ad hoc basis, if necessary.

136.

51/241, annex,
para. 31

The Main Committees shall
meet in substantive session only
after the end of the general
debate.

Main Committees

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

137.

51/241, annex,
para. 36

The First Committee and the
Fourth Committee shall not
meet simultaneously and may
consider meeting in a sequential
manner during the regular
session of the General
Assembly. This arrangement
shall not apply if it affects their
respective identities,
programmes of work and
effective consideration of their
agendas.

Main Committees

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The Secretaries
of the First and Fourth
Committees undertake
consultation for the purpose
of avoiding simultaneous
meetings.

23-12551

71/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Requests the President-elect of
the General Assembly to
continue with the practice of
meeting informally with the
incoming members of the
General Committee before the
beginning of the regular session
in order to review the proposed
programme of work of the Main
Committees, with a view to
increasing their efficiency,
improving complementarity and
avoiding overlap of meetings of
the Main Committees to the
extent possible, in order to allow
for wider participation by
Member States.

President-elect

Ongoing provision. The
President-elect of the seventyseventh session convened a
meeting with the incoming
members of the General
Committee in advance of the
opening of the seventyseventh session for an
informal exchange of views.

Requests the General
Committee, while exercising its
functions under rule 40 of the
rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, and within
its mandate, to also consider
discussing gaps, overlaps and
duplication and make
recommendations to Member
States for consideration.

General
Committee

Ongoing provision.

L. Provisions related to the General Committee
138.

72/313, para. 24
Also in:
71/323, para. 23

139.

75/325, para. 41
Also in:
73/341, para. 13;
72/313, para. 30;
and 71/323,
para. 29

During the seventy-third
session, the President
convened informal meetings
of the General Committee on
5 December 2018 to exchange
views on the programme of
work with respect to
addressing gaps and
duplication in the agenda of
the General Assembly as they
relate to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in
accordance with Assembly
resolution 72/313, in
particular paragraphs 29, 30
and 31; and on 17 April 2019
to discuss (a) improving the
methods of work of the
General Assembly as well as
its Main Committees and
(b) enhancing the role of the
General Committee in further
improving methods of work.
During the seventy-seventh
session, the President
convened an informal meeting
of the General Committee to
discuss the priorities and
mandates for the resumed part
of the session of the General
Assembly.

72/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

140.

72/313, para. 43

Recalls its resolutions 1898
(XVIII) of 11 November 1963,
2837 (XXVI) of 17 December
1971, 45/45 of 28 November
1990, 51/241 of 31 July 1997,
58/126 of 19 December 2003
and 58/316, and reiterates its
call to the President of the
General Assembly to continue
to make full use of the General
Committee throughout the
session, with a view to
reviewing the programme of
work of the Assembly and its
Main Committees, in line with
rule 42 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly.

President of the
General Assembly

Ongoing provision.

Reiterates its call for the
effective implementation of rule
42 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.

General
Committee

Since the adoption of
resolution 58/316, the General
Committee has met
throughout the session of the
General Assembly.

Also in:
71/323, para. 37

141.

60/286, annex,
para. 27
Also in:
58/316, annex,
para. 5 (b)

142.

51/241, annex,
para. 33

The General Committee shall
use its authority and
competence, taking into
account rule 43 of the rules of
procedure, by allowing Member
States that are not represented
on the General Committee to
participate in its discussions.
The process of decision-making
will continue to be as at
present.

General
Committee

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

143.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (a)

The work of the General
Committee shall be carried out
in accordance with section VI
of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly.

General
Committee

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

144.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (b)

The General Committee shall
continue to meet throughout the
session and to play the leading
role in advising the General
Assembly on the efficient
organization, coordination and
management of its work.

General
Committee

Since the adoption of
resolution 58/316, the General
Committee has met
throughout the session of the
General Assembly and played
its leading role in advising the
Assembly in the organization
of its work.

23-12551

73/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

During the seventy-fourth
session, the General
Committee held frequent
consultations. In the light of
the rapidly evolving
developments relating to
COVID-19, the General
Assembly had been carrying
out its work through novel
means to guarantee business
continuity and mitigate the
spread of the disease. With
regard to the proposal of its
President contained in his
letter dated 24 March 2020,
the Assembly adopted under a
silence procedure decision
74/544 of 27 March 2020,
entitled “Procedure for taking
decisions of the General
Assembly during the
coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic”, the
provisions of which were
subsequently expanded to
include Main Committees in
decision 74/555 of 15 May
2020. The procedure outlined
in both decisions was
subsequently extended by
decisions 74/558 of 18 June
2020 and 74/561 of 21 July
2020, thus enabling the
Assembly to take essential
decisions by means of silence
procedure between March and
August 2020, after
consultation with the General
Committee, when a plenary
meeting was not practicable
as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic.
During the seventy-fifth,
seventy-sixth and seventyseventh sessions, the General
Committee continued to meet
on various issues, including
business continuity.

74/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

145.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (c)

To ensure the effective
implementation of rule 42 of
the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, the General
Committee shall meet regularly
throughout the session with the
bureaux of the Main
Committees to review the
progress of the work of the
Main Committees and to make
recommendations for furthering
such progress.

General
Committee

Since the adoption of the
provision, the General
Committee has met
throughout the sessions of the
General Assembly to ensure
the effective implementation
of rule 42 of the rules of
procedure. The Main
Committee Chairs have
regularly given a briefing to
the General Committee on the
work of their Committees.

146.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (d)

In July of each year, the
General Committee shall
conduct a review of the
proposed programme of work
for the forthcoming session of
the General Assembly, on the
basis of a report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General, and
submit recommendations on the
matter to the forthcoming
Assembly. The report of the
Secretary-General shall include
information on the status of
documentation to be issued
during the forthcoming session.

General
Committee

Provision to be implemented
on an ongoing basis. In
response to this request, the
Secretary-General annually
submits reports to the General
Assembly, including the
requested information on the
status of documentation.

147.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (f)

On the basis of proposals from
the President of the General
Assembly, and in the light of
the positive experience during
the fifty-eighth session, the
General Committee shall be
encouraged, as appropriate, to
continue to schedule informal
briefings on topical issues.

General
Committee

At the fifty-eighth and fiftyninth sessions, the General
Committee held several
informal briefings on topical
issues. Owing to the rising
number of thematic debates,
the practice of informal
briefings in the General
Committee has been limited
to avoid duplication.

148.

58/316, annex,
para. 5 (h)

The General Committee shall
continue to consider ways and
means to further improve its
working methods to increase its
efficiency and effectiveness in
all aspects, and make
recommendations on the matter
to the General Assembly for its
decision by 1 April 2005.

General
Committee

The General Committee
continues to consider ways
and means of improving its
working methods. No
recommendation has been
made in that regard since the
adoption of this provision.

23-12551

75/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

149.

58/126, annex,
sect. B, para. 1

The General Committee shall
meet throughout the session and
further improve its working
methods to increase its efficiency
and effectiveness. It will play the
leading role in advising the
General Assembly on the
efficient organization,
coordination and management of
its work. In this connection, the
Assembly will also consider
proposals to reform the General
Committee.

General
Committee

The General Assembly, at its
fifty-eighth session, adopted
resolution 58/316, by which,
inter alia, it decided on
several measures regarding
the reform of the General
Committee.

150.

55/285, annex,
para. 20

In order to enhance the capacity
of the General Committee to
assist the President of the
General Assembly in the conduct
of the business of the Assembly
and to improve continuity
between its different sessions, at
the outset of each session, each
Vice-President of the Assembly
shall designate a liaison person
for the duration of the session.
This designation may be made
informally, without any
amendment to rule 39 of the
rules of procedure of the
Assembly, by means of a letter to
its President.

General
Committee

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

151.

51/241, annex,
para. 34

The General Committee may,
each year, prior to the closure of
the session, prepare suggestions
based on its experience for the
consideration of the incoming
General Committee.

General
Committee

Suggestions have been made
on an ongoing basis during
informal meetings between
the incoming and outgoing
General Committees.

152.

51/241, annex,
para. 35

The General Committee is
requested to consider and
recommend to the General
Assembly methods and
procedures for streamlining and
rationalizing the Committee’s
work. The General Committee
shall, in this context, in relation
to each agenda item proposed,
consider its rejection or its
inclusion in the provisional
agenda, taking into account
previous recommendations of the
General Committee and previous
relevant decisions of the
Assembly.

General
Committee

Provisions to be implemented
by the General Committee.

76/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Takes note of the proposals
provided by the Secretariat for
addressing the cost of the use of
the Delegates’ Dining Room
and other venues at United
Nations Headquarters in New
York by delegations, and
decides to continue the
consideration of this issue
during its seventy-fourth
session.

Department of
Operational
Support

During the seventy-third
session, the Department of
Operational Support gave a
briefing to the Ad Hoc
Working Group on 9 April
2019 on the issue and
presented three possible
options for consideration (see
supplementary information
annexed to the letter from the
President of the General
Assembly dated 18 April
2019). Additional information
was provided in the course of
informal consultations.

M. Other matters
153.

73/341, para. 21
Also in:
72/313, para. 63

A briefing was not provided at
the seventy-fourth session
owing to the cancellation of
the interactive dialogue
between the Secretariat and
the permanent missions as a
result of the COVID-19
pandemic.
A briefing was provided at the
seventy-fifth session, on
25 March 2021.
Information on the Delegates’
Dining Room was provided at
the seventy-seventh session,
during the interactive
dialogue.
154.

23-12551

72/313, para. 64

Requests the Secretariat to
provide, in an electronic
version only, a list containing
the names of the President and
the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly and officers
of the Main Committees, as
well as members of the Security
Council, members of the
Economic and Social Council
and Member States and
observers of the United
Nations.

Secretariat

The electronic lists containing
the names of the President
and the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly and
officers of the Main
Committees, as well as
members of the Security
Council, members of the
Economic and Social Council
and Member States and
observers of the United
Nations have been made
available on the websites of
the relevant bodies. In 2019, a
new module was added to the
e-deleGATE portal to enable
searches for the names of

77/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Presidents and VicePresidents of the General
Assembly and officers of the
Main Committees of the
General Assembly as well as
members of the Economic and
Social Council.
155.

73/341, para. 19

Requests the Secretariat to
circulate in advance to the
Permanent Missions all new or
updated administrative
instructions and other
documents that have an impact
on Member States with respect
to the delivery of standard
administrative services.

Secretariat

The provision is implemented
on an ongoing basis.

Cluster III: selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

A. General provisions related to the selection of the Secretary-General
156.

72/313, para. 66
Also in:
71/323, para. 57;
70/305, para. 37;
69/321, para. 34;
68/307, para. 26;
60/286, annex,
para. 17; and
51/241, annex,
para. 57

78/99

Reiterates that the process of
selecting and appointing the
Secretary-General differs from
the process used with regard to
the executive heads of the
organizations of the United
Nations system, given the roles
of the Security Council and the
General Assembly in accordance
with Article 97 of the Charter,
and emphasizes in particular that
the process of selection of the
Secretary-General is guided by
the principles of transparency
and inclusiveness, building on
the best practices and the
participation of all Member
States.

Ongoing provision.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

157.

72/313, paras. 67
and 68

Stresses, in particular, the need to
ensure the appointment of the
best possible candidate for the
post of Secretary-General, who
embodies the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and
integrity and who demonstrates a
firm commitment to the purposes
and principles of the United
Nations, proven leadership and
managerial abilities, extensive
experience in international
relations and strong diplomatic,
communication and multilingual
skills.

Also in:
71/323, para. 58;
70/305, para. 40;
69/321, para. 39;
and 60/286,
annex, para. 22

Implementing entity

Comments

Ongoing provision.

Also stresses that, in the course
of the identification and
appointment of the best
candidate for the post of
Secretary-General, due regard
shall continue to be given to
regional rotation and to gender
balance.
158.

73/341, para. 41

Encourages future Presidents of
the General Assembly to actively
contribute to the implementation
of provisions guiding the
selection and appointment of the
ninth Secretary-General, as
contained in all relevant
resolutions, in particular
resolutions 69/321 and 70/305,
and stresses the need for the
selection and appointment
process of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads to be
guided by the principles of
transparency and inclusiveness.

Presidents of the
General Assembly

Ongoing provision.

159.

75/325, para. 57

Also decides to further assess
during the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly
the selection and appointment
process of the SecretaryGeneral, to consolidate the
advances gained in the relevant
Assembly resolutions and to
explore possible steps to
improve future processes,
including the collaboration
between the Assembly and the

Ad Hoc Working
Group, Member
States

The informal dialogue with a
candidate for the position of
Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, of Portugal, was held
on 7 May 2021 pursuant to
resolution 69/321 and
subsequent related resolutions.
The format of the dialogue was
communicated by the President
of the General Assembly to all
Permanent Representatives and
Permanent Observers to the

Also in:
73/341, para. 43

23-12551

79/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Security Council, consistent
with Article 97 of the Charter.

160.

75/325, para. 59
Also in:
73/341, para. 44

Reiterates the possibility of
providing the process of
selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General with
provisional timelines in
accordance with paragraph 72
of its resolution 72/313, and
decides to further discuss this
issue during its seventy-seventh
session in the Ad Hoc Working
Group.

Comments

United Nations in New York in
his letter dated 26 April 2021.
The vision statement of the
incumbent Secretary-General
for the next term beginning on
1 January 2022 was circulated
by the President of the General
Assembly in his letter dated
25 March 2021.
Ad Hoc Working
Group, Member
States

The Working Group
considered the issue during
the seventy-fourth and
seventy-fifth sessions.
The issue was further
discussed during the seventyseventh session.

B. Provisions related to the selection process
161.

75/235, para. 52
Also in:
73/341, para. 40;
72/313, para. 69;
71/323, para. 59;
70/305, para. 41;
69/321, para. 32;
68/307, para. 25;
67/297, para. 23;
66/294, para. 25;
65/315, para. 20;
and 64/301,
para. 14

80/99

Reaffirms its commitment to
continue, in the Ad Hoc
Working Group, in accordance
with the provisions of Article
97 of the Charter, its thorough
consideration of the issues
under the third thematic cluster
of the Working Group, on the
revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, including
the examination of innovative
ways to improve the process of
selecting and appointing the
Secretary-General and other
executive heads in all its
aspects, and recalls all relevant
resolutions, including
resolutions 11 (I) of 24 January
1946, 46/77 of 12 December
1991, 47/233 of 17 August
1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994,
51/241 of 31 July 1997, 52/163
of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of
3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of
8 July 2002, 57/300 of
20 December 2002, 57/301 of
13 March 2003, 58/126 of
19 December 2003, 58/316 of

Ad Hoc Working
Group, Member
States

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The Ad Hoc
Working Group devoted a
thematic meeting to this issue
at recent sessions. At the
seventieth session, the
Co-Chairs also convened a
dedicated informal
brainstorming session on,
inter alia, the possibility of
modifying the term of office
to a single, non-renewable
term and of recommending
more than one candidate for
consideration by the General
Assembly. In accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution
75/325, the theme “Selection
and appointment of the
Secretary-General and other
executive heads” was
considered by the Ad Hoc
Working Group at the
seventy-seventh session.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Calls upon the President of the
General Assembly to monitor
and review the Assembly’s
implementation of these
resolutions.

President of the
General Assembly

Ongoing provision.

Requests the Presidents of the
General Assembly and the
Security Council to start the
process of soliciting candidates
for the position of SecretaryGeneral through a joint letter
addressed to all Member States,
containing a description of the
entire process and inviting
candidates to be presented in a
timely manner.

President of the
General Assembly,
President of the
Security Council

A joint letter by the President
of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security
Council dated 15 December
2015 was sent to all Member
States (see A/70/623S/2015/988).

Also requests the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the
Security Council to jointly
circulate to all Member States
on an ongoing basis the names
of individuals that have been
submitted for consideration as

President of the
General Assembly,
President of the
Security Council

1 July 2004, 59/313 of
12 September 2005, 60/286 of
8 September 2006, 61/292 of
2 August 2007, 62/276 of
15 September 2008, 63/309 of
14 September 2009, 64/301 of
13 September 2010, 65/315 of
12 September 2011, 66/294 of
17 September 2012, 67/297 of
29 August 2013, 68/307 of
10 September 2014, 69/321 of
11 September 2015, 70/305 of
13 September 2016, 71/323 of
8 September 2017, 72/313 of
17 September 2018 and 73/341
of 12 September 2019,
reaffirming the applicable
procedures set out in the rules
of procedure of the Assembly,
in particular rule 141, and
acknowledging existing
relevant practices of the
Assembly.
162.

72/313, para. 70
Also in:
71/323, para. 60;
70/305, para. 42;
and 69/321,
para. 33

163.

69/321, para. 35
Also in:
75/325, paras. 55
and 56; 60/286,
annex, para. 19;
and 51/241,
annex, para. 60

164.

23-12551

69/321, para. 36

A joint letter by the President
of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security
Council dated 5 February 2021
was sent to all Member States
(see A/75/780-S/2021/179).
The President of the General
Assembly and the President of
the Security Council jointly
circulated the names of the
individuals that were
submitted for consideration as
candidates during the

81/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

candidates for the position of
Secretary-General together with
accompanying documents,
including curricula vitae.
165.

70/305, para. 38
Also in:
69/321, para. 37

166.

75/325, para. 68
Also in:
70/305, para. 39;
69/321, para. 38;
68/307, para. 28;
66/294, para. 26;
60/286, annex,
para. 18; and
51/241, annex,
paras. 56 and 59

167.

69/321, para. 42
Also in:
75/325, para. 58;
and 60/286,
annex, para. 20

82/99

Comments

seventieth, seventy-first
sessions and seventy-fifth
sessions.

Notes that the selection and
appointment of the next
Secretary-General is expected to
take place in 2016, and as a
result requests, without
prejudice to the role of the
principal organs as enshrined in
Article 97 of the Charter, the
President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first
session to actively support this
process in accordance with the
role accorded to him by relevant
resolutions, including the
present resolution.

Presidents of the
seventieth and
seventy-first
sessions of the
General Assembly

Implemented by the
Presidents of the seventieth
and seventy-first sessions of
the General Assembly.

Notes that there is yet to be a
woman Secretary-General, and
invites Member States to bear
this in mind in the future, when
nominating candidates for the
position of Secretary-General.

Member States
Ongoing provision.
(General Assembly,
Security Council)

Decides, without prejudice to the
role of the principal organs as
enshrined in Article 97 of the
Charter, to conduct informal
dialogues or meetings with
candidates for the position of
Secretary-General, without any
prejudice to any candidate who
does not participate, thus
contributing to the transparency
and inclusivity of the process.

General
Assembly,
President of the
General Assembly

The Presidents of the
seventieth and seventy-first
sessions of the General
Assembly organized informal
dialogues with all candidates
submitted for consideration as
the ninth Secretary-General.
In its resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly recalled
that informal dialogues and
meetings with candidates for
the post of Secretary-General,
as provided for in paragraph
42 of its resolution 69/321,
are an important part of the
selection and appointment
process, and encouraged the
President of the General
Assembly to further improve,
in close consultation with
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Member States, the modalities
of these dialogues in order to
increase their efficiency and
interactivity with Member
States (para. 71).
The informal dialogue with a
candidate for the position of
Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, of
Portugal, was held on 7 May
2021 pursuant to resolution
69/321 and subsequent related
resolutions. The format of the
dialogue was communicated by
the President to all Permanent
Representatives and Permanent
Observers to the United
Nations in New York in his
letter dated 26 April 2021.
C. Provisions related to the appointment and duration of the term
168.

73/341, para. 45
Also in:
75/325, para. 60

169.

60/286, annex,
para. 21
Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 61

23-12551

Decides that the SecretaryGeneral-designate shall take an
oath of office before the General
Assembly during a swearing-in
ceremony, as detailed in the
annex to the present resolution.

Secretary-General- Ongoing provision. During
designate
the seventy-fifth session, on
18 June 2021, the SecretaryGeneral-designate took an
oath of office before the
General Assembly during a
swearing-in ceremony, as
detailed in the annex to its
resolution 73/341 (see
A/75/PV.82).

Recalls paragraph 61 of its
resolution 51/241, in which it is
stated that, in order to ensure a
smooth and efficient transition,
the Secretary-General should be
appointed as early as possible,
preferably no later than one
month before the date on which
the term of the incumbent
expires.

General Assembly,
Security Council

The provision is being
implemented to the extent
possible. Resolution 71/4, by
which the General Assembly
appointed António Guterres
Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a term of
office beginning on 1 January
2017 and ending on
31 December 2021, was
adopted on 13 October 2016.
Resolution 75/286, by which
the Assembly appointed
António Guterres SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations
for a term of office beginning
on 1 January 2022 and ending
on 31 December 2026, was
adopted on 18 June 2021.

83/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

170.

51/241, annex,
para. 58

The duration of the term or
terms of appointment, including
the option of a single term,
shall be considered before the
appointment of the next
Secretary-General.

Member States

Member States decide on the
duration of the term on a
case-by-case basis, on the
recommendation of the
Security Council. At the
seventieth session, the
Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group convened an
informal brainstorming
session on, inter alia, the
possibility of modifying the
term of office to a single,
non-renewable term, and of
recommending more than one
candidate for consideration by
the General Assembly. The
Working Group continued to
discuss the issue at the
subsequent sessions.

Requests the Office of Human
Resources of the Secretariat to
continue with the practice of
providing a briefing to the Ad
Hoc Working Group, during the
seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly, on the
gender and geographical
balance of the executive heads
of the United Nations system
and the Senior Management
Group of the Organization, as
well as with a breakdown
showing those originating from
the States that are permanent
members of the Security
Council.

Department of
Management
Strategy, Policy
and Compliance

At the sixty-ninth session, the
Ad Hoc Working Group, on 22
March 2016, was given a
briefing by the Acting Director
of the Strategic Planning and
Staffing Division of the Office
of Human Resources
Management, Department of
Management, on the gender
balance and regional origin of
executive heads and the Senior
Management Group of the
United Nations.

D. Miscellaneous/other
171.

75/325, para. 69
Also in:
73/341, para. 50;
72/313, para. 80;
71/323, para. 65;
and 69/321,
para. 40

During the seventy-third
session, the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Resources
gave a briefing to the Working
Group on the gender balance
and regional origin of the
executive heads of the United
Nations system and the Senior
Management Group.
During the seventy-fourth
session, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human
Resources gave a briefing to
the Working Group on the
gender and geographical
balance of the executive heads
of the United Nations system
and the Senior Management
Group of the Organization.

84/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

During the seventy-fifth and
seventy-seventh sessions, the
Director of the Global
Strategy and Policy Division,
Office of Human Resources,
Department of Management
Strategy, Policy and
Compliance, gave a briefing
to the Working Group on the
gender and geographical
balance of the executive heads
of the United Nations system
and the Senior Management
Group of the Organization.
172.

73/341, para. 46
Also in:
72/313, para. 75;
71/323, para. 61;
and 70/305,
para. 43

173.

72/313, para. 77
Also in:
71/323, para. 62;
70/305, para. 44;
and 69/321,
para. 43

23-12551

Welcomes again the ongoing
Secretary-General
efforts of the Secretary-General
towards achieving equal and fair
distribution in terms of the
gender and geographical balance
of the executive heads of the
United Nations system and the
Senior Management Group of the
Organization, while securing the
highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity, in
accordance with Article 101 of
the Charter and its resolutions
46/232 of 2 March 1992, 51/241,
and 71/263 of 23 December
2016, commends in particular the
fact that gender parity was
achieved in the Senior
Management Group, and requests
that further effective measures be
taken in this regard.

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

Recalls its resolution 52/12 B of Secretary-General
19 December 1997, in particular
paragraph 2 thereof, in which it
notes that the Secretary-General
will appoint the Deputy
Secretary-General following
consultations with Member
States, stresses that the process of
appointments to senior posts by
the Secretary-General within the
Organization should be inclusive
and transparent, in accordance
with relevant rules of procedure
and as set out in the Charter, and
in this context calls upon the
Secretary-General to announce
such vacancies well in advance.

Ongoing provision.

In its resolutions 73/341 and
75/325, the General Assembly
welcomed the fact that gender
parity had already been
reached in the Senior
Management Group, and
commended the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to
reach gender parity and to
recruit staff on as wide a
geographical basis as possible
across the United Nations
Organization.

In its resolution 73/341, the
General Assembly supported
the request of the SecretaryGeneral for Member States to
submit the names and résumés
of nationals who might be
considered for positions of
executive heads and senior
management of the Secretariat
(para. 47).

85/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

174.

75/325, para. 67

Reiterates the need to ensure
equal and fair distribution based
on gender balance and as wide a
geographical basis as possible,
while also being diverse from a
multilingual perspective, and in
this regard recalls its resolutions
46/232 and 51/241, adopted
without a vote, which contain
the principles that the highest
standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity are the
paramount considerations in the
recruitment and performance of
international civil servants, and
that candidates’ independence
should be considered.

Secretary-General

Ongoing provision.

Reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General that he
continue his ongoing efforts to
ensure the attainment of
equitable geographical
distribution in the Secretariat
and to ensure as wide a
geographical distribution of
staff as possible in all
departments and offices and at
all levels, including at the
Director and higher levels, of
the Secretariat.

Secretary-General

Ongoing provision.

Also in:
73/341, para. 49;
72/313, para. 78;
71/323, para. 63;
and 70/305,
para. 45

175.

75/325, para. 66
Also in:
72/313, para. 79;
and 71/323,
para. 64

176.

72/313, para. 81

Invites the specialized agencies,
funds and programmes to
maintain updated information
regarding the past and present
executive heads on their official
websites in order to strengthen
transparency, as well as
accessibility of the historical
record.

Specialized
agencies, funds
and programmes

The Secretariat informed the
heads of the specialized
agencies, funds and
programmes of the invitation
by the Assembly. Several of
them responded that this
provision had already been
implemented.

177.

72/313, para. 82

Requests the Secretariat to brief
the Ad Hoc Working Group at the
seventy-third session on the issue
of candidacies of senior United
Nations officials currently holding
office, in order to enhance
transparency and equity of the
appointment process.

Department of
Management
Strategy, Policy
and Compliance

During the seventy-third
session, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human
Resources gave a briefing to
the Working Group.

86/99

23-12551

A/77/942

Cluster IV: strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

A. Provisions related to the competencies of the President of the General Assembly
178.

70/305, para. 57

Decides that the Presidentelect of the General Assembly
shall take an oath of office of
his or her own, as detailed in
annex I to the present
resolution, at the moment of
handing over the gavel in the
final plenary meeting of the
preceding session, and decides
that the text of the oath shall be
annexed to the rules of
procedure of the Assembly.

President of the
General Assembly,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The oath of
office was first taken by the
President-elect of the seventyfirst session of the General
Assembly at the 118th plenary
meeting of the seventieth
session of the Assembly, on
13 September 2016.
The rules of procedure have
been reissued (A/520/Rev.19)
and include the oath of office
under annex X.
In its resolution 71/323, the
General Assembly welcomed
the taking of the oath of office
and the observation of the
code of ethics by the
President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first
session, as contained in
annexes X and XI to the rules
of procedure of the General
Assembly, thus contributing
to increased transparency and
accountability of the Office
(para. 67).

179.

180.

70/305, para. 58

72/313, para. 85
Also in:
71/323, para. 69;
70/305, para. 49;
69/321, para. 46;
68/307, para. 31;
67/297, para. 27;
66/294, para. 29;
65/315, para. 24;

23-12551

Also decides that the
President of the General
Assembly shall observe a code
of ethics, as detailed in annex
II to the present resolution,
and further decides that the
text of the code of ethics for
the President of the Assembly
shall be annexed to the rules
of procedure of the Assembly.

President of the
General Assembly,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

Encourages the President of
the General Assembly to
continue the practice of
periodically briefing Member
States on his or her activities,
including official travel.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

The rules of procedure have
been reissued
(A/520/Rev.20) and include
the code of ethics for the
President of the General
Assembly under annex XI.

87/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Encourages exchanges between
the President-elect of the
General Assembly and the
Council of Presidents of the
General Assembly so that
Presidents-elect may benefit
from the experiences of former
Presidents in terms of best
practices and lessons learned.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision is implemented on
an ongoing basis.

64/301, para. 13;
and 63/309,
para. 4
181.

70/305, para. 51
Also in:
69/321, para. 48;
and 68/307,
para. 33

182.

72/313, para. 90

Highly commends the
President of the General
Assembly at its seventysecond session for introducing
the morning dialogues,
envisaged as informal
discussions among Permanent
Representatives on the
substantive and practical
aspects of work of the
Assembly, and strongly
encourages the continuation of
the valuable practice of
regular meetings between the
President and the Permanent
Representatives.

President of the
General Assembly,
Member States

The President of the seventysecond session introduced
the practice of regular
morning dialogues with the
Permanent Representatives.
This practice has continued
through the seventy-seventh
session.

183.

73/341, para. 60

Emphasizes the importance of
a handover report for the
institutional memory of the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly in
accordance with resolution
69/321 and other relevant
mandates contained in
resolutions on the
revitalization of the work of
the Assembly.

President of the
General Assembly,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.

Also in:
72/313, para. 87;
71/323, para. 71;
70/305, para. 52;
69/321, para. 49;
67/297, para. 32;
66/294, para. 36;
65/315, para. 28;
64/301, para. 17;
and 60/286,
annex, para. 9

88/99

The President of the seventysecond session shared with
all Member States, in a letter
dated 17 September 2018, the
handover summary received
from his predecessor, which
was prepared on the basis of
a standardized format
developed by the Department
for General Assembly and
Conference Management
with the Department’s
technical assistance. The
Presidents of the seventythird to seventy-sixth
sessions continued the
practice and shared with all
Member States the handover
report to the Presidents-elect.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

184.

75/325, para. 80

Requests the Secretariat to
issue, during the seventyseventh session, within
existing resources, in
coordination with the Office
of the President of the General
Assembly, a compendium of
best practices of past
Presidents that could serve to
contribute to strengthening the
institutional memory of the
Office.

Secretariat, in
coordination with the
Office of the
President of the
General Assembly

An update was provided at
the seventy-seventh session.

Requests the President of the
General Assembly, in
cooperation with the Secretariat,
to report to the Ad Hoc Working
Group at the seventy-third
session of the Assembly on the
implementation of all mandates
accorded to her under the
present resolution and previous
relevant resolutions.

President of the
General Assembly,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Ongoing provision. The
Presidents of the General
Assembly have been
reporting to the Working
Group.

In June of each year, the
President-elect of the General
Assembly, after taking into
account the views provided by
Member States and following
consultations with the
incumbent President and the
Secretary-General, will
suggest an issue, or issues, of
global concern upon which
Member States will be invited
to comment during the general
debate at the forthcoming
session of the Assembly. The
views provided by Member
States should also be
summarized and circulated to
Member States. Such
suggestions regarding the
issue(s) for comment will be
without prejudice to the
sovereign right of Member
States to solely and entirely
determine the content of their
general debate statements.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The
President-elect of the
seventy-fourth session
proposed the following
theme: “Galvanizing
multilateral efforts for
poverty eradication, quality
education, climate action and
inclusion”. The Presidentelect of the seventy-fifth
session proposed the
following theme: “The future
we want, the United Nations
we need: reaffirming our
collective commitment to
multilateralism – confronting
COVID-19 through effective
multilateral action”. The
President-elect of the
seventy-sixth session
proposed the following
theme: “Building resilience
through hope – to recover
from COVID-19, rebuild
sustainably, respond to the
needs of the planet, respect
the rights of people, and
revitalize the United

Also in:
73/341, para. 59

185.

72/313,
para. 101
Also in:
71/323, para. 84;
70/305, para. 69;
69/321, para. 56;
68/307, para. 40;
and 67/297,
para. 29

186.

23-12551

58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 7

89/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Nations”. The President-elect
of the seventy-seventh
session proposed the
following theme: “A
watershed moment:
transformative solutions to
interlocking challenges”.
The President-elect of the
seventy-eighth session
proposed the following
theme: “Rebuilding trust and
reigniting global solidarity:
accelerating action on the
2030 Agenda and its
Sustainable Development
Goals towards peace,
prosperity, progress and
sustainability for all”.
187.

188.

90/99

71/323, para. 73

72/313, para. 89

Decides, in full respect of the
established principle of
geographical rotation and its
resolution 33/138 of
19 December 1978, to conduct
informal interactive dialogues
with candidates for the
position of President of the
General Assembly, thus
contributing to the
transparency and inclusivity
of the process, and calls upon
candidates to present to the
Assembly their vision
statements.

General Assembly

Requests the Ad Hoc Working Ad Hoc Working
Group to establish, in close
Group
consultation with the
President of the General
Assembly, the guidelines for
the informal interactive
dialogue with candidates for
the position of President of the
General Assembly, including
the question of participants,
duration and format.

Ongoing provision. In its
resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly strongly
welcomed the organization
of informal dialogues with
candidates for the position of
President of the General
Assembly, as well as the
circulation of vision
statements, as outlined in
paragraph 73 of resolution
71/323 (para. 88).
At the seventy-third to
seventy-seventh sessions, the
President of the General
Assembly convened an
informal interactive dialogue
with the candidate for the
position of President of the
General Assembly.
In its resolution 73/341, the
General Assembly called
upon the President of the
General Assembly to
organize the informal
interactive dialogue of the
Member States with the
candidate(s) for the position
of President of the General
Assembly pursuant to
resolution 71/323 as a
question and answer session
23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

with targeted and relevant
questions, that would serve as
a follow-up to the vision
statement of the candidate(s)
and draw on the plans and
priorities of each candidate
for his or her term, and
emphasized the need to
provide enough time so that
all participants would have
the opportunity to put
forward questions (para. 61).
B. Provisions related to the financial, logistic and technical support for the President of the General Assembly
189.

72/313, para. 96
Also in:
71/323, para. 79;
70/305, para. 64;
69/321, para. 54;
and 68/307,
para. 38

23-12551

Requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit, in the
context of the proposed
programme budget for 2020,
proposals to review the budget
allocation of the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly, in accordance with
existing procedures, including
rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly,
and taking into account the
deliberations of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the issue,
and in this connection looks
forward to considering such
proposals during the main part
of its seventy-fourth session.

Secretary-General

Pursuant to resolution 70/305,
the Secretary-General, in the
context of the proposed
programme budget for the
biennium 2018–2019,
submitted the following
proposals: (a) one new
general temporary assistance
position at the P-5 level to
manage the continuity and
transfer of knowledge
between Presidents and
sessions and assist in the
preparation of the President’s
end-of-presidency report and
in the handover for the
President and/or the Office;
and (b) additional general
temporary assistance
resources corresponding to an
overlap period of one month
for each of the four positions
(2 D-2, 1 D-1 and 1 P-5) to
maximize the use of the
transition period for incoming
Presidents on an annual basis
(see A/72/6 (Sect. 1),
paras. 1.8–1.26). At the end of
the main part of the seventysecond session, the General
Assembly decided against the
establishment of the requested
P-5 position but approved the
additional general temporary
assistance resources
corresponding to an overlap
period of one month to
maximize the use of the
transition period for incoming

91/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

Presidents (see resolution
72/263).
Pursuant to resolution 72/313
and in accordance with the
recommendation in the report
of the task force on the
functioning of the Office of
the President, the SecretaryGeneral again included in the
context of the proposed
programme budget for 2020
the establishment of one
additional P-5 position to
support the Office of the
President in managing the
continuity and transfer of
knowledge between
Presidents and sessions, as
well as to assist in the
preparation of the President’s
end-of-presidency report and
in the handover briefing for
the President and/or the
Office (see A/74/6 (Sect.1),
para. 1.7). At the end of the
main part of the seventyfourth session, the General
Assembly decided not to
approve the proposed
establishment of the requested
P-5 position and decided to
maintain the transitionary
period of one month (see
resolution 74/262, para. 36).
190.

72/313, para. 83
Also in:
71/323, para. 66;
and 70/305,
para. 46

92/99

Commends the President of
the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session for
strengthening the transparency
and inclusivity of his Office,
including through continuing
the practices outlined in
paragraph 66 of resolution
71/323, and for voluntarily
presenting the summary of his
personal financial disclosure,
and requests future Presidents
of the Assembly to follow
these good practices.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. Detailed
information on finances,
official travel, staffing and
activities of the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly are made available
on the website of the
President.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

191.

70/305, para. 53

Requests the President of the
General Assembly to preserve
the records and institutional
memory during her or his term
of office by using existing
United Nations recordkeeping and archiving
facilities, taking into account
existing record-keeping
standards and practices of the
Organization.

President of the
General Assembly

To be implemented on an
ongoing basis.

192.

71/323, para. 72

Supports the efforts made thus
far in archiving and recordkeeping by the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly, with the assistance
of the Archives and Records
Management Section of the
Department of Management of
the Secretariat, and stresses
the need to continue to
consider methods to
effectively preserve the
institutional memory of the
Office.

Secretary-General

To be implemented on an
ongoing basis upon receipt
of relevant documentation
from the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly.

Requests the SecretaryGeneral to take the measures
necessary to preserve and
further strengthen the
institutional memory of the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly and the
General Assembly
revitalization process, through
utilizing existing United
Nations record-keeping and
archiving facilities, in
particular in the Dag
Hammarskjöld Library and the
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management and the
Department of Global
Communications of the
Secretariat.

Secretariat

To be implemented on an
ongoing basis.

Also in:
70/305, para. 54

193.

75/325, para. 79
Also in:
73/341, para. 58

23-12551

93/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

194.

70/305, para. 59

Requests the Ethics Office of
the Secretariat and the
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management to provide an
induction briefing to all
Presidents of the General
Assembly and members of the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly prior to the
assumption of their duties.

Ethics Office,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Implemented on an ongoing
basis.
The Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management organized a
two-day induction
programme for the Presidentelect of the seventy-first
session and his team, which
took place on 7 and
8 September 2016 and
included briefings on
conference management
support; the rules of
procedure of the General
Assembly; the programme of
work of the seventy-first
session; ethics,
accountability and oversight;
best practices in digital
records management;
communications and media;
budget, finance, human
resources and administrative
matters; and an overview of
the protocol services
available to the President of
the General Assembly.
Induction briefings were
provided to the Presidentselect of the seventy-third to
seventy-seventh sessions.

195.

72/313, para. 94
Also in:
71/323, para. 77;
and 70/305,
para. 61

196.

94/99

70/305, para. 62

Recalls its request to the
Secretary-General and its
invitation to the heads of
specialized agencies, funds and
programmes, upon request by
the President of the General
Assembly, to consider
seconding staff to work in the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly on a more
systematic basis.

Secretary-General,
heads of specialized
agencies, funds and
programmes

Provision to be implemented
on an ongoing basis.

Decides that Presidents of the
General Assembly shall
provide financial disclosures
upon assumption and
completion of their duties, in
line with the existing United
Nations financial disclosure
programme.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision to be implemented
on an ongoing basis.

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

197.

70/305, para. 65

Also requests the SecretaryGeneral to make non-staff
programme budget resources
available to Presidents of the
General Assembly from the
date of their election.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. In its
resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly took note
of the practice of making
non-staff programme budget
resources available to
Presidents of the General
Assembly from the date of
their election (para. 97).

198.

72/313,
para. 100

Reiterates its call for non-inkind contributions to be
channelled through the trust
fund, and welcomes steps
taken in this regard by the
President of the General
Assembly at its seventysecond session.

President of the
General Assembly,
Ethics Office

Provision to be implemented
on an ongoing basis.

Encourages the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly to expedite the
posting of all relevant
documents, including the
President’s speeches, letters,
travels, activities, decisions
and press releases, on the
relevant websites of the
United Nations.

President of the
General Assembly

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis.

Stresses the importance of the
contributions of Member
States to the trust fund in
support of the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly, and in this regard
notes with appreciation the
contributions that have been
made to the fund and
encourages Member States to
continue to contribute to the
fund and to allow for unspent
contributions from previous
sessions to be made available
for succeeding terms.

Member States

Since the adoption of
resolution 66/294,
contributions have been
made to the trust fund in
support of the Office of the
President of the General
Assembly. Furthermore, each
incoming President of the
Assembly is given a briefing
on the fund and its
modalities. Since the
seventy-first session, the
Presidents have published
information concerning
contributions made to the
trust fund on their websites.

Also in:
71/323, para. 83;
and 70/305,
para. 67

199.

73/341, para. 62
Also in:
70/305, para. 68

200.

72/313, para. 98
Also in:
71/323, para. 81;
70/305, para. 66;
69/321, para. 55;
68/307, para. 39;
67/297, para. 28;
66/294, para. 33;
and 64/301,
para. 12

23-12551

In its resolution 72/313, the
General Assembly welcomed
the continuation of the
practice of vetting all
contributions from sources
other than Member States
through the Ethics Office,
and urged adherence to this
practice (para. 99).

95/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

201.

73/341, para. 52

Invites Member States to
equally consider women as
candidates for the position of
President of the General
Assembly, and encourages
Presidents-elect to continue to
strive for both gender and
geographical balance within
the Office of the President of
the General Assembly.

Member States

Provision to be implemented
on an ongoing basis.

76. Requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to provide
to the President of the General
Assembly, within existing
resources, adequate
administrative, technical,
logistical and protocol-related
support necessary to
effectively execute his or her
mandates as president of a
principal organ of the United
Nations.

Secretary-General

Ongoing provision. The
Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and
Conference Management
gave a briefing to the
Working Group at the
seventy-fourth and seventyfifth sessions. A briefing and
a written update were
provided at the seventyseventh session.

Secretary-General

The Department of Safety
and Security continues to
provide close protection
coverage for the President of
the General Assembly from
within existing resources,
and the Department for
General Assembly and
Conference Management
continues to provide protocol
services to the Office of the

Also in:
72/313, para. 92;
71/323, para. 74;
70/305, para. 55;
69/321, para. 50;
and 68/307,
para. 34
202.

75/325,
paras. 76–78
Also in:
73/341, para. 56;
72/313, para. 93;
71/323, para. 75;
70/305, para. 56;
69/321, para. 51;
68/307, para. 35;
67/297, para. 30;
66/294, para. 34;
and 65/315,
para. 26

203.

66/294, para. 35
Also in:
65/315, para. 27;
64/301, para. 11;
and 59/313,
para. 3 (d)

96/99

78. Requests the Secretariat
to provide to the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the
seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly a written
update with recommendations,
and a briefing on the
functioning of the Office of
the President of the General
Assembly, as a follow-up to
the report of the Task Force
convened by the SecretaryGeneral in November 2015
and circulated in the annex to
the letter dated 11 March 2016
from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, taking
into consideration its previous
relevant resolutions.
Requests the SecretaryGeneral to further endeavour
to ensure, within agreed
resources, that the President of
the General Assembly is
provided with proper protocol
and security services and
adequate office space, with a
view to enabling the President
of the Assembly to carry out
his or her functions in a

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

manner commensurate with
the dignity and stature of the
Office.

204.

71/323, para. 76
Also in:
70/305, para. 60;
69/321, para. 52;
68/307, para. 36;
67/297, paras. 31
and 32; 66/294,
para. 36; 65/315,
para. 28; 63/309,
para. 5; and
60/286, annex,
para. 9

205.

59/313,
para. 3 (b)

Comments

President of the General
Assembly. In addition, office
space has been made
available to the Office in the
Conference Building.

Emphasizes the need to
ensure, from within agreed
resources, that the Office of
the President of the General
Assembly is allocated
dedicated Secretariat staff,
with responsibility to, in an
efficient and capable manner,
coordinate the transition
between Presidents, manage
interactions between the
President and the SecretaryGeneral and preserve
institutional memory,
welcomes the provision by
Member States of staff from
their respective Permanent
Missions to be seconded to the
Office of the President, and
encourages the continuation of
this existing good practice.

Secretariat,
Department for
General Assembly
and Conference
Management

Decides to strengthen the role
and leadership of the
President of the General
Assembly by:

Secretary-General

Provision implemented on an
ongoing basis. The
Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management provides
technical, procedural and
substantive support to the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly
throughout the year and
gives a briefing to
Presidents-elect and their
teams on the work of the
forthcoming session.
As from 2016, the Department
for General Assembly and
Conference Management
organizes an induction
programme each year.
The Department for General
Assembly and Conference
Management also serves as
focal point for the institutional
memory of the work and
practices of the General
Assembly within the
Secretariat.
Provision implemented as
from the sixtieth session
(A/61/483, p. 18).

(b) Augmenting the
resources available to the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly from within
existing resources, subject to
consideration by the Assembly
of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium
2006–2007, to provide for two
further additional posts at
management and senior levels
to be filled on an annual basis
following consultations with
the incoming President,
beginning at the sixtieth
session of the Assembly.
23-12551

97/99

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

206.

58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 10

The resources available to the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly in personnel
and other support shall be
augmented from within existing
resources, bearing in mind the
provisions of paragraph 22 of
the annex to resolution 55/285.
Five additional posts shall be
made available to supplement
current support, of which three
shall be filled on an annual
basis, following consultations
with the incoming President,
beginning at the fifty-ninth
session of the Assembly.

Secretary-General

Provision implemented as
from the fifty-ninth session
(A/61/483, p. 11, and
A/62/608).

207.

55/285, annex,
para. 22

Additional measures are
required to implement
paragraph 44 of the annex to
resolution 51/241, in
particular in the area of
substantive support for the
President of the General
Assembly. Therefore,
adequate support should be
made available to the Office
of the President in the
substantive areas of its work.
To this end, the SecretaryGeneral is requested to take
appropriate measures and to
submit proposals to the
relevant committees for their
consideration during the fiftysixth session of the Assembly.

Secretary-General

Implemented on an ongoing
basis. See also other relevant
provisions.

Decides to strengthen the role
and leadership of the
President of the General
Assembly by:

Secretary-General

As from the sixty-eighth
session, office space has
been made available to the
Office of the President of the
General Assembly in the
Conference Building.

Also in:
51/241, annex,
para. 44

208.

59/313,
para. 3 (c)

(c) Making available to the
President of the General
Assembly adequate office and
conference space with a view
to enabling the President to
carry out his/her functions in a
manner commensurate with
the dignity and stature of the
Office.

98/99

23-12551

A/77/942
Number

Resolution

Text of provision

Implementing entity

Comments

209.

60/286, annex,
para. 11

Requests the Secretary-General
to continue to make the
necessary arrangements for the
provision of transitional office
accommodation and other
support to the President-elect
of the General Assembly, in
accordance with resolution
58/126.

Secretary-General

As from the fifty-ninth
session, transitional office
space and other support has
been provided to the
Presidents-elect (A/61/483,
p. 11, and A/62/608, p. 6).

Also in:
58/126, annex,
sect. A, para. 11

23-12551

99/99
