A/71/1016–S/2017/556

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
10 August 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda items 13 and 117

Security Council
Seventy-second year

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Implementing the responsibility to protect: accountability
for prevention
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
There is a gap between our stated commitment to the responsibility to protect
and the daily reality confronted by populations exposed to the risk of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. To close that gap, we must
ensure that the responsibility to protect is implemented in prac tice. One of the
principal ways in which we can do so is by strengthening accountability for the
implementation of the responsibility to protect and by ensuring rigorous and open
scrutiny of practice, based on agreed principles. Accountability ties authori ties to
their populations and individual States to the international community. In the present
report practical steps that can be taken by Member States, intergovernmental bodies
and the United Nations system to strengthen accountability for the prevention of
atrocity crimes are outlined. First, the relationship between the legal, moral and
political responsibilities associated with the responsibility to protect and different
forms of accountability are outlined. Then steps are identified that can be taken to
strengthen accountability for the prevention of atrocity crimes at the national level,
to enhance the role of intergovernmental bodies and to improve the accountability of
the United Nations system to those it serves.

17-13686 (E)

010917

*1713686*

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

I. Introduction
1.
I prioritize prevention, as I believe all of us should. By prevention, I mean
doing everything we can to help States to avert the outbreak of the crises that take
such a high toll on humanity. Of course, atrocity crimes impose a particularly heavy
toll on humanity and their prevention is at the heart of my overall prevention
agenda.
2.
The international community recognizes that States have the primary
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. 1 We also recognize that there is a collective
responsibility to encourage and assist States to fulfil their primary responsibility and
to use diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means, in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to protect populations
from atrocity crimes. Should peaceful means be inadequate and national authorities
manifestly fail to protect their populations, Member States have stated that they are
prepared to take collective action, in a timely and decisive manner, in accordance
with the Charter, including Chapter VII. That was agreed when all Heads of State
and Government adopted the World Summit Outcome in 2005. 2 It has been
reaffirmed many times since. The Security Council has adopted more than 50
resolutions that refer to the responsibility to protect and has reaffirmed the principle
at least six times. It has reminded Governments of their primary responsibility to
protect, 3 urged national authorities to ensure accountability for violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law, and has twice mandated peace
operations to support host Governments to fulfil their responsibility to protect. 4 In
2009, the General Assembly reaffirmed its intention to continue consideration of the
concept (see resolution 63/308). More than 100 Member States have actively
contributed to the ongoing consideration by the General Assembly of the
responsibility to protect during eight informal and interactive dialogues since 2009.
They have used those opportunities to clarify the principle, reaffirm their
commitment to it, share experiences and lessons learned, and outline the steps
needed to make the responsibility to protect a reality everywhere. The Human
Rights Council has adopted more than 20 resolutions that refer to the responsibility
to protect. In 2016, it called upon all Member States to work to prevent potential
situations that could result in atrocity crimes and, where relevant, to address the
legacy of past atrocities to prevent recurrence (see resolution 33/19).
3.
Beyond the United Nations, an increasing number of regional and subregional
arrangements have indicated their commitment to the responsibility to protect (see
A/65/877-S/2011/393). Fifty-nine Member States from every region of the world
and the European Union have now appointed a senior official to act as a national
focal point on the responsibility to protect. Argentina, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Switzerland and the United Republic of Tanzania, together with civil society
organizations, have established the Global Action against Mass Atrocity Crimes
initiative. The Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region also constitute
__________________
1

The term “atrocity crimes” is used only to refer to the four acts specified in paragraph 138 of the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity are defined in international criminal law, including in articles 5 -8 of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Ethnic cleansing, while not established as a
distinct crime, includes acts that can amount to one of these crimes, in particular genocide and
crimes against humanity.
2
See World Summit Outcome, paras. 138-140.
3
See Security Council resolutions 2348 (2017), 2339 (2017), 2332 (2016), 2327 (2016), 2317
(2016), 2295 (2016), 2288 (2016), 2277 (2016), 2095 (2013) and 2014 (2011).
4
See Security Council resolutions 2085 (2012) and 1996 (2011).
2/16

17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

important regional venues to advance the prevention of atrocities. Civil society is
also playing an active role and has established several regional networks for atrocity
prevention, which seek to strengthen the resilience of their communities.
4.
The consensus on the purposes of the responsibility to protect spans every
continent. There is no longer any question that the protection of populations from
atrocity crimes is both a national and an internatio nal responsibility, which is
universal and enduring. However, too often we still fail to take the necessary steps
to prevent such crimes and protect populations at risk. The number of civilians
subjected to atrocity crimes, including women and children, ha s increased
significantly over the past few years. We have seen increasing violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. That has contributed to a refugee crisis on
a scale not seen since the end of the Second World War. It is imperative t hat we put
an end to these negative trends; indeed, we have a responsibility to do so.
5.
Atrocity crimes have regional and international implications that extend well
beyond national borders. The massive flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons they generate create immense humanitarian and protection needs and put
considerable pressure on host communities, Governments and the international
community. Such crises have often strengthened calls for action, including military
intervention, to protect populations, which raise difficult political and moral
questions. The human and financial costs associated with the use of force when
atrocity crimes have been committed are extremely high, the prospects and
consequences always uncertain. In my remarks to the Security Council on
10 January 2017, I emphasized that we spend far more time and resources
responding to crises than we do on preventing them. I explained that a new
approach was needed, one that brings the prevention of atrocity crimes back to the
fore and that closes the gap between commitment and reality. One of the principal
ways in which we can do this is by strengthening accountability and ensuring the
rigorous and open scrutiny of practice, in the light of agreed principles.
6.
We already have some guidelines on how to make atrocity prevention a
practical programme of action. The Human Rights Up Front action plan constitutes
a major effort to achieve existing United Nations prevention mandates through
cultural and operational change and engage ment with Member States. It is intended
to lead to improved early warning, efficiency, support for national authorities and
internal accountability. The recent United Nations reviews of peace operations, of
the peacebuilding architecture and of women, peace and security underscored the
need for an overall shift of resources and priorities of the United Nations towards
prevention. In General Assembly dialogues on the responsibility to protect, Member
States have repeatedly made political commitments to suppo rt the prevention of
atrocity crimes. In its resolution 2150 (2014), the Security Council called upon
Member States to “recommit to prevent and fight against genocide, and other
serious crimes under international law”. The successful implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes that sustainable development
depends on fostering peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free from fear
and all forms of violence which, in the worst case, includes atrocity crimes. The
New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 71/1, called on Member States to address the root causes of refugee
movements and to prevent or reduce conflict by peaceful means. To make atrocity
prevention a practical programme of action, however, there must be greater synergy
among the three pillars of the United Nations system: human rights, peace and
security and development.
7.
The ongoing work of developing and implementing the responsibility to
protect requires continuous, frank and inclusive dialogue. My Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect has consulted widely in preparing the present report.
17-13686

3/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

Every Member State was invited to provide written contributions in response to a
questionnaire, as were civil society organizations. Three preparatory panels were
organized, two in New York and one in Geneva, to provide States with an
opportunity to reflect on the issues, seek clarification and contribute their own
insights. My Special Adviser has also engaged with individual Member States,
networks such as the Global Network of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points,
the European Network of Focal Points, Parliamentarians for Global Action, global
and regional networks of national human rights institutions and ombudspersons and
other interested actors.
8.
We must prioritize prevention, not just in word but also in deed. To meet this
challenge, we must strengthen accountability for implementation of the responsibility
to protect.

II. The responsibility to protect and accountability
9.
As we turn towards implementation, precision is needed on who is responsible
for the prevention of atrocity crimes, including national institutions and
intergovernmental mechanisms, and how accountability can be achieved. Answering
those questions will help to translate the responsibility to protect into an agenda for
individual and collective action.
10. The responsibility to protect is based upon, and implemented through, existing
national and international law, but it also reflects our moral responsibil ity for the
prevention of atrocity crimes and the protection of populations. The unanimous
adoption of the responsibility to protect by all Heads of State and Government in
2005, and its subsequent reaffirmation by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, establishes political responsibility for atrocity prevention. Since the
principle encompasses legal, moral and political responsibilities, so too must our
approach to accountability.
11. Legal accountability relates to obligations under national and international
law. Accountability for implementation of the responsibility to protect, however,
goes beyond legal obligations and includes a moral and political dimension. Moral
accountability challenges us to scrutinize whether we are living up to ethica l
standards. In national settings, political accountability refers to the relationship
between Governments, parliaments and other statutory bodies and the populations
they serve. Internationally, it refers to the need for those invested with authority and
responsibility to be answerable to their peers. Each form of accountability involves
different actors, institutions and mechanisms. They are united, however, by a
common goal: to ensure that those with a responsibility for preventing atrocity
crimes are held accountable for fulfilling that responsibility.
12. The primary responsibility of the State and its officials for the protection of
populations from atrocity crimes under pillar one of the three -pillar strategy for
implementation of the responsibility to protect is the cornerstone of that
responsibility. It includes the prevention of atrocity crimes within the jurisdiction of
the State. Under international human rights and humanitarian law, States have legal
duties to refrain from committing violations of fundamental human rights, to protect
individuals and groups from such violations and to take positive steps to ensure the
fulfilment of rights. It is vital that States adopt and implement the core treaties of

4/16

17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

international human rights law. 5 Most national constitutions and legal codes include
provisions guaranteeing the fundamental rights of populations. States should also
ensure that genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity are prohibited in
national law and that those laws are rigorously enforc ed. States also have an
obligation to prevent and punish atrocity crimes and to promote compliance with the
law. The obligations of States under conventional and customary law apply to all
States and no derogation is permissible. The duty to prevent atrocity crimes is
therefore a clear legal obligation for States.
13. The legal obligations of States extend to addressing the root causes of atrocity
crimes, including persistent patterns of identity-based discrimination, economic
deprivation and related disparities and weaknesses in State structures. The principal
objective is the creation of State structures and institutions that are functioning and
legitimate, respect human rights and the rule of law, deliver services equitably and
can address or defuse sources of tension before they escalate.
14. National moral responsibility for the prevention of atrocity crimes stems from
the broad range of universally shared values. Political responsibility, meanwhile, is
narrower and arises from the explicit commitment States have made to the
prevention of atrocity crimes, but also provides opportunities for clearer
accountability mechanisms on both national and international levels. In committing
themselves to the responsibility to protect in the 2005 World Summit Outcome ,
States made a bold promise. In paragraph 138, they recognized that: “Each
individual State has the responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. This responsibility entails the
prevention of such crimes, including their incitement, through appropriate and
necessary means.”
15. The collective responsibility to protect, as reflected in pillars two and three of
the strategy, includes existing legal obligations to prevent atrocity crimes an d to
support others in doing so. All States have an extraterritorial obligation to take all
reasonable measures to prevent genocide. They have an additional responsibility to
raise the alarm when genocide is imminent or is being committed. In relation to w ar
crimes, common article 1 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions points to an obligation
not just to abide by the law but to “ensure respect” for the Conventions in all
circumstances. The Charter of the United Nations imposes on States the obligation
to “accept and carry out” decisions of the Security Council (Article 25). That would
include decisions taken in response to the risk of atrocity crimes or to evidence of
their commission. States parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court have a legal obligation to assist the Court, including by detaining and
surrendering individuals indicted by it. Additional Protocol I (1977) to the Geneva
Conventions established a duty for States parties to act, jointly or individually, in
cooperation with the United Nations and in conformity with the Charter in situations
of serious violations of the Geneva Conventions and Protocol (article 89). The
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol requires States
parties to respect the rights of and fulfil their obligations vis-à-vis refugees. The
Arms Trade Treaty, among other things, prohibits the transfer of certain arms and
items in situations where a State party “has knowledge at the time of authorization
that the arms or items would be used in the commission of genocide, crimes against
humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, attacks directed
__________________
5

17-13686

In particular, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Second Optional
Protocol aiming at the abolition of the death penalty; the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights; the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; and the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination.
5/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

against civilian objects or civilians protected as such, or other war crimes as defined
by international agreements to which it is a party” (article 6 (3)).
16. The moral responsibility of the international community to contribute to
protecting populations from harm goes beyond genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, and stems from our common humanity and
solidarity. However, in addition to moral responsibility, the international community
has a political responsibility to contribute to the prevention of those crimes under
pillars two and three of the responsibility to protect.
17. Political responsibility stems from the commitments reflected in paragraphs
138 to 140 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome and subsequent resolutions
referencing the responsibility to protect. As stated in paragraph 139, States have a
collective responsibility “to use appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
peaceful means … to help to protect populations” from atrocity crimes. The
Security Council has special responsibilities. Article 24 (1) of the Charter of the
United Nations confers on the Security Council the “primary resp onsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.” That responsibility stems from the
call in the preamble of the Charter to “save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which … has brought untold sorrow to mankind.” It is amplif ied by the
responsibilities also set out in paragraph 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
where Member States affirmed that they would be “prepared to take collective
action, in a timely and decisive manner, through the Security Council, in accordance
with the Charter … should peaceful means be inadequate and national authorities
are manifestly failing to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity”.

III. States and national mechanisms
18. States are accountable first and foremost to the populations that live within
their borders, but they may also be held accountable for compliance with their
obligations stemming from international law. Compliance with those obligations is
subject to review by intergovernmental or expert-led accountability mechanisms. 6
There are several steps that States can take to strengthen their accountability for
atrocity prevention.
Ratify and implement the core instruments of international human rights and
humanitarian law
19. Not all States have ratified or acceded to the most basic legal instruments
relevant to the responsibility to protect. Forty-seven Member States have not yet
become party to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. Twenty-eight Member States have yet to become party to Additional
Protocols I and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which extend protection
obligations to situations of international and non-international armed conflict.
Seventy-one Member States are still not party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, an important component of the struggle against
impunity for atrocity crimes. Forty-nine Member States have not signed and ratified
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and forty-eight Member States
have not acceded to its 1967 Protocol. More than 60 Member States have not yet
become parties to the Arms Trade Treaty. I strongly urge all Member States to sign,
ratify and implement those instruments of international law that are necessary for
the prevention of atrocity crimes.
__________________
6

6/16

In addition, official capacity does not exempt a person from criminal responsibility, as provided,
for example, under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (article 27).
17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

Conduct periodic self-assessments to ascertain how national efforts to prevent
atrocity crimes can be strengthened
20. As the primary responsibility to protect rests with national authorities, it is
incumbent on those authorities to ensure that they have an accurate understanding of
the sources of potential risk within their communities, the mechanisms and policies
needed to reduce or mitigate those risks and the capacity to protect vulnerable
populations, should the need arise. Under pillar two of the responsibility to protect,
States can request international support when they do not have the necessary
capacity, or where there are risks that cannot be addressed by them alone.
I encourage all States to conduct a national assessment of risk and resilience, using
the framework of analysis for atrocity crimes developed by my Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect. 7 That assessment
should be regular, comprehensive and include the identification of vulnerable
populations.
Existing national political accountability mechanisms can be utilized to support
atrocity prevention
21. In most countries, national parliaments are the principal means by which
Governments are held accountable. They provide valuable forums in which national
policies and actions are scrutinized and debated. They create opportunities for civil
society, the media and concerned individuals to engage directly with decision makers and representatives, further enhancing accountability and increasing the
national pool of talent contributing to the prevention of atrocity crimes. Parliaments
should hold their Governments accountable for fulfilling their commitment to the
responsibility to protect and the legal obligations on which that responsibility is
based. That could be achieved by the establishment of an annual parliamentary
debate on the implementation of the responsibility to protect and/or the
establishment of all-party working groups or committees. Parliamentary processes
could focus on national challenges and preventive actions (pillar one) and include
consideration of resource allocation for atrocity prevention. They could also
consider steps taken in fulfilment of the responsibilities relevant to pillars two and
three of the responsibility to protect, such as international diplomacy, foreign
assistance programmes, contributions to peacekeeping, human rights reporting and
field missions, humanitarian action in situations where atrocity crimes are
threatened and the protection of refugees fleeing from atrocity crimes.
Mainstreaming atrocity prevention in national aid programmes is particularly
important, since States can assist each other to meet their responsibilities through
such programmes. Where funding for aid programmes is limited, States should
prioritize support for those that can have the greatest impact on atrocity prevention. 8
Integrate concerns about the prevention of atrocity crimes into the work of
national human rights mechanisms
22. Over 120 Member States have formal domestic mechanisms for protecting and
promoting international human rights standards, most including a national human
rights institution and/or a national human rights ombudsperson. I strongly
encourage those States that have not yet established such a mechanism to do so, to
support implementation of their obligations under international human rights and
__________________
7

Available at www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/documents/publications -andresources/Framework%20of%20Analysis%20for%20Atrocity%20Crimes_EN.pdf .
8
As a complement or alternative to parliamentary review, some States in Latin America and the
Great Lakes region of Africa have established national mechanisms to address atrocity
prevention.
17-13686

7/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

humanitarian law. Most of the national mechanisms that exist comply with the
principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights (the Paris Principles), which set standards for their
independent status and functioning. Those that do not yet comply with the Paris
Principles should strive to do so. National human rights mechanisms can play a
critical role in supporting atrocity prevention and should be better utilized. They can
enhance transparency in risk assessment and measures taken or intended to be taken,
by adding an authoritative yet independent voice to natio nal deliberations. They can
conduct their own risk assessment for atrocity crimes, identifying any protection
gaps and recommending steps to close them. To achieve that, national human rights
mechanisms should integrate concerns about atrocity prevention i nto their annual
reporting to parliaments, Governments and the public, and in parliamentary debates.
They could also include consideration of the prevention of atrocity crimes in the
reports they prepare for United Nations human rights mechanisms and, when
necessary, submit complaints or send information and analysis to those mechanisms.
Many national human rights mechanisms are members of at least one global or
regional network. Those networks offer an important opportunity for peer -to-peer
exchange on the risks of atrocity crimes, prevention strategies and the challenges of
implementation, which would encourage national action, facilitate the sharing of
lessons and open opportunities for mutual support.
Guarantee the accountability of the security forces and those that control them
23. Legitimate and effective security forces are a prerequisite for the prevention of
atrocity crimes and are thus a fundamental part of State capacity that must be
accountable. National accountability mechanisms can ensure that personnel under
the control of the State, especially the security forces, respect human rights and
international humanitarian law and fulfil their responsibility to protect populations
from violations within their jurisdiction. A clear chain of comman d facilitates
transparency and accountability. In addition, the removal of statutory limitations,
amnesties or immunities that obstruct the prosecution of State officials and other
individuals responsible for atrocity crimes is compliant with international law and
strengthens national legal frameworks for accountability. Ensuring the accountability
of security forces and those that control them, including senior State officials and
the judiciary, increases their capacity to serve as inhibitors of atrocity c rimes. It also
reduces the likelihood of them contributing to the root causes of those crimes (see
A/68/947-S/2014/449, paras. 43-58).
Ensure accountability and redress for past and present atrocity crimes
24. Ensuring accountability and redress for past and present atrocity crimes is
crucial to assuring their non-recurrence. The primary responsibility to protect of
each State entails a duty to investigate and prosecute alleged atrocity crimes, as
established by international law, reinforcing the international criminal justice
principle of complementarity between national jurisdictions and the International
Criminal Court. I encourage States to ensure that those responsible for atrocity
crimes in their territory are prosecuted. If they fail to do so, I encourage the
international community to consider all legal options and practical steps to ensure
justice for all victims and contribute to the prevention of future violations. In
societies that have experienced atrocity crimes, a fair and inclusive transitional
justice process can help prevent relapse into further violence or crimes. Transitional
justice initiatives can encompass judicial and non-judicial mechanisms, including
criminal investigations and prosecutions, reparations, truth-seeking and institutional
and legal reform. They can address the root causes of tensions by promoting truth telling and ensuring accountability and access to justice. Addressing past grievances
and violations can help to restore the dignity of victims, acknowledge and facilitate
8/16

17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

redress for violations and enable reconciliation. That is likely to help re -establish
the rule of law and restore confidence in the State, promote stable and durable peace
and deter further atrocity crimes.
Promote more open reflection on the risks of atrocity crimes, inhibitors and the
actions necessary to strengthen prevention
25. Accountability for the prevention of atrocity crimes can be strengthened by
open reflection and inclusive dialogue on national experiences and the practical
steps needed to strengthen atrocity prevention. The perspectives of women and
youth should be included in risk assessments and the design of measures to close
atrocity prevention gaps. National focal points for the respon sibility to protect can,
in line with their political responsibility to promote the principle in their daily work
and improve intragovernmental and intergovernmental efforts to prevent and halt
atrocity crimes, push for effective atrocity prevention strate gies through
international dialogue with their counterparts. An active, diverse and robust civil
society that can operate freely and openly without fear of harassment, persecution or
reprisal also contributes to ensuring accountability. States should encou rage and
support civil society, including national media and academia, to hold Governments
accountable for the prevention of atrocity crimes and facilitate open and transparent
national discourse. Civil society, national media and academia make essential
contributions to national dialogue and debate about atrocity prevention. For
example, when national parliaments deliberate on reports provided by national
human rights mechanisms, civil society can offer “shadow” reports, bringing in
otherwise diverse perspectives from different parts of the country and minority
groups to enrich the process. That strengthens transparency and hence
accountability by increasing the range of perspectives considered. The media also
has a vital role to play. Fact-based, impartial media is fundamentally important but
is under threat in many parts of the world. The independence and plurality of the
media should be encouraged, including the right of national, racial, religious and
ethnic minorities to have their own media outlets. States can create a legal and
social environment that encourages professional and ethical standards in journalism,
and encourages freedom of the press.

IV. Intergovernmental bodies
26. Experience teaches us that atrocity prevention is most effective wh en national,
regional and global actors work together. In the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
Heads of State and Government identified the important role of regional and
subregional arrangements in supporting atrocity prevention. States committed to
utilizing regional and subregional arrangements to encourage and help each other to
fulfil their primary responsibility to protect, including by helping to build sufficient
capacity to protect their populations from atrocity crimes (see paras. 138 -139); to
utilizing consensual measures under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations to protect populations from atrocity crimes (para. 139); and to cooperating
with the Security Council in the application of measures, when required. During the
preparatory phase of the present report, States from all regions described enhanced
cooperation between international and regional organizations as crucial to
preventing atrocity crimes, because of the unique position regional actors have —
both to mobilize collective action at the national level and to foster regional
cooperation. They have the advantage of proximity and knowledge of the risks of
each region and of the most appropriate ways to respond. When the Security
Council grants mandates to regional or subregional organizations, it is important
that it monitors their respect for international humanitarian, human rights and

17-13686

9/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

refugee law in implementing such mandates and that the United Nations fully
respect the Secretary-General’s human rights due diligence policy on United
Nations support to non-United Nations security forces.
27. During the three preparatory panels on the theme of the present report, States
consistently called for more opportunities for dialogue at the United Nations. Many
of their written submissions and interventions during the consultations for the report
called for the inclusion of an item on the agenda of the General Assembly on the
prevention of atrocity crimes and implementation of the responsibility to protect.
I am of the view that this would strengthen the accountability of deliberations,
demand deeper consideration of the difficult issues raised in the context of
preventing atrocity crimes and lay the foundations that are needed to ensure that the
United Nations moves decisively from principle to practice. To ensure that there are
more opportunities for free-flowing discussion, the innovative practice of holding
informal thematic panels, introduced in the preparation of the present report, should
be continued, complementing a yearly formal interactive debate. General Assembly
discussions on country situations of concern can also address the risks of atrocity
crimes and measures to mitigate them. 9
28. The Security Council has a specific responsibility to take timely and decisive
action to protect populations by preventing atrocity crimes. It also has the authority,
under article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute, to refer situations of concern to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and thus extend the jurisdiction of
the Court. In practice, however, the deliberations of the Council sometimes fail to
generate solutions, including in situations where there is a serious risk of atrocity
crimes, or when they are already being committed. The expectation of the
international community that the Council will take timely and decisive action to
protect populations from atrocity crimes has therefore not yet been fulfilled. In
response, States have put forward different proposals for strengthening the
effectiveness and transparency of the working methods of the Council as it responds
to the threat and commission of atrocity crimes. Those proposals include calls for
the Council to adopt a voluntary code of conduct, including veto restraint, by the
cross-regional Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group, which enjoys
the support of 110 Member States (see A/70/621-S/2015/978). In addition, France
and Mexico have issued a political declaration on suspension of the veto in
situations where atrocity crimes are committed, which is supported by 93 Member
States.
29. Member States are increasingly demanding that the Security Council be held
accountable to those in whose name it acts: the membership as a whole. At the same
time, the Council confronts ever greater challenges relating to the implementation of
its responsibility to prevent atrocity crimes. The United Nations system as a whole,
including its Member States, should learn from experience and strive to improve
implementation, using all available tools. During the consultations held for the
preparation of the present report, a number of Member States suggested that this
could be achieved by holding an annual thematic debate on the responsibility to
protect and atrocity prevention, providing States with an oppo rtunity to review the
actions of the Council in a holistic way, consider practical operational matters and
identify future priorities. During the preparatory activities for the present report,
many States expressed support for a regular thematic debate on this subject,
indicating that it should involve members of the Security Council, other interested
Member States, my Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
__________________
9

10/16

That includes accountability for past violations. For example, in resolution 71/248, the General
Assembly established the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

Responsibility to Protect, and the other main protection actors. There could also be
an informal or working-level committee for Member States, including Council
members, to meet more regularly to facilitate the sort of frank exchange of
perspectives and information necessary to improve effectiveness over the long term.
30. Collective action to protect populations is likely to make a decisive
contribution only if it is supported by a viable political strategy and adequate
means. The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure that its mandates are
tailored to the context concerned and that peace operations are adequately
resourced. Mandates to protect populations must be strong and achievable, based on
clear analysis and a political strategy. It is a basic principle of accountability that
those authorized to undertake actions on behalf of others are accountable to those
that authorize them. That means ensuring that States and intergovernmental
organizations that are assigned responsibility for implementing Security Council
mandates are accountable to the Council. The Council should continue to monitor
implementation of its decisions carefully to ensure full respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and the specific provisions of its mandates. It might consider issuing
mandates that include a time limitation, or request progress repor ts from States and
intergovernmental organizations authorized to implement its mandates.
31. Collective action to prevent atrocity crimes must be well -crafted and based on
impartial and evidence-based assessments. Decisions require careful assessment of
the situation, a review of the likely consequences of action and inaction and an
assessment of the most effective and appropriate strategy for achieving our
collective goals. It is therefore important that assessments are conducted fairly,
prudently and professionally, without political interference or double standards.
Through implementation of the Human Rights Up Front initiative, the United
Nations system has endeavoured to meet those expectations.
32. The Economic and Social Council also has an important role to play in
supporting atrocity prevention and strengthening accountability. The prevention of
atrocity crimes is fundamental to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
especially Goal 16 on the promotion of just, peaceful and inclusive societie s. Goal 16
requires determined action to significantly reduce all forms of violence, which
implies action to reduce the risk of the most systematic and destructive form of
collective violence, namely atrocity crimes. It is important, therefore, to examine
how economic and social cooperation, including development assistance, can be
better utilized to support the strengthening of national inhibitors of atrocity crimes,
by which I mean particular capacities, institutions and actors that help to prevent
escalation from risk to imminent crisis (see A/68/947-S/2014/449). In particular,
targets 16.3 and 16.a of the Sustainable Development Goals reinforce the need to
promote the rule of law, ensure equal access to justice and strengthen national
capacity to prevent conflict, which are all key inhibitors of atrocity crimes.
33. The Human Rights Council makes important contributions to the prevention of
atrocity crimes. The Council, the human rights treaty bodies and the sp ecial
procedure mandate holders encourage the accountability of States to their peers for
compliance with international human rights and humanitarian law. Those bodies
help States to evaluate their own situations and contribute by making
recommendations to other States as to how they might meet their obligations. They
also add an additional layer of transparency to identification of the potential risks of
atrocity crimes through their monitoring role. States benefit from the insights
offered by the Special Rapporteurs, who are independent experts, since they help to
identify issues requiring action, recommend steps that might be taken and provide
support for capacity-building. States should therefore provide the special procedure
mandate holders with open invitations to visit and assess their national situation,
engage openly and frankly in dialogue and give serious consideration to
17-13686

11/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

implementing any resulting recommendations. In addition, the engagement of both
the special procedure mandate holders and independent experts of the human rights
treaty bodies provides a vital mechanism for engaging in open dialogue with States
on human rights concerns and the risks of atrocity crimes. Several States have
proposed that my Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genoc ide and on the
Responsibility to Protect brief the Human Rights Council more regularly on
situations that could give rise to heightened risks of atrocity crimes.
34. The universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council is especially well
placed to support efforts to prevent atrocity crimes. In 2006, in its resolution
60/251, the General Assembly decided that the Human Rights Council should
address situations of violations of human rights, including gross and systematic
violations, and make recommendations thereon, and should also promote the
effective coordination and the mainstreaming of human rights within the United
Nations system. The Human Rights Council later emphasized that the review should
also take into account applicable international humanitarian law. 10 In the annex to its
resolution 5/1, the Human Rights Council established that the basis of the universal
periodic review would include, among other elements, human rights instruments to
which the State is a party and voluntary pledges and commitments made by States,
such as the 2005 commitment to the responsibility to protect. With a mandate that
clearly includes considerations directly relevant to atrocity prevention, the universal
periodic review could be better utilized to facilitate more systematic reflection on
the risks of atrocity crimes, encourage States to develop plans, policies and
strategies to address longer-term risks and mobilize international support for
national initiatives to address them. The universal periodic review can support
fulfilment of national responsibilities under pillars one and two of the responsibility
to protect through its focus on actionable recommendations and their
implementation and follow-up. Introducing an atrocity prevention lens to it would
help to ensure that underlying risks are identified early, facilitate remedial action by
national Governments and promote international assistance, including technical
assistance, where needed.
35. The universal periodic review could be better utilized to support atrocity
prevention through the adoption of four simple steps:
(a) First, the inclusion of risk assessments and preventive measures for
atrocity crimes in the preparatory materials. In preparing for their review, States
could conduct consultations, which could include a review of national assessments
of atrocity crime risk and resilience, reports from relevant institutions, including
national human rights mechanisms and parliamentary processes, and consultations
with civil society. Preparatory material provided by the United Nations could
include information about risk and resilience assessments and prevention activities.
Additionally, information provided by national stakeholders could incl ude an
analysis of risk factors for atrocity crimes and a review of the capacities, initiatives
or policies developed by the State in that regard;
(b) Second, the inclusion of atrocity prevention issues in the peer -to-peer
dialogue. There are several ways in which the dialogue itself could be utilized to
address considerations of atrocity prevention. States could pay attention to issues
related to atrocity prevention in the questions and recommendations that they
provide. Countries under review might also reflect on considerations of atrocity
prevention in their oral presentations and replies;
(c) Third, ensuring that information about and discussion of risks and
preventive measures for atrocity crimes are adequately reflected in the outcome
__________________
10

12/16

See Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, annex.
17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

document and its actionable recommendations. States under review should be
strongly encouraged to accept recommendations that can help them to close any
gaps in their strategic and operational efforts to prevent atrocity crimes;
(d) Fourth, ensuring that, where relevant and appropriate, other States
provide the necessary assistance to help countries under stress prevent atrocity
crimes and protect their populations. As mentioned earlier, pillar two of the
responsibility to protect gives States a responsibility to assi st one another to fulfil
their primary responsibility to protect. United Nations field operations, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, my Special Advisers on
Genocide Prevention and on the Responsibility to Protect and othe r relevant entities
should offer support for the implementation of recommendations and the adoption
of practical steps to strengthen the mechanisms for the prevention of atrocity
crimes.
36. Most regions now have their own regional or subregional human ri ghts
mechanisms. They should also be utilized to support atrocity prevention. While each
is distinctive, taking account of the relevant regional specificities, regional and
subregional human rights mechanisms can help to prevent atrocity crimes by
identifying potential risks, recommending actions and supporting capacity -building.
Some mechanisms might also receive and consider complaints from individuals or
groups, or review relevant national legislation. States and the regional and
subregional human rights mechanisms should actively consider ways of utilizing
those capacities to strengthen and support national accountability for the prevention
of atrocity crimes.
37. States might also consider utilizing other forms of peer -to-peer exchange to
strengthen their efforts for atrocity prevention and open up opportunities for mutual
support. Focal points provide a valuable opportunity for peer -to-peer learning and
engagement. Fifty-nine States, the members of the Global Network of the
Responsibility to Protect Focal Points, have appointed a national focal point for the
responsibility to protect, to coordinate national implementation and to facilitate
cooperation with other States and international actors. The member States of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Latin American
Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention have also taken significant
initiatives in that regard. I welcome plans to develop a manual for national focal
points that will assist them in their work and help other States to take the decision to
appoint their own focal point. Focal points can continue using their deliberations to
report on their activities, foster practical dialogue on implementation and discuss
ways to assist each other in the design and implementation of prevention activities.

V. United Nations system
38. In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, Heads of State and Government
emphasized that the responsibility of the international community to protect
populations from atrocity crimes should be exercised through the United Nations.
We must continue to mainstream the responsibility to protect across the whole
United Nations system, so that all the tools and capacities we have can be brought to
bear to prevent atrocity crimes and protect vulnerable popu lations. To achieve that,
we must strengthen the cooperation of United Nations entities on atrocity prevention
and improve our own internal accountability for it.
39. United Nations country teams can play a role in supporting States to
strengthen their resilience to atrocity crimes. Their programmes in support of good
governance, the rule of law, education, sustainable development and women’s and
children’s rights, among others, all contribute to atrocity prevention. United Nations
17-13686

13/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

peace operations must have the capacities and political support that they need to
implement protection mandates and the appropriate measures in place to review
their performance, when necessary. We must also strengthen our support for training
and lesson learning, to ensure that peacekeepers have the skills and knowledge they
need. Member States can contribute by committing themselves to the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians. All United Nations offices must implement
the human rights due diligence policy, in which measures are set out that should be
taken to ensure that any support provided to non -United Nations forces is consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and with the
responsibility to respect, promote and encourage resp ect for international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.
40. I have a responsibility to tell the Security Council what it needs to know. To
that end, and when appropriate, I will bring to its attention any matter that may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and security, including situations
where there is a risk of atrocity crimes. 11 In accordance with its responsibilities
under the responsibility to protect principle and to help the Council in deciding
which measures to take to successfully protect populations, I will seek to ensure that
Secretariat briefings on country situations systematically include an analysis of the
risks of atrocity crimes. 12
41. In practice, it can sometimes be difficult to assure direct accountability to
populations that are under stress owing to the risk of atrocity crimes. In such
situations, those with mandates for protection must represent the views and interests
of vulnerable populations. That includes, but is not limited to, the United Nations
High Commissioners for Human Rights and for Refugees, the heads of United
Nations field presences, my Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and for Children and Armed Conflict and my Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect. United Nations field presences have
a responsibility to speak on behalf of the vulnerable and raise protection concerns,
in public, if judged necessary, a responsibility reinforced by the Human Rights Up
Front initiative. When they do so, they speak with my full support, but speaking out
is only part of what is needed. Individual States and intergovernmental bodies must
be prepared to listen. It is imperative that the Security Council, the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly provide greater opportunities for those who
speak on behalf of the vulnerable to relay their concerns, and those opportunities
should be extended beyond the United Nations to others, such as humanitarian and
civil society organizations that have field presences in affected regions.
42. My Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility
to Protect continue to play an important role in supporting Member States, regional
and subregional arrangements and the United Nations system to fulfil t heir
responsibility to protect. Their work has been recognized by the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council. 13 During the consultations undertaken in the
preparation of the present report, States emphasized the importance of having both
my Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect brief the Security Council on issues of concern.
__________________
11

The Security Council has recognized that the targeting of civilians and other flagrant and
systematic violations of international human rights and humanitarian law may constitute a threat
to international peace and security (see resolution 1674 (2006), para. 26).
12
The informal expert working groups on country-specific situations established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2242 (2015) could consider information about atrocity crime risks,
including widespread or systematic sexual and gender -based violence, confronting women and
girls, as is the practice in the Security Council informal expert group on the protection of
civilians.
13
See, for example, Security Council resolutions 2171 (2014) and 2150 (2014) and Human Rights
Council resolution 33/19.
14/16

17-13686

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

VI. Conclusions and recommendations
43. There remains too much of a gap between the solemn commitments and
legal obligations of Member States and the actual lived experience of
vulnerable populations. Our failure to deliver on what we have promised by
protecting populations from atrocity crimes shames us all. We must do better.
In the present report, I have explained how practical action on the prevention
of atrocity crimes must be built on the bonds of trust and transparency forged
by accountability. As we continue moving from the normative and political
development of the responsibility to protect towards practical implementation,
we must bear the duty of accountability in mind. There are many things that
States, the United Nations and intergovernmental mechanisms can and should
do to strengthen atrocity prevention, but let us prioritize five simple, practical
steps.
44. States have the primary responsibility to protect their populations from
atrocity crimes. All Member States can:
(a) Appoint a senior official to serve as a national focal point for the
responsibility to protect to coordinate national activities, share good practi ces
and cooperate on capacity-building;
(b) Sign, ratify and implement the key international treaties and
protocols associated with the prohibition and prevention of atrocity crimes and
the provision of assistance to their victims. Member States should also ensure
that atrocity crimes and their incitement are criminalized by domestic law;
(c) Issue open invitations to the special procedures mandated by the
Human Rights Council and include an assessment of the risks of atrocity
crimes and the measures taken in their regular reporting to other human rights
mechanisms, such as the universal periodic review and the relevant treaty
bodies. States should accept the guidance and support contained in the
recommendations of the human rights mechanisms and develop strategies for
atrocity prevention accordingly;
(d) Conduct regular risk assessments and take the necessary action to
reduce the risks of atrocity crimes, if identified. Assessments should include a
review of whether and what kind of international support could strengthen
national capacity. All assessments and associated action should include the
participation of civil society, community actors, religious leaders and elders,
women and youth;
(e) Establish domestic mechanisms to ensure that national authorities
can be held accountable for acting upon their commitment to the responsibility
to protect. That could be achieved through thematic parliamentary debates,
permanent parliamentary working groups, annual reports by national human
rights institutions or human rights ombudspersons, or other mechanisms, such
as national committees for atrocity prevention.
45. There is a shared responsibility to protect held by all States and exercised
both individually and collectively. States and intergovernmental mechanisms
have responsibilities to assist States to fulfil their primary obligation and to
adopt measures, when necessary, to protect populations from atrocity crimes.
To be legitimate and sustainable, the exercise of international responsibility
must be transparent and accountable. I recommend that States consider five
initiatives designed to strengthen the accountability of international action:

17-13686

15/16

A/71/1016
S/2017/556

(a) Place a specific item on the prevention of atrocity crimes and the
implementation of the responsibility to protect on the agenda of the General
Assembly;
(b) Put the universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council to
better use in preventing atrocity crimes by introducing a focus on the risk of
atrocity crimes and on the actions and support needed to address them;
(c) Utilize the procedures available to ensure that States and regional
and subregional organizations mandated to protect by the Security Council
remain accountable to the Council;
(d) Consider options to promote reflection on the role of the Security
Council in protecting populations from atrocity crimes;
(e) Further develop the opportunities provided by regional and
subregional arrangements to evaluate the risk of atrocity crimes, review
performance and promote the implementation of shared commitments.
46. The responsibility to protect demands that all of us do what we can to
prevent atrocity crimes and protect vulnerable populations. We should ask
ourselves, as individuals, whether we are doing all that we can. The United
Nations will:
(a) Fully include atrocity prevention in the United Nations integrated
prevention platform;
(b) Through my Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect, provide stronger evidence-based insights into the
structural and operational measures that can be taken to prevent atrocities and
support the provision of policy guidance for practitioners on the prevention of
atrocities;
(c) Improve the coordination of United Nations entities to contribute
more effectively to atrocity prevention;
(d) Continue to provide assessments to Member States on our collective
efforts to implement the responsibility to protect.

16/16

17-13686
