S/PV.7403

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7403rd meeting

Monday, 16 March 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2015/151)

15-06968 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1506968*

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2015/151)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Slovakia, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/151, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: Recent avalanches and floods across
Afghanistan, which caused over 250 fatalities, serve to
remind us that the country is not only subject to the cost
of human conflict but is also vulnerable to the regular toll
exacted by natural disasters. The United Nations offers
its condolences to the affected families and commends
the response of the Government and humanitarian
rescue workers, who have worked in the harshest of
conditions to assist survivors and re-establish basic
services. As requested by the Government, the United
Nations humanitarian system has provided emergency
relief and stands ready to deliver further assistance for
longer-term reconstruction.

2/34

16/03/2015

Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7347), a number of significant developments
have brought about renewed hope for an active peace
process in Afghanistan. In addition, the national
unity Government has started to take shape, with the
nomination and approval of a number of ministers.
And Afghanistan and Pakistan have conducted an
increasingly constructive dialogue focused on peace,
trade and security. Those positive developments are a
testament to the efforts of President Ashraf Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Their collaborative
leadership remains essential for any peace talks to
progress, for comprehensive electoral reforms to take
hold and for the implementation of the changes required
to reinvigorate the economy.
To that effect, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) once again urges
political leaders to conclude the appointment process of
senior Government officials. In particular, the Mission
highlights the need to appoint senior judicial officials
to strengthen recent efforts to reinforce the rule of law
and to fight against corruption. UNAMA continues to
stress that a diverse and professional Administration
with strong female representation will be necessary to
tackle the many challenges that lie ahead.
In past weeks, reports on possible peace talks
between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban
have been prevalent. It is UNAMA’s assessment that
there is currently an alignment of circumstances that
could be conducive to fostering peace talks. However,
the parties need to be given sufficient space to build a
level of trust that will allow them to establish common
ground, to come to the realization that peace is the only
viable option for Afghanistan and that a military victory
is neither likely nor optimal for a lasting national social
compact. Peace processes are fragile and vulnerable
to external destabilization. They require patient
nurturing. International support should be coherent
and coordinated. Sustainable peace will require that
the process be inclusive and build upon the significant
gains made by Afghanistan in the past decade. In close
consultation with the Government, UNAMA will
continue to engage all parties to this conflict in order
to assist them find that common ground.
I can also confirm that UNAMA continues a frank
dialogue with the Taliban on humanitarian access and
on human rights, notably on the protection of civilians.
In that regard, the Mission notes that, as a result, access

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

for immunization teams in Helmand province has been
restored.
An integral component of the political agreement
that led to the formation of the national unity
Government is the pledge made to establish an electoral
reform commission. Comprehensive electoral reforms
will be essential to restoring the faith of the Afghan
people in the democratic process and in strengthening
political stability. UNAMA therefore welcomes
President Ghani’s renewed commitment to establish the
Commission shortly. We strongly encourage Afghan
authorities to clarify the electoral calendar, improve
fraud-mitigation measures, enhance the sustainability
of elections and engage the Afghan people in a
transparent and consultative manner.
In the past months, I have undertaken a number
of visits to Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries and
met with senior officials, inter alia from Iran, Pakistan
and Uzbekistan. I am pleased to report that, in each
of those meetings, many interlocutors recognized
the importance of enhancing regional collaboration.
They affirmed their readiness to play a constructive
role in Afghanistan and appreciated that stability and
economic cooperation were ultimately a matter of
mutual self-interest. In addition, a proper intra-Afghan
peace dialogue will require strong regional backing, in
full respect of Afghanistan’s sovereignty. In that regard,
we note the positive initiatives taken by the leaders of
Afghanistan and Pakistan in recent months.
The state of the Afghan economy remains of
significant concern. The Government’s self-reliance
agenda, presented at the London Conference in
December, was rightly lauded for its vision. It now
needs to be implemented to allow for the Government
to further mobilize its revenues, increase its capacity to
deliver services and create employment opportunities.
Although the rain and snowfall of the past weeks have
alleviated some of the concerns that Afghanistan could
be affected by a debilitating drought this summer,
preventive measures need to be put in place to assist the
most vulnerable.
UNAMA has repeatedly stated its persistent
concerns about the continued increase in civilian
casualties. UNAMA documented more than 10,000
civilian casualties in 2014 — the highest annual number
of civilian casualties recorded since UNAMA began
systematic monitoring, in 2009. The rise in civilian
casualties resulted mainly from increased ground

S/PV.7403

engagements in which Afghan forces and insurgents
use indirect fire in and on civilian populated areas.
The parties to the conflict must understand the impact
of their actions, take responsibility for them, uphold
the values they claim to defend and make protecting
civilians their priority. We need to see concrete steps
towards a real reduction in civilian casualties in 2015.
In late February, together with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
UNAMA released its third report on torture and illtreatment of conflict-related detainees in Government
detention facilities. The report found that one third of
all detainees interviewed were ill-treated or tortured.
Although that shows a decrease from the 49 per cent
in incidence of torture during the previous reporting
period, more remains to be done to prevent torture,
which is still pervasive and systemic. We welcome
the new Administration’s immediate commitment to
end those practices, including its announcement to
bring forward a national plan on the elimination of
torture. UNAMA calls on the Government to send a
clear message of zero tolerance for those practices by
prosecuting perpetrators, and thereby putting an end to
impunity.
Recent military operations in Helmand and Kunar
provinces are a demonstration that the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) have improved their planning
and operational capacity. They are now in a position
to conduct large-scale operations without direct combat
assistance from international military forces. That
development is encouraging, even though we expect
to see an intensification of combat in the upcoming
fighting season as insurgents seek to test the ANSF
capacity to hold ground on its own.
Recent reports have indicated that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has established a
foothold in Afghanistan. It is UNAMA’s assessment
that the group’s presence is of concern but that ISIL’s
significance is not so much a function of its intrinsic
capacities in the area or the region, but of its potential
to offer an alternative flagpole around which otherwise
isolated insurgent splinter groups can rally.
Noting the continuation of the Mission’s core
mandate, UNAMA will maintain its efforts, in a
manner consistent with Afghan sovereignty, to provide
good offices, promote human rights and promote
coherent support by the international community for
the priorities set by the Government of Afghanistan.

15-069683/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

We stand ready to participate fully in the role of
UNAMA, donors and the international community as
Afghanistan enters the decade of transformation.
In less than a week, Afghans will celebrate Nowrooz,
the day that in the region marks the beginning of the
new year and that is widely recognized as an occasion
signifying hope and renewal. I therefore take this
opportunity to wish my colleague Ambassador Tanin
and all Afghans a peaceful 1395. It is my most sincere
hope that this will be the year that brings tangible
progress towards peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Haysom
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
France for its leadership of the Security Council this
month and for convening this debate. I would also like to
thank my esteemed friend Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing, and the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2015/151). I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and his
team at the Permanent Mission of Spain for their hard
work in facilitating the draft resolution on UNAMA’s
mandate and for their dedication as penholder on
Afghanistan on the Security Council.
When the Security Council established UNAMA,
in 2002, to assist the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghan people in laying the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in the country,
Afghanistan was in a fundamentally different situation
than it is in today. At that time, the State was unable
to function. The Government could barely provide
services to the Afghan people. The country was almost
bankrupt. Its national and international legitimacy had
been eroded. Its institutions and its civil society were
almost completely destroyed. Millions of Afghans had
fled the country, and Afghanistan had lost most of its
human capital.
The United Nations was instrumental in efforts
to establish the Afghanistan we know today. From
forging the Bonn Agreement in 2001, in the aftermath
of the Taliban regime, and coordinating international
civilian assistance over the past 10 years, to supporting

4/34

16/03/2015

presidential and parliamentary elections, the United
Nations has supported Afghanistan’s move from a
prolonged period of internecine fighting and bloody
civil wars to a new era of democracy and national unity.
As a result of our joint efforts, we have created
new institutions and critical infrastructure, made
unprecedented economic progress, built a capable and
well-trained army and seen the flag of Afghanistan
rise in the most remote parts of the country. Millions
of Afghan refugees have returned home, and a new
generation of educated Afghans has emerged to lead
the country towards a brighter future.
There was tremendous progress and change in
the past year in particular. Afghanistan completed its
political and security transition in line with the goals
set out at the Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, and
it is now embarking upon the transformation decade.
In the summer of 2014, millions of Afghan women and
men cast their votes in historic presidential elections,
which marked the first-ever transition from one
democratically elected President to another. At the end
of 2014, the International Security Assistance Force
mission ended and the new NATO Resolute Support
Mission was established to provide training, advice
and assistance to Afghanistan’s national defence and
security forces. Those forces are now fully responsible
for the security of the country.
As we welcome the renewal of the mandate
of UNAMA, it is important to note that today’s
Afghanistan is not comparable with the Afghanistan
that UNAMA was established to support in 2002. It is
even different from the situation upon which last year’s
mandate extension was based.
Afghanistan is gearing up to become a full partner
to the community of democratic nations. As it does
so, it is essential that the United Nations support
to Afghanistan be consistent with the new realities
on the ground and the goals of the transformation
decade. It must fully reflect the principles of Afghan
national sovereignty, national leadership and national
ownership, the successful completion of the transition
process and the initiation of the transformation
decade. It must align precisely with the Government’s
national priorities. It must be effective, accountable
and coherent. And it must reflect the fact that the
Government of Afghanistan is ready to fully assume
the leading managing and coordinating role over all

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

assistance and development programmes, as well as the
international community’s efforts in Afghanistan.
To that end, we welcome the Security Council’s
request that the Secretary-General initiate a process
to conduct, within six months of the renewal of the
mandate, a full examination of the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan, in
full consultation and engagement with the Government
of Afghanistan and key stakeholders, including the
donor community, in the light of the completion of
the transition and the beginning of the transformation
decade and in accordance with the principles of Afghan
national sovereignty, national leadership and national
ownership.
While an initial review of the role and activities
of the United Nations in Afghanistan took place at the
request of the Government of Afghanistan in 2011, the
process put forward in today’s draft resolution will
allow us to fully engage with all stakeholders over the
next six months through a new, thorough and extensive
mechanism that will refine the framework of our
partnership and our relations with the United Nations
in a new era.
The Government of Afghanistan is determined
to do its part to build an Afghanistan that is ready to
stand on its own feet, take full responsibility for its own
affairs and assume its rightful place as a full and equal
partner of the international community. To realize that
vision, President Ashraf Ghani devised an agenda for
reform entitled “Realizing Self-reliance”, which was
presented to the international community in London in
December 2014. At the core of that agenda is a compact
of stability and prosperity at the national, regional and
international levels.
At the national level, the Government of Afghanistan
is committed to enhancing our focus on the well-being
of the citizen through concrete commitments, including
eliminating corruption, tackling poverty, strengthening
good governance and the rule of law, promoting human
rights, including women’s rights, and restoring fiscal
stability and economic growth.
At the regional level, the Government of Afghanistan
has embarked upon a new phase of engagement with
our neighbours, the wider region and the Islamic
world based on trust, cooperation and shared interests.
Increased cooperation is essential not only to achieving
lasting peace and stability in the country and the
region, but also to enabling Afghanistan to become a

S/PV.7403

hub for regional trade and integration and a land bridge
of prosperity for all. To that end, the leadership of the
country has engaged in a series of consultations and
dialogues with neighbours and countries in the region
to develop new and deepen existing trade, transit
and energy links and to enhance cooperation and
confidence-building measures.
At the international level, the new Government
has reinvigorated its international partnerships, as
evidenced by the early signing of the Bilateral Security
Agreement with the United States and the NATOAfghanistan Enduring Partnership. The upcoming
visit of the high-level delegation of Afghanistan to the
United States, led by His Excellency President Ashraf
Ghani, will provide an important opportunity to deepen
those commitments. In addition, the Government has
set a new tone in its dialogue with the international
community, including by expanding its partnerships
with many countries that supported Afghanistan in the
past decade. Those renewed commitments are votes
of confidence in a peaceful, stable Afghanistan and in
the belief that peace and security in Afghanistan are
essential to regional and global stability.
Lasting peace and security are critical to building
a prosperous and stable Afghanistan and to ending
the vicious cycle of fragility in the country. That
is particularly true at a time when violence affects
increasing numbers of civilians and when the crippling
triple threat of terrorism, extremism and criminality
threatens to undermine the future of the Afghan
people and the wider region. That is why the peace
and reconciliation process is the first priority of the
Government of Afghanistan. Afghans from all walks
of life are united in their urgent call for peace, and
their active involvement is crucial to the success of the
reconciliation process. As President Ghani said,
“The peace process is not a monopoly of the
Government; all our nation should take part in it.”
It is time for those still engaged in fighting to heed the
widespread call for peace and play their part in building
the country’s future.
We welcome the new phase of cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan towards the shared goal of
peace and reconciliation. It is essential to the success
of the peace process and heralds a new era of relations
between our two brother nations. We also welcome the
support of all our partners, particularly in the region
and in the Islamic world, and would like to express our

15-069685/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

appreciation to the People’s Republic of China for its
help in facilitating the peace process.
The renewal of UNAMA’s mandate is a testament
to the continuing partnership among Afghanistan,
the United Nations and the international community.
The Council’s call for an examination sends a clear
message of dedication to long-term, effective support to
Afghanistan. All of our collective efforts over the past
13 years, the blood spilled and the lives lost, have been
aimed at enabling Afghanistan to become a full member
of the international community as a stable, peaceful
and democratic country. The time for Afghanistan to
take full responsibility as a sovereign nation has come.
With the support of the international community, now
and in the future, we can achieve that critical goal.
The President (spoke in French): Members of
the Council have before them document S/2015/168,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by Spain. The Council is ready to proceed to the vote
on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2210 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by welcoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom to the Security Council and by thanking him
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
the activities of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to welcome
and thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan for his
words.
I take this opportunity to express our thanks to the
other members of the Security Council for entrusting
us with the responsibility of being the penholder on

6/34

16/03/2015

the Security Council’s work regarding the situation
in Afghanistan. For me and for my delegation, it is an
honour that we are very happy to assume, and I can
guarantee Spain’s firm commitment to Afghanistan.
That has always been the case, particularly in our
bilateral relations. On 1 January, the same day that
Spain assumed its responsibility as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Afghanistan began
a new stage in its recent history of the past 13 years,
and the Council indicated that this is the transformation
decade aimed at bringing about economic sustainability
and security in the country. Once that transformation is
achieved, there will be a national unity Government,
which will represent the first democratic transition of
power in the country.
With those changes, Afghanistan has fully
recognized its sovereignty and, in our view, its
ownership and leadership of its own process of national
reconstruction and economic and social development,
including peace and reconciliation between the
members of its national community. There is, however,
something that did not change on 1 January, and that is
the commitment of the international community to the
country and our common desire to continue to support
Afghanistan, its institutions and its citizens in the
processes I have mentioned. We have just adopted the
new resolution 2210 (2015), which extends UNAMA’s
mandate for an additional year in accordance and in
consultation with the Afghan Government. The members
of the Council view the adoption of the resolution as a
recognition of a new era and as an expression of the
support of the international community.
I would like to take opportunity to highlight the
fact that the resolution includes important changes with
regard to previous resolutions. First, it recognizes and
reflects an adaptation to the new situation following
1 January. Secondly, it underscores the sovereignty,
ownership and leadership of Afghans. Thirdly and
finally, it recommends that the Secretary-General
begin examining the structures and activities of the
United Nations in Afghanistan in full consultation and
cooperation with the Afghan Government and with all
interested parties, particularly the donor community.
Spain feels that those three elements form the starting
point in this new stage, and we would like to call
upon all parties participating in the process to ensure
that everyone, acting in accordance with their own
responsibilities, will be cooperative, constructive and
responsible in their actions. That is what we intend to do.

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

Accordingly, I would like to endorse the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union
on the subject. Spain fully endorses that statement.
In conclusion, while fully supporting the new
authorities in Afghanistan and their citizens, I would
like to issue two calls. On the one hand, I would like
to call on the Afghan institutions and authorities
to continue their progress with the urgency and
responsibility that the process deserves in their pursuit
to form the national unity Government. We trust that
the Government will soon and decisively carry out
its announced programme of reforms and that it will
reinforce the progress of the past 13 years in the areas
of democratization, good governance and human rights,
in particular the rights of women. We also trust that the
Government will persevere in its efforts to bring about
national peace and reconciliation and will continue to
work closely with its neighbours in order to address all
common challenges.
I would also call upon the citizens of Afghanistan
to persevere in the democratic process with a view to
designing and building their common future — as we
saw them do in the electoral process last year. Challenges
remain, but the achievements are concrete and the
capacity of the Afghan people in overcoming difficulties
has been more than proven. We should not risk any
backsliding, particularly in the area of democratization
and the rights of men and women in Afghanistan.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretarhy-General, for his briefing, which provided
a comprehensive description of the current situation
in Afghanistan and included valuable observations.
Mr. Haysom and the members of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) deserve
our appreciation for their dedication in carrying out
their duties under the challenging conditions in the
country.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement, which outlined his Government’s views
and analysis of the latest developments. Malaysia
congratulates Afghanistan on its historic transition
into the transformation decade. The process and the
progress are now firmly in the hands of its own people.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm to Ambassador Tanin
Malaysia’s commitment as a partner to Afghanistan in
this time of progress and development.

S/PV.7403

As stated in the December 2014 document of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan entitled “Realizing
Self-Reliance — Commitments to Reforms and Renewed
Partnership”, Afghanistan now stands alongside
Malaysia and other Muslim-majority democracies in the
community of nations. The Afghan leadership’s strong
testament to inclusivity and stability has been reflected
in a number of subsequent positive developments
on the political track. We commend the patient and
respectful conduct of the ongoing negotiations between
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah under the power-sharing
framework. The way forward for the Afghan people
should be grounded in the principles of the country’s
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity. In that context, we wish to express our
hope for a successful outcome to the final formation of
the national unity Government.
The “Realizing Self-Reliance” document outlines
numerous reform measures that the Afghan Government
aims to carry out. It is evident that they are under
no illusions on the complexity of the exercise. While
we note the realistic assessments presented by the
Afghan Government, we are more encouraged by its
drive and determination to succeed. We are confident
that Afghanistan will continue to build momentum
on that course, and we look forward to the upcoming
action plan on the implementation of its priorities.
The Afghan Government has pledged itself to strong
international engagement with increased Afghan
ownership and leadership in the areas of security,
governance, development and the effective delivery
of commitments — inter alia through the Kabul
process, the London Conference and the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.
At the same time, we should also note the
importance for political and developmental activities
of international organizations active in Afghanistan
and for other international aid and resources to be in
greater alignment with the priorities set by Afghan
Government. Malaysia believes that, at the current
stage, it remains imperative for the United Nations and
the international community to continue to lend their
support, encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan
through reconstruction and redevelopment efforts for
rebuilding the country. In the light of the crucial need
for sustained assistance, we hope the donor community
will expeditiously fulfil their commitments to that end.

15-069687/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

16/03/2015

In relation to the humanitarian emergency response
to last month’s extreme weather, Malaysia extends
its condolences to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan following the tragic loss of more than
220 lives and the displacement of more than 6,000
families across the country. We were encouraged by
last week’s report by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs that stated that the emergency
response in the district of Panjshir had been phased out
and that the response gap in assessed areas appeared
to be minimized. Malaysia hopes and prays that the
people and Government of Afghanistan will quickly
recover from that calamity.

previous Heart of Asia Conference held in Beijing in
October 2014. Such constructive regional engagement
is essential to reinforce support for Afghanistan’s own
efforts towards an inclusive reconciliation process. On
that note, we commend the convening of the national
conference of the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace:
Building the Foundations for an Inclusive Peace
Process, held on 15 January, and we are encouraged
by the efforts of the High Peace Council. That
convergence of developments deserves the focus and
attention of the international community. We hope that
key stakeholders in the country and in the region will
continue to intensify their efforts to that end.

Despite the noteworthy developments, Malaysia
remains deeply concerned about the security situation
on the ground. As reflected in the recent UNAMA
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in Afghanistan, the year 2014 saw the highest number
of documented civilian casualties; a total of 3,699
deaths and 6,849 injuries were documented. Malaysia
condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians by
anti-Government elements, which has led to the
highest toll on civilian lives in Afghanistan since
UNAMA began documenting civilian casualties. All
parties should respect both the letter and the spirit
of international humanitarian law in order to win the
hearts and minds of the Afghan people with a view to
their national reconciliation and integration process.

Malaysia firmly supports the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts undertaken by the Government
of Afghanistan within the context of respect for the
country’s democracy and Constitution, non-violence
and respect for the rights of all Afghan people. We
believe that an approach based on the principle of
moderation would be the most effective way to find
common ground and overcome the voices of extremists.

My delegation is particularly alarmed about
the increasingly negative impact of the conflict on
children. We are shocked by the repeated incidents
involving anti-Government armed groups killing and
maiming Afghan boys and girls and attacking schools
and hospitals. Malaysia welcomes the adoption and
endorsement, on 2 February, of a decree by President
Ghani Ahmadzai to criminalize underage recruitment
into armed forces. We encourage the Afghan
Government to continue to intensify its efforts to
comply with the action plan it had adopted pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005).
Malaysia observes an increasingly positive
atmosphere in the region in support of the Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. We welcome the convening of the inaugural
Afghanistan-China-Pakistan
Trilateral
strategic
dialogue, held on 9 February in Kabul. We also look
forward to Pakistan’s hosting of the fifth Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process later
this year, following the successful outcome of the

8/34

While Afghanistan endeavours to sustain peace
and stability in the country, Malaysia remains fully
committed in its peacebuilding efforts and its provision
of assistance to Afghanistan. I would like to take this
opportunity to place on record our appreciation to
the Government of Afghanistan for its invitation for
Malaysia to join the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). Prior to the ending of the ISAF mandate,
a Malaysian medical team had been stationed in the
country to provide medical, dental and health-care
services to the Afghan civilian population. I should
also thank New Zealand in that regard, as the Malaysian
medical team received valuable logistical support from
the New Zealand transitional reconstruction team while
based together in Bamyan province. The Malaysian
Government is also committed to providing technical
capacity-building programmes for Afghanistan. Since
2002, more than 520 Afghan officials have received
training in Malaysia through the Malaysian technical
cooperation programme, the third-country training
programme and other frameworks.
Malaysia firmly believes that the international
community should continue to support Afghanistan as
the country proceeds down the path it has charted. The
interconnected nature of existing challenges requires
sustained and mutually reinforcing progress in various
fields. The entry into the transformation decade will
bring forth new challenges and new approaches for

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

collaboration in resolving them. We should now
concentrate on looking at approaches to complement
and seal the gains that Afghanistan has achieved.
Through resolution 2210 (2015), just adopted this
morning, the Security Council sets out the mandate
of UNAMA for the next 12 months. We are pleased
that UNAMA and the Government of Afghanistan
will continue to maintain a close partnership, which is
vital to ensuring sustainable peace and stability in the
country. The Secretary-General has also been tasked
with examining the modalities for the next steps in the
evolution of UNAMA’s relationship with Afghanistan.
We hope that will lead to a more productive and effective
collaboration between the host county, the United
Nations system and the international community. I
would like to express my appreciation to the Spanish
delegation for its hard work on the preparation of the
resolution.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s sincere
commitment in supporting the Afghan Government in
its efforts to achieve peace, security and stability in the
country during the transformation decade and beyond.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
As of 1 January, Afghanistan has opened a
new chapter in its history. The Afghan people have
entered the transformation decade, fully assuming
responsibility for their security, with the first peaceful
and democratic transition of power and first ever
national unity Government. Nonetheless, further
perseverance from the Afghan authorities is critically
needed as the situation in the country remains volatile
and a number of formidable challenges loom.
The first and foremost task is to strengthen
Afghanistan’s ailing economy, which poses a threat to
its stability and affects the Government’s capacity to
carry out administrative functions and provide services.
In that regard, we strongly encourage President Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah to press ahead
with good governance and other relevant reforms. The
road map for the way ahead is clearly agreed upon, most
notably in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework

S/PV.7403

and the recent paper of the Afghan Government on
the reform programme, entitled “Realizing SelfReliance”. In particular, Afghan authorities must step
up the fight against corruption; the illicit economy, in
particular by boosting counter-narcotics efforts; and the
embezzlement of public funds. It must also significantly
improve revenue collection, while simultaneously
developing economic sectors — especially agriculture,
mining and services.
Secondly, ensuring security remains yet another
daunting task for the Afghan Government. The past
year and the first months of this year were marked with
record numbers of incidents and civilian casualties,
including among women and children. Almost every day
Afghan forces are challenged by insurgency activities,
armed clashes, targeted killings and suicide attacks. We
commend the resolve of Afghan National Security Forces
in thwarting attacks by anti-Government elements.
However, continued international assistance to further
develop Afghan security forces and institutions remains
essential. In that regard, we believe that the new NATO
non-combat, training, advisory and assistance mission
is another important contribution. But beyond that,
the appalling human cost borne by ordinary Afghans
underscores the necessity for an inclusive peaceful
resolution to the conflict. In that context, we welcome
President Ghani’s leadership in calling for Afghanto-Afghan dialogue and building closer relations with
its neighbours, particularly Pakistan. We welcome the
new Administration’s increased emphasis on regional
dialogue and cooperation.
Thirdly, to sustain the impressive progress on
development achieved since 2001, Afghanistan has to
continue tghe meaningful progress made on human
rights, and in particular on women’s rights. We call
on Afghan authorities to deliver on their promises to
advance the position of women and girls in political,
economic and social life, including by appointing
women ministers and urgently developing a strategy
to fully implement the elimination of violence against
women law, including by providing services to victims
and access to justice. The United Nations has repeatedly
raised concerns over the illegal practice of arresting and
prosecuting women for so-called moral crimes. Special
focus must be placed on human rights and gender
issues in the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process. The December 2014 meeting of
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah with the heads of
the provincial peace committees, which encouraged

15-069689/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

greater participation by women in the peace process,
was a positive step.
Lastly, my delegation commends Mr. Ghani
and Mr. Abdullah for their leadership and spirit of
compromise. Lithuania urges the political leaders
to quickly conclude the process of a merit-based
appointment and the approval of senior Government
officials. Likewise, swift electoral reform is needed so
that it can take effect prior to the holding of the Wolesi
Jirga and the district council elections envisaged for
2015.
Notwithstanding the support of international
community, the primary responsibility for the future
of Afghanistan lies with the Afghans themselves. The
reform programme and commitments presented by the
Afghan unity Government are encouraging. Lithuania
stands ready to support its efforts by remaining
committed to the political, military and civilian support
to Afghanistan, including through participation in the
Resolute Support Mission, the EU Police Mission in
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, as well as contributing to the Afghan
National Army trust fund. The interaction, synergies
and close cooperation among the United Nations, the
EU and NATO are of great importance as we continue
our efforts to promote durable peace and reconciliation
processes, stabilization and the development of the
country.
My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Permanent Mission of Spain for resolution 2210 (2015)
,on the UNAMA mandate extension for one year, as
well as for its efficient facilitation of the negotiating
process. The continuous presence and role of UNAMA
and other United Nations agencies, including at the
provincial level, remain crucial for the development of
Afghanistan and the benefit of each and every Afghan.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ambassador Tanin for their observations
today. On behalf of the United States, I would like to
thank Mr. Haysom and his team for their dedicated
and humane work to help the Afghan people improve
their lives, their institutions and their nation. Today’s
unanimous renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
shows the Council’s ongoing support for their efforts
and for Afghanistan.

10/34

16/03/2015

As we mark the beginning of Afghanistan’s
transformation decade, we have seen both encouraging
advances and enduring challenges. Last year we saw
Afghans take real risks and conquer fear to cast their
ballots in an election. We saw two candidates put the
country’s future first, forming a unity Government
and sustaining it as they confront shared challenges,
including the formation of the Cabinet, electoral reform
and peace and reconciliation. The United States calls
on the leaders to put forward urgently a full slate of
Cabinet nominees who meet the rigorous requirements
that they establish and who can obtain parliamentary
approval.
We commend President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah’s shared commitment to prioritizing
electoral reform. Last year’s election exposed chronic
weaknesses in Afghanistan’s electoral system. Promptly
identifying the necessary reforms and implementing
them urgently and in a manner consistent with
international standards is critical, including to ensure
successful parliamentary and district council elections.
Establishing the special electoral reform commission,
which the two leaders agreed upon last fall, would be
an important step towards that end.
Making fundamental changes to a country’s
political and electoral system is challenging under
any circumstances. Yet Afghans are undertaking that
extraordinary task amid continued attacks by insurgents
who seek to destabilize the country. UNAMA’s
exceptional reporting on the toll on civilians, which
is a model for other missions, testifies to the impact
of the violence on Afghan society, particularly on
some of its most vulnerable members. Compared to
2013, civilian casualties increased by 22 per cent in
2014, civilian deaths rose by 25 per cent, the number
of women casualties increased by 21 per cent and the
number of child casualties by 40 per cent. There were
714 children — kids — killed in 2014.
UNAMA’s reporting attributes roughly 75 per cent
of all civilian casualties to the Taliban and affiliated
groups. What statistics cannot capture is the
immeasurable impact on the families of those wounded
or killed. For example, UNAMA’s report tells us
that women, left as sole income providers after their
husbands were killed or maimed, experienced lasting
consequences,

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

“with poverty forcing many women to give their
daughters in marriage in exchange for debts or to
take their children out of school often to work”.
That does not even capture the emotion and pain of all
the losses.
Afghanistan’s leaders understand the far-reaching
impact of violence on the Afghan people, which is one
of the many reasons they have committed to bringing
peace to their country — a goal we strongly support. We
see tremendous bravery exhibited by many Afghans.
One unheralded group is the de-miners, who venture
out day after day to clear minefields so that their fellow
citizens are not maimed as they harvest their land or
walk to school. Last year 34 de-miners were killed,
including 11 killed by insurgents on 13 December while
they were clearing unexploded ordnance in Helmand
province. We see similar dedication in the legions of
Afghan teachers who show up in their classrooms every
day, despite threats and harassment, to give boys and
girls the education they need to build their future and
the future of their country.
We also honour Afghan security forces, who risk
their lives, and in far too many cases give their lives,
protecting their fellow citizens. Their resolve and
capabilities have improved a great deal. The continued
professionalization of the Afghan national defence and
security forces, with robust, sustained international
support, including through NATO’s Resolute Support
Mission, is crucial both to improving effectiveness
and ensuring more faithful adherence to international
human-rights standards. The abusive tactics reported
to UNAMA and catalogued in its recent report on
the treatment of Afghan detainees have no place
in the pursuit of justice; nor does the complicity of
justice officials who, according to the same report,
overwhelmingly rely on confessions from defendants
in criminal prosecutions, even when credible evidence
suggests that such confessions may have been obtained
through abusive tactics. That is why we applaud the
Afghan Government’s commitment to eliminating the
use of torture.
As everyone here knows, last week we marked
International Women’s Day. It was a day for marking
a number of inspiring stories from around the world,
including Afghanistan, a country where under
Taliban rule women could not walk outside without
a male relative and a burqa. Last week, members of
the Afghanistan women’s national cycling team were

S/PV.7403

not only walking outside, they were racing down the
country’s roads on their bikes. Team members are
pinched for resources but big on courage. Some drivers
yell at them and threaten them, but they ride on. One
day a man on a motorcycle reached out and tried to grab
at the captain, causing her to crash and hurt her back.
But today she is back on her bike, leading more than
40 women training with the team. Imagine what it must
feel like to be a little girl sitting in a car and to suddenly
drive by those 40 women flying down the road in single
file. Imagine how inspiring that must be. One of the
team members, Malika Yousifi, wants to become the
first Afghan woman to complete the Tour de France.
She told a reporter, “Nothing will stop us.” We believe
that if she is given the chance, and if her country stays
on the brave political path it has charted, Malika is
right. Nothing will stop them.
There is so much to lose and so much left to gain
in these difficult days. The United States will support
the Afghan people on every step of their journey to
take their place as a stable, peaceful, independent and
democratic nation.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his
ongoing work in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Tanin for so eloquently reminding
us where Afghanistan has come from over the past 13
years. We salute that progress, while remaining ever
mindful of the challenges that lie ahead.
Today’s briefing and mandate renewal come at
a critical time for Afghanistan, as the national unity
Government seeks to establish itself and the country
adjusts to what might be described as post-International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) realities. Against that
background, and the significant security, development
and governance challenges that the country still faces,
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) assumes even greater
significance.
Over the past decade, the support of the international
community, coupled with the sacrifice and effort of the
Afghan people, has delivered real progress in security,
health, education and infrastructure. Indeed, we have
all invested heavily in Afghanistan’s success. It is
therefore important that the Security Council send a
strong signal and message of unity and of our ongoing
commitment and support as Afghanistan enters its

15-0696811/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

decade of transformation. New Zealand’s commitment
to Afghanistan since 2001, referred to by the
representative of Malaysia earlier, and our continued
support through a training and development assistance
programme reflects the importance we attach to the
country’s long-term success.
New Zealand commends President Ghani and
Mr. Abdullah on their formation of a Government of
national unity and on making all the compromises
necessary for that process. Unified and responsible
leadership is essential if Afghanistan is to move
successfully from transition to transformation, and
UNAMA and the international community will play
an important role in supporting all of that. We look
forward to progress on electoral reform, as the Special
Representative mentioned, and the strengthening of
Afghanistan’s governance institutions. We also look
forward to an increased role for women.
However, the Council must not lose sight of the
ongoing security challenges facing Afghanistan.
Indeed, we should be concerned at the deterioration of
the security situation. Last year saw the second highest
number of reported security incidents since 2002. For the
first time, ground engagements were the leading cause
of civilian casualties, as the Special Representative
said and others have detailed. We therefore echo the
Secretary-General’s call for all parties
“to respect the laws of war, including the distinction
between civilians and combatants, and to avoid
using heavy weapons in civilian-populated areas”.
The Resolute Support Mission is a non-combat
operation. It is therefore crucial that the Afghan
National Security Forces maintain stability. For the
foreseeable future, that will require the ongoing
support of international partners. Longer-term, peace
will only come about if we meet the development
aspirations of the Afghan people. As we say so often,
in so many different situations, economic development
is key to stability and self-reliance. In the short term,
we will have to help mitigate the severe economic
impacts of ISAF’s withdrawal. In that UNAMA
will again play a very critical role. It must provide
assistance, particularly through engagement on human
right. It must promote coherence and coordination of
international support. And, of course, it must work
with the Afghan Government to align all of that with
national needs and priorities.

12/34

16/03/2015

New Zealand has often said, both before and since
joining the Council, that we must do better at conflict
prevention, and we say it again in the context of
Afghanistan. Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture.
The risk of relapse into conflict can be avoided, but
we must all support it in remaining on the path of
peace. Economic development will be central to that
pathway. New Zealand supports and encourages the
Government of Afghanistan’s pursuit of reconciliation
with moderate Taliban, but that can happen only at a
pace and in a manner acceptable to Afghanistan itself,
and if there is the alignment of circumstance of which
the Special Representative has already spoken. It is
important that the Council’s implementation of the
Taliban sanctions regime also support efforts aimed at
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan. New Zealand
chairs the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), and recognizes that it can play a positive
role in achieving results for Afghanistan.
New Zealand is pleased that today’s resolution
2210 (2015) provides for the Secretary-General to begin
examining the activities, structure and role of the United
Nations system in Afghanistan in close consultation with
the Afghan Government. In this transformation decade
such constitutionalism and consultation is essential. We
commend the Council’s willingness to engage directly
with Afghanistan in drafting the resolution so that
the country’s views were reflected in the mandate we
have just renewed. As Ambassador Tanin emphasized,
that process has produced a very good outcome, in
line with the principle of national ownership. New
Zealand welcomes the Afghan Government’s wish to
take on a greater role in the leadership and ownership
of its own security and development. We see that as
a natural and necessary step in any emergence from
conflict — certainly in any emergence that is consistent
with core peacebuilding principles. We therefore wish
the Government and people of Afghanistan well and
offer our ongoing support for their endeavours.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. I
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his statement.
Thanks to the tireless efforts of the Afghan
Government and people and the firm support of the
international community, Afghanistan smoothly
completed political, security and economic transitions

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

at the end of 2014 and entered its important
transformation decade, thereby turning a new page in
the country’s history. The Chinese Government and
people congratulate the Government and the people
of Afghanistan for the significant achievements made.
However, we should also note that Afghanistan still
faces various difficulties and challenges in the political,
security, economic and reconciliation fields. Looking
to the future, Afghanistan’s achievement of sustainable
economic and social development will hinge mainly
on the efforts of the Government and the people of
Afghanistan themselves. In the meantime, they will also
rely on the continuing massive support and assistance
provided by the international community, based on full
respect for Afghanistan’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
I wish to make the following points.
First, the current mindset must be changed to adapt
to the new normal of the Afghanistan situation — or,
as Ambassador Tanin said, the new reality. This year
marks the first year of Afghanistan’s transformation
decade. As the country enters a new stage of political,
economic and social development, the Government
and the people of Afghanistan will have to shoulder
increased responsibilities in national reconstruction
and economic and social development, which is in
accord with the fundamental principle resolving
the Afghanistan situation with the ownership and
leadership of the Afghan people. The international
community should focus on the new long-term view,
proactively adapt to the new normal of the significant
role of the people and the Government and give them
full confidence and support, while actively helping
them strengthen their capacity-building in all areas
aimed at a unified Afghanistan and its people enjoying
self-esteem, self-improvement and self-reliance.
Secondly, we firmly believe in the steady
advancement of Afghanistan’s reconciliation. A broadbased and inclusive reconciliation owned and led by
the Afghan people is the correct direction to ensure
Afghanistan’s progress towards national unity, harmony
and lasting peace. China appreciates the efforts of
Afghan President Ahmadzai in promoting national
reconciliation. We believe that the Government and
the people of Afghanistan, with the assistance of the
international community, will achieve harmony and
peaceful coexistence among all of its ethnic groups.
China is ready to play a constructive role in that regard
based on the needs of Afghanistan’s various factions.

S/PV.7403

China stands ready to provide at any time necessary
assistance and facilities for the peace and reconciliation
process.
Thirdly, Afghanistan must march in step with
the times and strive for new opportunities in terms of
economic development. Economic development is the
basis and guarantee to Afghanistan’s lasting peace and
stability. Afghanistan enjoys abundant resources and
geographical advantage, and thus has huge potential
for economic development. China welcomes and
appreciates the development strategy that has been
meticulously worked out by the new Government,
which is well suited to the country’s conditions and will
accelerate its economic development. The international
community must actively collaborate and fully honour
its commitments in order to achieve further results
in Afghanistan’s economy based on its national
priorities. China is ready to assist the Government of
Afghanistan based on its own development experience
and convergence points between the two countries’
development strategies in stepping up construction
related to infrastructure, mining, agriculture and water
projects, among other areas, and in further developing
its economy and improving people’s livelihoods.
Fourthly, the open, inclusive and active support of
Afghanistan’ in its increased participation in regional
cooperation is necessary, as strengthened regional
cooperation is an important guarantee for the country’s
peaceful reconstruction. A solution to the Afghanistan
question will not succeed without the support and
cooperation of the countries in the region. Improved
and strengthened relations with countries in the region
and increased engagement in regional economic
cooperation will assist Afghanistan in creating
conditions favourable to its peaceful development.
China welcomes the steps taken by Afghanistan,
based on its development needs, to actively participate
in China’s “One Belt, One Road” initiative, and to
join hands in our common development for mutual
benefit and results. China would also like to support
the strengthened role of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional organizations in
efforts to settle the Afghan question. Last year,
China successfully hosted the fourth Istanbul Process
Ministerial Conference. China looks forward to further
positive results from the fifth meeting, to be held in
Pakistan.

15-0696813/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

Fifthly, coordinated efforts to strengthen and
improve the role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
are necessary. China supports the ongoing, active role
of the United Nations on behalf of Afghanistan. We
support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in addressing the
Afghanistan issue and believe that UNAMA’s mandate
should address the requirements of further improving
and perfecting the transformation process with a
view to improved support for, and cooperation with,
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts towards
national reconciliation and reconstruction.
In that work, UNAMA should respect the leadership
role of the Afghan Government and strengthen
communication and cooperation with it to genuinely
ensure that the result of one plus one will be larger than
two. China is ready to work with other Council members
and with the Afghan Government in diligently seeking
improved measures to ensure UNAMA’s heightened
role on behalf of Afghanistan.
China and Afghanistan have a long history of
exchanges. China is also a friend and neighbour of
Afghanistan. Peace and security in Afghanistan are
therefore closely related to the security situation in
western China. China looks forward to seeing a united,
stable, developed and friendly Afghanistan.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between our two
countries. In January, Chinese President Xi Jinping
exchanged messages of congratulations with the
President of Afghanistan. They warmly congratulated
each other on the sixtieth anniversary and the Year of
China-Afghanistan Friendship and Cooperation, the
prelude to raising China-Afghanistan cooperation in al
fields to new heights.
China stands ready to join the international
community in continuing its firm support to
Afghanistan in its national reconciliation and peaceful
reconstruction efforts and in promoting improved
results in the transformation process, and in greater
contributions towards economic development and
improving the people’s livelihoods, with a view to longterm peace and stability.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
briefing. I thank him and the team of the United Nations

14/34

16/03/2015

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
efforts.
Afghanistan is now moving into the transformation
decade, which shows clearly that it is headed towards a
better future for its citizens. The period ahead is replete
not only with opportunities but also with challenges,
some of which could pose a threat to the future of
Afghanistan. The Afghan people themselves must
confront those challenges with determination, and this
effort will depend first and foremost on the competence
and performance of the new Government. It is also
important to pursue dialogue and consultations among
the Afghan factions. The reconciliation process has
been marked by a number of incidents of attempted
sabotage, threatening territorial integrity and peace
in Afghanistan. That is one of the greatest challenges
facing the new Afghan Government, which must
address this issue as a top priority.
We attach great importance to the fact that the
Government is pursuing the national reconciliation
process in order to make progress towards a
comprehensive reconciliation in Afghanistan. On
that basis, we would urge the implementation of the
reform processes that have been announced by the
President of Afghanistan since he took office. Some
of those measures were announced during the London
Conference last year, and they can strengthen stability
in Afghanistan. In this regard, we hope that the new
Afghan Government will be formed as soon as possible
and that the reform process will be accelerated.
The political and security process in Afghanistan
must be supported by economic, social and educational
measures. Despite the progress that has been made
in those areas in Afghanistan, the Government must
redouble its efforts in order to protect its citizens from
the various threats and from terrorist activities. It must
also strengthen and speed up the implementation of
measures aimed at combating corruption and protecting
human rights. The Government must also reform
the various security and civilian sectors and work to
find a solution to the problem of internally displaced
persons. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to
make greater efforts with regard to the empowerment
of women at all levels, and also to guarantee that the
perpetrators of human rights violations are pursued and
brought to justice.
We encourage the Afghan Government to hold
strategic talks with neighbouring countries so as

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

to strengthen cooperation in various areas. We
also urge Afghanistan’s neighbours to strengthen
mutual confidence-building measures and to support
Afghanistan through security cooperation efforts and
regional processes. Such projects, after all, are in
everyone’s interest.
The Afghan forces will be in charge of security
and the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism
following the end of the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force. This will be a real test for
the country, especially given the fact that summer is
coming. The international community must continue to
support the Afghan forces so that they can eradicate
such phenomena.
Finally, we call on the international community
and all donor countries to continue their support for
Afghanistan and to provide it the necessary support so
as to guarantee development and stability in the country,
with full respect for the principles of neutrality and
sovereignty and for humanitarian principles. We call
on the Afghan authorities to appropriately manage all
international assistance and call upon them to ensure
that such assistance reaches its intended beneficiaries.
We would also like to express our appreciation for
the work done by United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which has been undertaking its
mandate under difficult conditions, and we encourage
it to continue its support for the Government in the
framework of resolution 2210 (2015), which we have just
adopted. We therefore await a review of peacekeeping
operations in Afghanistan in the context of the
comprehensive review of peacekeeping operations to
be carried out by the Secretary-General.
We call on the Afghan Government to take hold of
the reins of power and implement the transformation
decade.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish first to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom,
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and, of
course, Ambassador Tanin for his substantive briefing.
We agree with the assessment we heard today. A
difficult situation continues to prevail in Afghanistan,
and we are concerned about the increasing activities
of fighters, of which civilians are the primary victims.
This negative trend is reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/151), which

S/PV.7403

states that in past year alone, the conflict has claimed
the lives of more than 10,000 civilians. This is a
regrettable scorecard for the contemporary history of
Afghanistan. This state of affairs clearly suggests that
the International Security Assistance Force, which has
left the country, did not fulfil the mandated handed
down by the Security Council, just as it has not provided
us with a comprehensive report on the work it did over
the 13 years of its presence in the country.
We hope that the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission will be more conscientious, and we urge the
Security Council, in line with resolution 2189 (2014),
to closely monitor its activities. There is no doubt
that extremists will continue to put the new Afghan
Government to the test, in an attempt to use the
withdrawal of the international presence in Afghanistan
to tilt the balance of power in their favour.
Spring is on the horizon, a time during which it is
traditional for fighters to escalate their activities. The
Afghan National Security Forces will be put to a serious
test regarding their ability to independently counter the
terrorist threat.
We take note with satisfaction of the efforts of
President Ghani to achieve national reconciliation. This
is the only way to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan.
We are pleased to note that the resolution just adopted
reflects the desire of the Afghan people to play a
leading role in governing the country in the context of
the process of national reconciliation, with the support
of the United Nations Mission.
Also of the utmost relevance is the principle of
national reconciliation and related principles such as
the laying down of weapons, recognition of the Afghan
Constitution, cutting ties with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations, and, of course, commitment to a
stable Afghanistan. Imperative here is strict compliance
with the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. We
would once again call attention to the obstinate disregard
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General with
respect to any reference to these terrorist organizations.
What does this mean? That this organization no longer
exists in Afghanistan and that the Al-Qaida issue has
been taken off the agenda? All the evidence, including
that which we heard today in the Security Council
Chamber, seems to bear witness to the contrary. We
note with concern the increased terrorist threat in
Afghanistan and the broadening geographical reach
of the activities and influence of the Islamic State in

15-0696815/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

Iraq and the Sham, which is spreading a radical, hostile
version of Islam. We call on the members of the Security
Council to develop a programme of joint activities at
the United Nations so as to halt the spreading influence
of that terrorist group.
We are alarmed by the increasingly frequent
reports of deterioration in the situation in northern
Afghanistan in areas bordering our friends and
allies in the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Extremists there are actively engaging in propaganda
and recruitment, entrenching their physical presence.
The States of Central Asia have legitimate concerns
regarding those developments, since it was not long ago
that the north was a nearly calm region, distinguishing
itself clearly from other parts of the country. Its
becoming yet another safe haven for militants and
extremists is categorically unacceptable.
The increase in the drug threat emanating from
the territory of Afghanistan is a cause of particular
concern, not only to neighbouring States but to the
world over. The volume of drug production, according
to the report of the Secretary-General, is the equivalent
of 15 per cent of the country’s gross national product.
That is a striking figure. The drug business remains one
of the sources of financing for extremist and terrorist
organizations. The refusal by some in the international
community to take decisive action in that area and draw
up effective approaches for eradicating the problem of
drug-trafficking from Afghanistan exacerbates the
terrorist threat.
The Russian Federation continues to counter the
flow of Afghan opiates, working with our partners from
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as well as within
the framework of the Russian-Afghan cooperation.
We must once again express our regret regarding the
position of NATO, which has repeatedly drawn on
trumped up excuses to turn down multiple proposals
for mutually beneficial cooperation with the CSTO in
combatting Afghan drug production.
We listened with interest to President Ghani’s
proposals to adjust UNAMA’s mandate. We support the
proactive intention of the Afghan Government to take
the country’s future into its own hands and strengthen
its sovereignty and independence in all spheres.
The Russian Federation supports the United Nations
Mission in coordinating international civilian efforts

16/34

16/03/2015

with a view to stabilizing Afghanistan by actively
assisting its Government.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151), Special Representative
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his remarks this morning.
There have been significant and positive
developments in Afghanistan since the Security
Council last met in this format (see S/PV.7347). The
International Security Assistance Force mission
concluded operations after 13 years, and the Resolute
Support Mission has now begun. That marks the end
of a period of transition and the start of a period of
transformation, with full Afghan ownership of its
national affairs. I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all of the servicemen and servicewomen,
international and Afghan alike, whose service and
sacrifice have made that progress possible.
I will focus my statement today on three key issues:
the support provided by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the Afghan
Government’s reform agenda, support for a peace
process, and the current security challenges.
I welcome the extension of UNAMA’s mandate
today. UNAMA plays a critical role in Afghanistan
and its continued presence is a strong sign of the
international community’s enduring commitment
to Afghanistan and its people. I commend President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
on the steps they have taken since the formation of the
national unity Government. In the first months of this
year, we saw early action on tackling corruption, as
well as agreement on the 2015 budget. We support the
goals of President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
to deliver economic security by tackling corruption, to
enact political reform and to consolidate progress on
human rights and national security. Yet the economic
situation remains precarious. Government fiscal
discipline is vital, as is sustained donor support. The
swift confirmation of the final ministerial appointments
to the national unity Government will help to safeguard
the gains made, build confidence and aid the reform
process. UNAMA will play an essential role in support
of those reform priorities. It will do so in a manner that
is consistent with a sovereign Afghanistan. UNAMA’s
provision of good offices will assist political reform,
aid in the preparations for parliamentary and provincial

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

council elections and protect the gains made on human
rights.
It will also promote more coherent donor support to
the Afghan Government’s priorities as co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Management Board. In order to
fulfil its mandate, UNAMA must have the resources
it needs to maintain its presence in the provinces. Our
goal remains to ensure that Afghanistan remains on a
path towards a sustainable future for all, and the United
Kingdom is committed to supporting the Afghans to
achieve that.
Securing a sustainable peace in Afghanistan
through a political settlement remains the key to
Afghanistan’s future. Reconciliation is vital to any
political settlement, and I welcome the efforts being
made to ensure an inclusive peace process. We urge
all parties to seize opportunities to make meaningful
progress, recognizing that the process will take time.
In that context, we welcome in particular the positive
dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
security remains volatile, and this year’s fighting season
will be no exception. The continued attacks in Kabul
bring home to us the courage and perseverance of the
people and the security forces of Afghanistan, as well
as the members of the international community who
support them. But the increases in civilian casualties,
for which the Taliban are largely responsible, are
concerning. Avoiding such casualties must be a priority
for all parties. Through resolute support, we will help
the Afghan National Security Forces by providing
practical training, advice and assistance that aids their
efforts to combat the insurgency.
In conclusion, the coming months will be
challenging, but we must not lose sight of how far
Afghanistan has come in the past year — and even more
so in the past 13 years, as Ambassador Tanin pointed
out. In the past 12 months alone, there has been the first
peaceful democratic transfer of power, the formation of
a national unity Government and the assumption of full
Afghan responsibility for security. We now have a clear
path ahead. The Afghan Government’s reform priorities
are the right ones. UNAMA, in close consultation
with the Afghan Government and the international
community, will continue to play a valuable role in
supporting Afghanistan and its goals.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representatives

S/PV.7403

of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for his detailed briefing. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.
Resolution 2210 (2015), which renews the UNAMA
mandate and which we have just adopted unanimously,
marks a new stage of empowerment, accountability and
leadership in Afghanistan under the Afghan authorities.
We welcome the improvements in the political
situation in Afghanistan through the formation of the
national unity Government following the framework
agreement between the two leading presidential
candidates. We therefore note with satisfaction the
reforms undertaken by the new authorities, including
the national reconciliation process aimed at achieving
a lasting resolution of the conflict by the Afghans
themselves. We also welcome the efforts agreed to by
the international community, UNAMA and Afghan
stakeholders during this crucial phase in Afghanistan’s
history.
On the security front, we welcome the end of
the transition process, on 31 December 2014, which
affected the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the Afghan forces and allowed the latter
to shoulder full responsibility for national security and
enabled the beginning of the new, non-combat NATO
support mission, in accordance with resolution 2189
(2014). We pay tribute to ISAF for the role it played
and the enormous sacrifices it made. We honour the
memory of those who gave their lives and call on the
Afghan Government and its partners to enhance their
vigilance so as to avoid, after the departure of ISAF,
a situation such as that in Iraq, in particular given the
allegiance of certain groups to the Islamic State and the
presence of foreign fighters on Afghan soil.
We deplore the climate of uncertainty brought about
by the political impasse, which has encouraged elements
that are hostile to the Government to seek to undermine
the population’s confidence in the Government
throughout the country. We also deplore the astonishing
number of victims of that violence over the past year.
Chad condemns the attacks against administrative and
district centres, security force checkpoints and major
roadways and calls on the Afghan Government and
its partners to enhance their efforts to eradicate the
growing insecurity, in particular in the south, southeast and east of the country. Chad welcomes the political
and diplomatic efforts at the regional and international

15-0696817/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

levels, in particular on the part of China, to consolidate
peace and security in Afghanistan, and we encourage
its supporters to continue on that path.
We condemn all the violence and terrorist acts
perpetrated by the armed groups and call on them to
quickly join the national reconciliation process initiated
by the Government for the well-being of the Afghan
people, who aspire only to peace, which is a sine qua
non for the country’s development.
In terms of the fight against drugs and drug
trafficking, Chad welcomes the most recent figures
showing a decrease in drug trafficking, which has taken
an incalculable toll on global security. We encourage
the new Afghan authorities to continue to work towards
its complete eradication. Therefore, we reiterate our
encouragement to Afghanistan’s neighbouring States
and the international community to intensify their
cross-border cooperation and fight against drugs and
illicit trafficking.
We remain concerned about the deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, in particular that of internally
displaced persons, resulting from natural disasters and
urge the international community to come to their aid.
We also reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for an
increase in humanitarian assistance and welcome the
fact that significant numbers of refugees are returning
to Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we hope that the positive steps taken
by the new Afghan authorities at the political and
diplomatic levels will be successful. We send a warning
to all armed groups that attack humanitarian personnel
in order to prevent them from delivering aid to people in
need. Finally, we reiterate our encouragement to all the
personnel of the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies who, despite the difficult conditions in which
they work in Afghanistan, continue to do their best to
come to the aid of the Afghan people.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this quarterly debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. We welcome the briefing by
Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the statement
by Mr. Tanin, the representative of Afghanistan.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its firm commitment to peace and the sovereignty and

18/34

16/03/2015

territorial integrity of States. We therefore welcome
the fact that in September 2014, the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan decided to leave its history of foreign
intervention behind and resolved, through an electoral
process, to take its destiny in its own hands as a free
and sovereign people. We welcome the formation of a
Government of national unity under the leadership of
President Ghani at a time when the country is facing
the task of consolidating its national institutions in the
post-conflict period. It is important to reiterate that the
Afghan people should have ownership of that process
with the help of the international community.
We would like to highlight the work done by
UNAMA in strengthening the peace process, including
the help it provided in 2014 to establish the presidential
commissions. We recognize the contribution that it
has made and believe that UNAMA should continue
to carry out its work in coordination with the Afghan
Government.
The resolution that we adopted today (resolution
2210 (2015)) is a clear example of the joint work of
Security Council members and the Afghan Government.
The extension of the UNAMA mandate takes into
consideration the new realities and challenges facing
the country over the next decade.
National reconciliation should continue to be one
of the priority objectives and must include the various
sectors of Afghan society in efforts to consolidate
democracy. Venezuela hopes that the Afghan people
will participate actively in bringing about lasting peace,
which can be achieved with the participation of the
international community and regional neighbours. The
Afghan political leaders should face those challenges in
the context of the transformation decade 2015-2024, as
established at the recent Kabul Conference and, most
recently, the 2014 London Conference.
One of the most important challenges facing the
current Government in the peace and reconciliation
process is that of the economic situation. We call upon
the Afghan authorities and the international community
to take the steps necessary to bring about the economic
stability that is so vital to addressing the many changes
the country must make.
The security situation is of great concern, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/151). We believe that the political process,
which is aimed at achieving peace and stability,
requires the Afghan people’s full participation. In

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

that regard, Venezuela supports strengthening the
institutional capacity of the Afghan State, including
its armed forces, in order to neutralize the impact of
extremist armed groups on the civilian population.
The international community’s support and that of
neighbouring States is essential to strengthening
internal security in Afghanistan. We appreciate, in that
regard, the dialogue held between China, Pakistan and
Afghanistan in February as a significant step towards
peace and security in the region.
The existence of terrorist groups is not only an
Afghan problem. The spread of such groups’ reach
is also currently affecting neighbouring countries,
as those groups threaten to extend their presence and
control over other territories. That is why we believe
that all the measures taken by the Afghan Government
to contain the impact of such groups within its territory
are important.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Afghanistan and international agencies
to combat drug production. While the drug trade
continues to be significant, the progress made by the
Government in that regard is a further step towards the
strengthening of the institutions of the State. In order
for the fight against the scourge of drugs to be more
effective, we believe that it is crucial that the Afghan
Government coordinate its related activities among
all agencies of the State in order to ensure that both
domestic drug consumption and the export of drugs by
criminal gangs to other countries are reduced.
We are concerned about the high number of
internally displaced persons and refugees resulting
from the internal conflict. The most recent numbers
show that there has been an 8 per cent increase in those
numbers, which means that there are more people in
need of assistance. In that respect, we welcome the
work being done by humanitarian agencies and call
upon the Afghan authorities to remain committed to
solving that problem.
In conclusion, Venezuela hopes for peace and
security in Afghanistan and for all its ethnic groups to
live in harmony. That will require joint efforts by the
Government and the people of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of the international community.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important and timely debate. I also
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his very lucid

S/PV.7403

and comprehensive briefing and Ambassador Tanin for
a very perceptive outlook on his country’s remarkable
progress.
Afghanistan is at a critical stage in its post-conflict
recovery. With a Government of national unity in place,
the political dimension of the recovery has been given
a significant boost. The Government is increasingly
assuming leadership of the country’s affairs, while
pursuing national reconciliation through an inclusive
Afghan-led process. Nigeria commends the Afghan
Government for its commitment to the reform agenda
agreed at the London Conference of 4 December. We
welcome President Ghani’s effort in not only promoting
the rights of Afghan women, but also empowering
them. No less significant is his unflagging commitment
to electoral reform, which is crucial to the progress of
Afghanistan’s democratic transition. The decision of
the Government to involve civil society in the electoral
reform process is highly commendable. We look
forward to the establishment of the Electoral Reform
Commission, which, among other things, will address
fundamental issues of governance, as stated in the
political agreement of 21 December 2014.
We believe that transparency and inclusive
governance constitute the key to building a united,
secure and sovereign Afghanistan, where all citizens
have a sense of belonging. The prevailing economic
situation in the country, characterized by challenges
in institutional capacity, infrastructural deficiencies
and declining rates of economic growth, must be
improved in order to support the reforms in other
critical areas. We note that some progress has been
made in developing the private sector; however, more
effort is required to promote vibrant entrepreneurial
activity. Foreign investment will be vital to stimulating
economic growth in Afghanistan. We therefore ask the
Government to continue to work assiduously towards
improving the investment climate in the country, with a
view to attracting more foreign capital.
Illicit drug-production and trafficking in Afghanistan
remain a matter of concern to Nigeria. It is a major source
of terrorist financing. It also undermines the rule of
law, owing to its link with criminal activities, as noted
in the Secretary-General’s report. Nigeria commends
the efforts of the Afghan law enforcement agencies,
which have led to the seizure of substantial quantities of
heroine, morphine and other narcotics, as well as to the
destruction of heroine laboratories. We note that that
success has been attributed to a combination of factors,

15-0696819/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

including the improved coordination of efforts among
the Afghan law enforcement agencies and the improved
capability of the police to conduct operations. It is
vital that counter-narcotic operations in Afghanistan
be strengthened with adequate support from the
international community. That is needed in order to
consolidate the gains made by the Government in the
fight against illicit drug production and trafficking.
According to the Secretary-General’s report,
unexploded ordnance continues to affect a significant
number of communities across Afghanistan. Owing to
funding constraints, the 2014 targets set by the 10-year
work plan of the Anti-personnel Mine Ban Convention
could not be met. Unexploded ordnance is restricting
freedom of movement, impeding agriculture and
stifling economic growth. The removal of that threat
is, therefore, an urgent matter. We commend the United
Nations and its mine-action partners for their efforts
to clear minefields and battlefields. Much has been
achieved, but a great deal still needs to be done. We call
on all donors to scale up their support for that important
process.
Following the withdrawal of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force in December
2014, Afghan security forces assumed responsibility
for maintaining law and order in the country. That is
a major challenge, considering the prevalent security
situation. Terrorist groups have continued to launch
attacks against civilians, using suicide bombers and
improvised explosive devices. A case in point is the
assassination of an Afghan police commander on
28 January, followed by a suicide attack during his
funeral, which killed 15 people. Nigeria condemns, in
the strongest terms, attacks by terrorist groups. The
insurgents should lay down their arms and respond
positively to President Ghani’s offer of inclusive peace
talks.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Nicholas Haysom and the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their tireless efforts to carry out the
Mission’s mandate. UNAMA’s engagement with the
Government of Afghanistan remains vital at this crucial
period in Afghanistan’s transition to a peaceful, stable
and prosperous country. That is why Nigeria supported
the extension of the Mission’s mandate, as expressed
in resolution 2210 (2015), adopted this morning. We
commend Spain, as penholder, for its leadership role in
drafting that resolution.

20/34

16/03/2015

Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank Special
Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for introducing
the Secretary-General’s report on Afghanistan
(S/2015/151*) and for the work that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
doing in carrying out its important mandate, which
was entrusted to it by the Security Council on behalf
of the international community. We also thank the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his remarks.
As we renew the United Nations Mission’s mandate,
ensuring the maintenance of cooperation between the
United Nations and Afghanistan in the critical political,
social and economic processes underway, this debate
affords an opportunity to take stock of the important
political, security and social economic developments in
Afghanistan — the closing of a cycle in Afghan life
and the opening of the transformation period, with
Afghanistan taking on the leadership and ownership of
its national affairs.
We welcome and hope that the reform agenda,
aimed at realizing self-reliance, which was put forward
by the Afghan leadership at the London Conference,
will lead to a transformation in overcoming the great
challenges that the country still faces as it struggles
to achieve national reconciliation, stability, social
development and sustainable peace.
The political agreement of 21 September and the
establishment of a Government of national unity were a
fundamental break-through in Afghan political life and
a confirmation that political compromise is possible
and relevant for the country’s progress in achieving
stability and, ultimately, peace. The Afghan leadership
and ownership of the political process is based on the
fulfilment of the benchmarks outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the attainment of which is vital in
order to safeguard against the loss of all that has been
achieved through the great and sustained efforts and
investments by the Afghans and the international
community.
Among those benchmarks, the first and foremost
is security — with the creation of sustainable Afghan
security institutions capable of ensuring the stability
and protection of the people of Afghanistan. From the
lessons learned in Iraq with the collapse of the Iraqi
armed forces at the hands of terrorists from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) upon the withdrawal
of the American forces, it would be wise to consider a
review of the timeline for the drawdown of American

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

troops, which appears to be happening. NATO’s
Resolute Support Mission, which will provide training,
advisors, and assistance to the Afghan security forces,
is an element of the confidence-building measures
aimed at strengthening the security situation in the
country.
Reintegration and reconciliation through the
development of national dialogue and regional
engagement to foster a political environment
conducive to peace is another policy objective to be
met. The reintegration of a relatively large number
of anti-Government elements, the efforts to counter
the fundamentalism that fuels violence, the call to
the Taliban to join the peace process, the pledge by
President Ghani Ahmadzai to focus on establishing
peace and other important political initiatives give the
hope that the Afghans might be entering a new and
decisive phase of their lives.
Governance and institution-building, the extension
of State authority throughout the country and the
establishment of democratic, legitimate and accountable
institutions are other crucial policy objectives. The
ability of the Afghan authorities to conduct the electoral
process in 2014 was an important event, to be coupled
with further electoral reforms, the development and
empowerment of anti-corruption institutions, the
strengthening of the transparency of the civil service
and the establishment of a credible judicial and penal
system. Respect for human rights, in line with the
Constitution and international law, protecting civilians,
improving the situation of women and girls, reducing
the number of incidents and the lawful use of force
to combat impunity are crucial processes for the
attainment of sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
Economic and social development is a key
purpose of a Government’s policies, supported by
the international community, in order to promote
sustainable economic growth. With Afghanistan taking
leadership and ownership of its national affairs, the
partnership within the international community is
intent on translating coherent support to Afghanistan,
improving the coordination and the alignment of donor
funding with national priority programmes.
Regional cooperation with sustained effective
regional coordination in support of progress, peace and
stability is another fundamental element in the new era
Afghanistan is entering. We take note of the remarkable
development of regional cooperation, the holding of

S/PV.7403

important summit conferences and their outcomes. A
number of regional initiatives within the framework
of counter-terrorism financing, on countering drug
trafficking and on trade, commerce and investment
show how Afghanistan is effectively committed to a
process of regional cooperation and to consolidating
the country’s role as a full and rightful member of
the international community. Finally, countering
narcotics — a critical area given that violence and crime
stem from narcotics and it serves as a main financial
source for the Taliban and the terrorists — decreasing
poppy cultivation and increasing narcotics control, and,
concurrently, the increase in licit agriculture, are key
policies to be pursued by the Afghan Government.
In conclusion, we acknowledge the remarkable
progress achieved by the Afghan people after the
demise of the despicable Taliban regime. We also
acknowledge the sustained commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan. However,
we must recognize that a long, hard and rocky road
still lies ahead if Afghanistan is to achieve stability
and peace. The fulfilment of the benchmarks detailed
in the Secretary-General’s report is a complex and
demanding task that requires strong commitment by the
Afghan people and authorities and by the international
community, including the United Nations Mission in
the medium term and, most probably, the long term,
if the Afghan people are to secure social progress,
freedom and lasting peace.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and thank him for his briefing on the current
situation in Afghanistan. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
Chile welcomes the progress achieved since our
previous meeting on Afghanistan, held on 18 December
(see S/PV.7347), and we welcome the start of the
transformation decade 2015-2024. We welcome the
goodwill that President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah have shown in
the process of forming the new Government. The
stability achieved in the first months of the transitional
Government made it possible to focus efforts on
priority areas related to security and development in
the country. We hope that the process of forming a
Government will be completed without problems.

15-0696821/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

16/03/2015

In that regard, we cannot fail to mention that one
of the short-term priorities should be holding this
year’s parliamentary and municipal elections in an
orderly and peaceful manner, with the active and broad
participation of women. The consolidation of peace
and national reconciliation are essential in this period.
The Government’s efforts to carry out a process that is
owned and led by Afghans themselves require support
from all of us. Civil society must play an active role in
an inclusive peace process.

the country’s political transition process and allowed
for the first peaceful, democratic handover of power.
France reiterates its support to the Afghan President,
Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, and to the Chief
Executive, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, and to all new
members of the new national unity Government. France
welcomes the appointment of members of the national
unity Government on 12 January and wants to see the
follow-up to that process to ensure that the Government
team will soon be fully staffed.

We recognize that Afghanistan continues to face
enormous challenges to its stability, such as corruption,
drug trafficking, terrorism and a humanitarian crisis. In
that regard, we call on donor countries and international
financial institutions to maintain their commitment
to long-term development assistance, particularly in
view of the sharp slowdown expected for the Afghan
economy in the next few years.

In addition, the security transition concluded in
2014 under satisfactory conditions. The NATO Resolute
Support Mission advisory training services are helping
the Afghan Security Forces, which are now responsible
for security across the Afghan territory.

We are concerned about the impact the security
situation continues to have on the Afghan civilian
population, particularly on children and women. The
complex security situation — a product of terrorism and
the fight against anti-Government elements — requires
a comprehensive and coordinated response to ensure
adequate protection for civilians. In that regard, the
support and cooperation of regional and international
partners continues to be important and necessary.
Given the critical time that Afghanistan is going
through and the important role of UNAMA in supporting
the Government, we favour the renewal of the Mission’s
mandate for 12 months. Likewise, we emphasize the
evaluation process for the six-month period beginning
on the date of the adoption of resolution 2210 (2015) to
examine all the functions, structures and activities of
all United Nations entities in Afghanistan. Finally, we
thank Spain for all the work done to make it possible to
submit the resolution approved today.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as a representative of France.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing. I should also like
to thank the Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin,
for his statement.
I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
Afghanistan is writing a new page in its history.
The 2014 presidential election was an important step in

22/34

Afghanistan has now entered the transformation
decade, which should result in the implementation of
an ambitious reform programme. With its partners,
France will continue to support the Government on the
implementation of the reform plan presented during the
London Conference on 4 December 2014. We stress the
importance of the commitments undertaken under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, which is to
be revised this year.
However, the completion of the transition and the
beginning of the transformation decade should not let
us to forget that many challenges remain. In a fragile
security context, the role of regional partners is essential
for Afghanistan’s stability. The initiatives taken to
better secure the border are very positive. Regional
support is also important to ensure that the process of
national reconciliation can begin in order to guarantee
the conditions for lasting peace in Afghanistan. France
supports the efforts of the Afghan Government in that
regard.
Furthermore, it is crucial that the mobilization
of the Afghan authorities remain strong on the issue
of countering drug trafficking. This is a concern for
my country. We encourage the Afghan authorities to
continue their efforts to combat the production and
trafficking of drugs, which pose a real threat to the
stability and development of the country and for the
health of its people.
In that context, France believes that the role of the
United Nations is more important than ever. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
embodies the will of the international community to
continue to support Afghanistan, and we attach great

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

importance to the United Nations continuing to enjoy
the necessary means to achieve that goal. We believe
that, while the current mandate remains relevant, it
will be useful in future to reflect on its evolution. In
that regard, we welcome the invitation to reflect on its
evolution set in resolution 2210 (2015), which we have
adopted today.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of Mr. Haysom and the entire UNAMA team, which is
working in difficult conditions. France is convinced that
the United Nations will continue to play a decisive role
in Afghanistan in the framework of the transformation
decade, which is characterized by renewed support
by Afghanistan’s partners, with full respect for the
principle of the country’s sovereignty.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I hank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2015/151)
and our briefers this morning.
This is a critical decade of transformation for
Afghanistan. India is proud to call itself Afghanistan’s
first strategic partner. We share the Afghan people’s
vision of a strong, independent, united and prosperous
State, for which so many Afghans have sacrificed so
much. India stands ready to do all that is possible within
our capacities and means to work with the Afghan
Government and its people to realize that great vision.
Afghanistan’s historic political transition remains
on course. The patience, forbearance, courage and
democratic aspiration of the people of Afghanistan
have strengthened that process. A priority is to
complete the task of Government formation as rapidly
as possible so that all Government ministries can start
functioning normally. The ministries have to deliver
the public services that the Afghan people have been
waiting for for so long. In that context, we welcome
the appointments of some of the key ministers, and
express India’s hope that the remaining process will be
completed as soon as possible.
We note that the national unity Government has set
itself two important political tasks: lectoral reforms and
the organization of a constitutional loya jirga. We hope

S/PV.7403

that those tasks will be completed soon, particularly the
task of electoral reforms.
We are concerned at what the latest report of the
Secretary-General tells us about the security situation
inside Afghanistan. The report states,
“In terms of incidents recorded over the past 13
years, 2014 was the second-highest, after 2011.”
(S/2015/151, para. 12)
That, of course, was the year when Osama Bin Laden
was neutralized. Those incidents are a matter of great
concern.
The Secretary-General’s report substantiates our
view that it is terrorism, and not tribal differences or
ethnic rivalries, that is the main source of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan. Terrorist groups, including
the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, are active despite the efforts of
the valiant personnel of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the international coalition forces. It is
obvious that their activity cannot be sustained without
systematic State support from beyond Afghanistan’s
borders. Reports indicate terrorist groups are mutating
into more virulent forms, in a region already impacted
by terrorism. The Council must act against that threat
with a sense of urgency.
The Secretary-General’s report mentions the
London Conference on Afghanistan. In today’s global
economic situation, when the feeling of aid fatigue
exists in most traditional donor countries, Afghanistan’s
economic transition will have to be also supported by
a private-sector-led process. President Ghani has taken
a lead on issues of connectivity, and we welcome and
encourage all members of the international community
to reciprocate that step in full measure.
As a lead country of the trade, commerce and
investment confidence-building measure under the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, India has gained
appropriate experience on this issue. Both Afghanistan’s
lack of connectivity to sea ports as well as to the faster
growing economic regions of Asia are major constraints
for private sector investment in Afghanistan.
India, Afghanistan and Iran are examining how
the existing port of Chabahar in Iran can be developed
to help Afghanistan connect with the outside world.
India has unilaterally offered Afghanistan access to
Attari on our side of the India-Pakistan international
border for Afghan trucks and goods that until now
have transit rights only up to Wagah on the Pakistan

15-0696823/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

side. The implementation of that offer would provide
Afghanistan significant access to one of the fastest
growing economic markets in our region. The proposed
motor vehicles agreement of our regional organization,
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
would further facilitate the movement of goods and
people from Afghanistan.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community’s
efforts to assist Afghanistan’s political and economic
reconstruction process. UNAMA must also focus on
the important role it plays in ensuring the delivery of
valuable humanitarian and development assistance to
Afghanistan. The recent avalanches in the northern
regions of Afghanistan only underscore the importance
of this point.
Finally, we reiterate our commitment to stay the
course in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): It is an honour to make my
maiden statement in the Security Council on the vital
issue of Afghanistan and under your skilled presidency,
Mr. President.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/151). We welcome the perceptive briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom, whom we had the pleasure of
receiving recently in Islamabad. I also welcome the
statement of Ambassador Tanin.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) today
comes at a defining moment for Afghanistan — a
moment of hope for its people and the entire region.
Pakistan has welcomed the peaceful transition in
Afghanistan and the formation of the national unity
Government, led by President Ashraf Ghani. Pakistan
wholeheartedly endorses his decade of transformation
and the programme for effective governance, economic
and social development and national reconciliation.
President Ghani’s historic visit to Islamabad last
November and his talks with Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif succeeded in overcoming in three days the
accumulated challenges of 13 years and produced a
strategic shift in Pakistan-Afghan relations. The leaders
of the two countries share a vision of a partnership

24/34

16/03/2015

built on multiple pillars of common security and
economic interests. They have committed not to allow
their respective territories to be used against each
other. They have initiated actions to intensify security
cooperation, promote bilateral trade, streamline transit
trade and forge a close economic relationship. Renewed
interaction in the military and intelligence sphere has
strengthened mutual confidence.
We are working to strengthen border controls and
cooperation. Pakistan’s Zarb-e-Azb military operation,
which is under way right now, is targeting all terrorist
groups without distinction. Afghanistan’s cooperation
against terrorists targeting Pakistan is greatly
appreciated by Islamabad.
The security challenges confronting Afghanistan
remain imposing. As anticipated, violence has escalated.
The Taliban will no doubt test the mettle of the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF). The ANSF will need
to demonstrate to them that a military solution is not
possible. The new Afghan Government has called for a
dialogue to resolve differences through political means.
There are encouraging indications that the Taliban
may be willing to negotiate with the national unity
Government. We hope it will join the reconciliation
process. It is for the Afghan Government to set out
the terms and framework for such reconciliation. The
international community should actively support that
process, and Pakistan will do everything possible to
facilitate it.
We welcome China’s closer engagement in
promoting reconciliation and economic development in
Afghanistan. But as the Secretary-General warns in his
report, the process of achieving peace and reconciliation
in Afghanistan is not likely to be fast or smooth. The
Afghan parties and the international community must
exercise strategic patience. Those who desire to disrupt
the peace process should be discouraged. They are on
the wrong side of history.
Security and development are interdependent.
A priority aim must be to break the nexus between
drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism. We share the
Secretary-General’s concern about the deterioration in
the Afghan economy. Short-term measures for economic
revival should be accompanied by steps designed to lay
the foundations for self-sustained growth. The road,
rail and trans-regional energy projects envisaged by
Pakistan and Afghanistan will contribute to creating
that foundation.

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

The Afghan refugees in Pakistan, still the
largest single-country refugee population anywhere
in the world, can make a valuable contribution to
Afghanistan’s economic revival. We welcome President
Ghani’s resolve to bring them home and provide a road
map to do so within a specified time frame. UNAMA
should give priority to assisting the process of refugee
repatriation and resettlement. Its core work in capacitybuilding and supporting the Afghan Government
in coordinating assistance and in reconstruction,
socioeconomic growth and good offices remains vital.
The destinies of the peoples of Pakistan and
Afghanistan are inextricably linked by geography,
history, culture, language and faith. Such ties cannot
be cut or rent asunder by the tides of power or politics.
For the past 35 years, the people of my country have
shared in the suffering and tragedies of the Afghan
people. Now, with the dawn of hope, we look forward,
God willing, to sharing in the triumph of peace and
development in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
briefing today and for his dedicated work. I would
also like to acknowledge Ambassador Zahir Tanin’s
presence in the Security Council today.
Afghanistan’s Government of national unity has
embarked upon a comprehensive reform strategy that
was presented by President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah to Afghanistan’s international
partners at the London Conference on Afghanistan in
December. Under the motto “Realizing Self-reliance”,
their agenda sets out an ambitious programme of
reforms in many key areas, among them fighting
corruption, promoting good governance, restoring
fiscal sustainability and promoting economic growth
and private-sector investment, as well as strengthening
the rule of law and protecting and promoting human
rights, particularly women’s rights.
The reform agenda will build on the achievements
made during the past decade. Life expectancy has
increased from 45 to 60, and maternal mortality has
been almost halved. Today, of a total of 9 million
students attending school, almost 4 million are girls.
Thousands of kilometres of roads have been built,
access to electricity has doubled and many Afghans

S/PV.7403

communicate by mobile phone. A vibrant civil society
has assumed the role of guardian of hard-earned
freedoms and rights. Those are only a few examples of
the real progress the Afghan people have seen.
At the same time, tremendous challenges remain.
The Afghan Government will have to pursue further
economic reforms and fiscal sustainability on the
one hand, and protect and promote human rights and
strengthen the rule of law, on the other. Refreshing
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is a
cornerstone of that process. The Government of
Afghanistan is currently engaged with its partners
in setting out new priorities that can put Afghanistan
firmly on a path of self-reliance. That process must
continue. Germany, which assists Afghanistan to the
tune of almost half a billion dollars annually, is one
of its largest donors and will continue to contribute
actively to that process. One result is already certain,
however. The international community, including
Germany, will stay the course and continue to support
Afghanistan during its transformation decade.
Swiftly forming a new Cabinet will be a pivotal
first step in successfully addressing the reform backlog
that has built up over the past few months. Germany
therefore urges that Afghanistan finalize the process
as soon as possible, while at the same time ensuring
that women are adequately represented in the Cabinet.
In that context, Germany commends the Afghan
leadership’s efforts to strengthen links and cooperation
with its regional neighbours, including within the
framework of the Heart of Asia process. Progress in
economic and security cooperation will be mutually
beneficial. Germany therefore calls on all stakeholders
to redouble their efforts to make the transformation
decade a success story for Afghanistan, the region and
beyond.
A continued strong role for the United Nations
Assistance Mission (UNAMA) will be critical to
bringing about success. Germany therefore welcomes
the extension of the mission’s mandate for another
12 months. The mandate sets the right priorities and
will enable the close and trusting cooperation that
exists between the Government of Afghanistan, the
Mission and the international community to continue.
Protecting and promoting human rights, strengthening
the coordination and efficiency of the international
community’s support to Afghanistan, and support to the
Afghan authorities in implementing their commitments
under the Tokyo Framework require a strong United

15-0696825/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

Nations Mission with adequate resources and a presence
throughout the country.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude for the work of the Special Representative
and his team. Under difficult circumstances, the United
Nations continues to do great work in the service of
the Afghan people. Germany will continue to support
UNAMA in its fulfilment of its mandate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151) and Special Representative
Haysom for his briefing on the current situation and
for the excellent work he has done in Afghanistan. I
would also like to acknowledge Ambassador Tanin’s
statement.
Sweden expresses its support for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
the extension of its mandate. A continued United Nations
presence, particularly in those parts of the country that
are otherwise left unattended, remains vital. This year
will be critical for Afghanistan. The Afghan people’s
expectations of the Government remain very high.
Sweden therefore welcomes the strong commitment
and willingness to reform shown by the national unity
Government. The proposed reform agenda of “Realizing
Self-reliance” shows Afghanistan’s readiness to take
on current challenges, although it is critical that the
agenda be translated into concrete results. In order
for the Government to fulfil its commitments to its
citizens and to implement reforms, a full Cabinet must
be nominated and approved as soon as possible.
Sweden remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan’s development towards becoming a
democratic, secure and prosperous State. We have
been assisting it for more than 30 years. Afghanistan
is in fact one of the largest recipients of Swedish
development aid. We intend to commit $1.2 billion to it
over the transformation decade. Our focus is primarily
on strengthening Afghanistan’s own ability to improve
the economy, enhancing democratic governance,
promoting equality and improving the human-rights
situation, particularly for women and children. Sweden
contributes to the Resolute Support Mission with the

26/34

16/03/2015

aim of training, advising and assisting the Afghan
National Security Forces. We also provide support to
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan.
The consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan
continues. The recent elections as well as a vibrant and
active civil society, often driven by the youth, are proof
of that. Yet, for democracy to fully take root, institutions
need to be functioning and adequate legal parameters
need to be in place. Sweden welcomes the commitment
by the national unity Government to implement
necessary reforms of the electoral system prior to the
Parliamentary and District Council elections. The
responsibility rests with the Afghan Government, but
we stand ready to advise, assist and support.
The human-rights situation, particularly the
situation for Afghan women and girls, remains of
serious concern to us. The principle of equality must be
promoted. That calls for a higher proportion of women
in senior government positions and conditions that
allow women to become equal members throughout all
levels of society.
An end to impunity will require serious reforms of
Afghan institutions, especially of the justice system,
and corruption is a critical obstacle to development and
must be combated at all times. The record high number
of civilian casualties reported by UNAMA in 2014 is
appalling. The dire humanitarian consequences of the
conflict underline the immediate need for finding a
peaceful solution.
We welcome the commitment of the Afghan
leadership to making progress in the peace process.
An inclusive approach is the only way forward. The
opportunity to provide women with a stronger role
in that process should be grasped. While the peace
process needs to be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, the
international community stands ready to assist.
The challenges in Afghanistan cannot be tackled
in isolation from the regional context. Recent attempts
to increase cooperation and build further trust are
commendable and should be encouraged. A stable and
prosperous Afghanistan creates potential for the entire
region. The production and smuggling of narcotics is
an area where regional cooperation really could make a
substantial difference. In that respect it will be crucial
to maintain the momentum in regional processes such
as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, as we know the challenges for
Afghanistan are many; tackling them will require
continued assistance from the international community.
UNAMA and other United Nations agencies have
played and will continue to play an indispensable role.
We look forward to continuing our cooperation with
the Afghan Government in making its vision for the
country come true.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2015/151), Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
Let me start by reiterating the EU’s full support
for the continued important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all of the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, and in coordinating the international
community’s assistance. Since the completion of the
International Security Assistance Force’s mission, the
role of the United Nations is now even more important
in assisting the national unity Government to implement
its priorities. In that regard, it also remains important
that the Mission maintain a countrywide presence. The
successful implementation of reforms has an important
part to play in underpinning the continued unity of
the Government and a continued unity of purpose.
That can ensure that gains made in the past 13 years
are safeguarded and used as the foundation for further
progress.
The EU welcomes the lead taken by the national
unity Government in renewing momentum towards the
initiation of an inclusive peace process. A meaningful
peace process has the potential to be transformative
in enabling Afghans to believe in an Afghanistan that
can fully meet their legitimate aspirations for a more
prosperous and more secure life.

S/PV.7403

But a peace deal should not come at any price.
Afghans were relieved to hear President Ghani
Ahmadzai’s words that the price of peace must not be
greater than the price of war. The EU fully supports
the national unity Government in that endeavour. It is
imperative that Afghanistan never again be the base
from which terrorist groups operate.
We must also protect the gains made by Afghan
women since the fall of the Taliban regime, as their
active involvement in rebuilding the State remains
crucial. In that regard, the EU would like to emphasize
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The EU has previously raised the issue of the
central and critical role of women in all spheres of life
in Afghanistan. As the High Representative recently
said on the occasion of International Woman’s Day, on
8 March, “Women make the difference.” We therefore
wish to see women actively involved in the negotiations
on the future of their country.
The EU welcomes the more positive atmosphere
now existing in regional relations. Credit must go
to President Ghani Ahmadzai and the other leaders
in the region for their endeavours to build links and
cooperation among their countries. The EU knows from
its own experience that greater security and prosperity
are interlinked.
The Central and South Asian regions remain among
the least integrated in the world. Increased cooperation
has the potential to benefit all countries in the region.
The cooperation structures that develop from those
processes will offer the possibility of deepened
relationships and increased interdependence, thereby
enabling a shared and structured approach to resolving
differences of opinion.
The EU is a strong supporter of the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process and other processes that are
owned by the countries in the region. They need to
be reinvigorated. The full implementation of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement and
other agreements can also play a valuable role in
stimulating economic activity along vital economic and
transport arteries. In turn, increased economic activity
can offer increased economic opportunities to those
living in insecure areas.
In conclusion, peace and security in Afghanistan are
the heartfelt desire of the Afghan people. The EU will
work with and support the national unity Government
during this difficult transformation period and calls

15-0696827/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

16/03/2015

upon it to further promote an inclusive dialogue on
reconciliation and political participation with all
members of society. Lasting peace can only come
with the constructive engagement of all neighbouring
countries. The EU will work with the leading members
of the international community to support that outcome.
UNAMA’s role in promoting peace and security for
all Afghans will be a vital one, and we reiterate its
importance.

situation. We cannot, in fact, ignore the gravity of the
situation revealed by the report prepared by UNAMA,
in collaboration with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. The report indicates a
22 per cent increase in civilian victims in Afghanistan
in 2014 over the previous year. Those are extremely
disturbing figures that make it imperative to achieve
peace in the country.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.

In that perspective, the developments in the
relations between Afghanistan and other regional
players are positive. The close collaboration among the
countries of the area is decisive in attaining peace and
stability, not only in Afghanistan, but throughout the
region.

Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I am
very happy to take the floor under your presidency, Sir.
Unfortunately I am not able to do so in French. I will
therefore speak in English today and perhaps next time
I will speak in French.
(spoke in English)
I wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and Ambassador Tanin for
their statements. I also stress that Italy aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add some remarks in its national
capacity.
Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation,
as others have done, for the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and by voicing Italy’s support for the renewal of its
mandate, because of the actions it has carried out and
its fundamental contribution towards coordinating
the international community’s actions in support of
Afghanistan and the common goal of achieving peace
and sustainable development in the country.
I wish to underline the precious added value
provided by UNAMA during the troubled election
season of last year, which concluded with the formation
of a national unity Government and the first democratic
transfer of power in Afghan history.
The completion of the International Security
Assistance Force’s mission and the hand-over of
responsibility for security to the Afghan forces — in
the framework of a fruitful collaboration with NATO
and other countries, which continues today through the
Resolute Support Mission — confirm the importance
of UNAMA’s future role and activities.
The challenges facing Afghanistan remain
considerable, in particular as regards the security

28/34

But the focus on the hoped-for process of domestic
reconciliation, in its Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
dimension, should not lead to any backtracking on the
gains made in democracy and civil rights, particularly
the civil rights of women, or to any concessions to
terrorism. These gains represent a legacy that must not
only be defended but also further consolidated.
Italy stands alongside the national unity Government
and its leadership, to which we lend our full support,
and we back its efforts to ensure peace, security
and prosperity for the country and the people. That
is what inspires our participation in the Resolute
Support Mission, in particular in the western region
of the country, and that is the goal of our cooperation
assistance, in the framework of a long-term commitment
on the part of Italy and the international community as
a whole to benefit Afghanistan.
This partnership is based on the principle of
reciprocal commitments, as affirmed in Tokyo and
reiterated last December in London, which require
a resolute pursuit of reforms in the country in the
areas of the democratic and electoral processes, the
fight against corruption, administrative and economic
governance, and human rights, particularly the human
rights of women, which are prerequisites to enabling
Afghanistan to progress resolutely on the road to
democratic consolidation and self-sustainable social
and economic development.
This is a challenging responsibility, but it is also
unavoidable. That is why it is so important to complete
the Government team at the central and local levels.
We hope that this will take place soon, so as to enable
the Government to effectively deploy its efforts to

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7403

concretely implement reforms and achieve the hopedfor results. We are convinced that, for this action to
be successful, the role of UNAMA continues to be
crucial. That is yet another reason why Italy supports
the renewal of its mandate.

programme. It is regrettable, however, that a full cabinet
has yet to be formed six months after an agreement was
reached. We reiterate our call on the new leadership to
form an inclusive national unity Government that can
tackle the challenges that the country faces.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
representative of Japan.

In this regard, I would like to touch upon three
points of particular importance as Afghanistan
embarks on its transformation decade, namely, first,
strengthening governance and institution-building;
secondly, advancing political reconciliation; and,
thirdly and lastly, laying the foundation for sustainable
economic development.

Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing my gratitude to France for
having convened today’s important meeting.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
his detailed briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.
Furthermore, I would like to join other Member
States in welcoming today’s adoption of resolution
2210 (2015), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and the Permanent
Mission of Spain for their leadership in the renewal
process.
This year Afghanistan will embark on its path
towards self-reliance through the transformation decade.
We welcome the strong determination and capacity
that the Government and the people of Afghanistan
have shown in addressing the important challenges
that the country faces. Afghanistan, nevertheless, does
not stand alone. The Tokyo and London Conferences
have reiterated that the international community stands
ready to continue its support for Afghanistan, under the
concept of mutual accountability.
The extension of UNAMA’s mandate is testimony
to the international community’s commitment
to Afghanistan. Japan expects that UNAMA, as
an embodiment of the international community’s
engagement with Afghanistan, will continue to play an
important role in supporting the Afghan-led political
process and the country’s socioeconomic development.
The first democratic transition of power marked
a watershed in Afghanistan’s pursuit of self-reliance.
We look to the national unity Government, under
the guidance of, and with cooperation between,
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah,
to successfully implement its ambitious reform

First, we believe that strengthening governance and
institution-building will be fundamental to achieving
self-reliance. A critical component of this is the
strengthening of Afghanistan’s own security forces.
With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force, the Afghan Government is now called
upon to take full responsibility for security and public
order. We are therefore concerned at the recent increase
in terrorism and civilian casualties. To this effect,
Japan will continue to help reinforce Afghanistan’s
law-enforcement capacity. Our assistance in this area
will be carried out principally through the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan, to which Japan has
hitherto contributed more than $1 billion.
In the light of the importance of maintaining
security, we hope that Afghanistan and international
donors will be able to agree on a form of management
for the Fund that is reliable and acceptable to all parties
involved, via constructive dialogue.
Secondly, political reconciliation is crucial for
Afghanistan’s long-term stability. In that light, Japan
values the Afghan Government’s efforts in leading
the Afghan-led process towards peace, reintegration
and reconciliation. Japan also welcomes Afghanistan’s
increased cooperation with regional partners, which is
conducive to peace. Japan, for its part, will continue to
support the reintegration of ex-combatants by providing
vocational training and promoting job creation in such
key sectors as agriculture.
Thirdly, we note with concern the recent economic
slowdown. This affects not only Government revenues
but also the welfare of ordinary Afghan citizens. Hence
it is all the more crucial for Afghanistan to achieve
a strong, endogenous and sustainable economy. The
development of infrastructure and human resources
would underpin this objective.

15-0696829/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

Strengthening the agricultural sector is also
important owing to its large potential for job creation.
To that end, Japan has provided assistance to reinforce
Afghanistan’s infrastructure and facilitate its integration
into the global economy. This includes, inter alia, our
assistance for the rehabilitation and expansion of Kabul
International Airport, the reinforcement of land routes
with neighbouring countries, and the rehabilitation of
irrigation facilities in rural areas.
Furthermore, through initiatives such as the
Promotion and Enhancement of the Afghan Capacity
for Effective Development, Japan is helping train
Afghan officials who will lead the country’s economic
development through and beyond the transformation
decade.
It is said that a journey of 1,000 miles begins
with a single step. We are confident that the millions
of Afghans who made their historic voices heard
last September will, along with the Government of
national unity, cement the foundations for a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
As testimony to Japan’s solidarity with Afghanistan,
the Japanese Government has decided to disburse an
additional $242 million before the end of this month.
We hope that this will reinforce Afghanistan’s first
steps into the decade of transformation. Japan, along
with the international community, stands ready to
accompany Afghanistan on its path towards reform and
self-reliance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I should like to
express our appreciation to the French presidency for
having convened this meeting. I should like also to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2015/151); his Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing; and Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement.
Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in its
political, security and economic transformation. We
welcome the continuation of the transition processes in
the country. However, the significant gains of the past
years, including in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, capacity- and institution-building,
economic development and human rights, have not
yet passed the point of no return. The launch of the

30/34

16/03/2015

transformation decade calls for enhanced efforts to
consolidate the achievements in these fields.
The international community’s continuing support
remains vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively meet the needs of its
people. The steps and messages we take now will have
an immense impact on the way in which the next decade
will unfold. We therefore attach particular importance
to the need for all parties to refrain from mentioning
any misguiding dates, which would imply the drawing
down of the international community’s commitment
to Afghanistan at an early stage incompatible with the
situation and requirements on the ground.
Resolution 2210 (2015), renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), is timely, when change and transformation
dominate the agenda of Afghanistan. We believe
that the comprehensive role assumed by UNAMA in
assisting the Afghan people to achieve a bright future is
of utmost importance. Turkey will continue to support
UNAMA’s activities and efforts in this regard.
The national unity Government’s resolve in carrying
Afghanistan forward should be commended. We
welcome and support the robust reform agenda the
Afghan leadership has embarked upon, including in
the fields of governance, the rule of law and the fight
against corruption, as well as its efforts for an Afghanled and -owned reconciliation process. The international
community’s support to the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan, with full respect for the principles of
Afghan leadership, ownership and sovereignty, will be
particularly important.
The issue of civilian casualties continues to be a
source of grave concern in Afghanistan. Regrettably,
2014 saw a 22 per cent increase in the number of civilian
casualties compared with the previous year. We believe
that addressing this issue should remain among the top
priorities of our common agenda.
Furthermore, we condemn the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in the country since the Security Council’s
last debate on Afghanistan in December 2014 (see
S/PV.7347), including an attack carried out against a
Turkish Embassy vehicle in Kabul last month, which
claimed the life of one member of the Turkish Armed
Forces personnel and wounded another. We reiterate
our conviction that those who perpetrate such attacks
will not achieve their goals of dragging Afghanistan

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7403

into instability and confirm that we will always stand
by Afghanistan in its struggle against terrorism.

Afghanistan is tantamount to security on our borders
and in our region.

The Secretary-General’s report underscores in its
paragraph 54 that “peace remains the fundamental
precondition to durable and sustained political and
economic progress in Afghanistan”. In fact, a successful,
Afghan-led and inclusive reconciliation process would
serve to eliminate the obstacles impeding social,
political and economic development.

Iran was among the first to welcome the formation
of the national unity Government in Afghanistan, with
Mr. Ashraf Ghani as its President and Mr. Abdullah as
its Chief Executive. Having assumed full leadership,
Afghanistan has now embarked on a very crucial
path of transformation. The strong and visionary
leadership taken by the new Government will address
current challenges in a sustainable, strategic and
consistent manner. We are confident that the national
unity Government is best positioned to face the major
challenges of peace and development.

Furthermore, at a time of transformation, the
importance of regional cooperation and commitment
becomes all the more relevant. We welcome all bilateral
and multilateral dialogue and cooperation efforts to
this end. With this understanding, we also welcome the
increased momentum that has been achieved through
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. Concrete projects
emerging from increased cooperation will facilitate
economic development, stability and self-sustainability
in the region.
Turkey remains committed to standing by the people
of Afghanistan in this transition process, including in
the fields of security and development. In addition to
Turkey’s financial commitments for the funding of the
Afghan National Security Forces, Turkey has assumed
the framework nation role for Kabul in the new Resolute
Support Mission.
The international community’s solidarity and
continued commitment will strengthen the hopes of the
Afghan people for a bright future. Turkey will continue
to contribute to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for holding
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan
for his statement and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his report (S/2015/151).
The Islamic Republic of Iran, with its deep
cultural and historical ties to Afghanistan, has always
supported peace, stability, security and socioeconomic
development in Afghanistan. To us, security in

The latest Secretary-General’s report on Afghanistan,
which indicates a possible increase in armed attacks
and violence in the coming summer season, should
be a matter of deep concern to us and all countries in
the region. Insecurity, instability and poverty provide
the most fertile of ground for the rapid growth and
re-emergence of violent extremist groups and even
footholds for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
in Afghanistan, as Special Representative Haysom
mentioned today.
Unfortunately, the report shows that the number of
terrorist acts has increased during the recent months.
We condemn all violent attacks committed by these
terrorist groups as well as any cooperation with them,
which we believe would embolden them in their odious
behaviour and be counterproductive to establishing
peace in Afghanistan.
On the important question of security arrangements
and the activities of the foreign troops, including
through the Resolute Support Mission, we believe
that such activities should be carried out with the
full consent and in constant consultation with the
Government. This is a vital requirement to demonstrate
the strong commitment of the international community
to respecting the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.
On bilateral cooperation, Iran’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs visited Kabul on 20 January and discussed issues
of common interest, such as security cooperation and
establishing bilateral strategic cooperation. That visit
was preceded by the 15 December signing in Tehran of
a memorandum of understanding by the Commander of
the Iranian Border Guards and his Afghan counterpart
to enhance cooperation in countering terrorism and
drug trafficking. Iran stands ready to increase its

15-0696831/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

bilateral cooperation, in particular on security matters,
counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects and
economic cooperation in the fields of infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as seeking a durable solution
for Afghan refugees.
There is also great potential to explore in the
fields of trade and transit. Completing the railroad
project between Harat and Khaf city in Iran and Iran’s
readiness to make available its port facilities in Chah
Bahar are two ongoing examples in this regard. The
tripartite agreement between India, Afghanistan and
Iran needs to be finalized in order to move forward
with the subjects addressed in that agreement.
On the counter-narcotics efforts, we are particularly
concerned about the reports indicating that opium poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan has almost doubled since
2012. It is a real threat for the region and beyond and
should be addressed by the international community.
We welcome the regional initiatives taken by countries
in the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran, to that end.
The strong support and commitment of the
international donors, Afghan authorities and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is essential to efforts
to deter those who would engage in drug cultivation and
drug trafficking. That is not only a major public health
challenge, but also, and more importantly, a major
source of income for extremist and terrorist groups.
Thus, the international community should especially
support the trilateral initiative on cooperation on
countering narcotics by Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan.
It is a useful initiative that will benefit Afghanistan and
transit and destination countries.
Millions of Afghan refugees continue to live in
Iran. The drop in the rate of their voluntary repatriation
underlines the importance of meeting the reasonable
needs of repatriated refugees in Afghanistan in order to
reverse that trend and underscores the need to mobilize
more international support for the host countries of
Afghan refugees pending their repatriation.
We support UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through robust
regional engagement on issues such as border security,
immigration, the return of refugees and drug control
measures. The role of UNAMA should be further
strengthened in the light of the important political
and socioeconomic developments in Afghanistan. The

32/34

16/03/2015

future involvement of UNAMA will be deepened and
strengthened given its unique role and the multifaceted
and increasingly complicated challenges it faces.
Let me conclude by expressing my best wishes to
the people of Afghanistan on the occasion of our — and
their — new year, Nowruz. I wish them peace and
prosperity in the new year, which starts on the first day
of spring.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom for his briefing and
for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Allow me also to
acknowledge Afghanistan’s Permanent Representative,
Zahir Tanin, for his continued important contribution.
Australia is pleased that the Security Council has
today unanimously renewed the UNAMA mandate
for a further 12 months. As Afghanistan assumes full
leadership of its affairs, the United Nations continues
to play a central role in leading international efforts to
support Afghanistan during its transformation decade,
including through good offices, donor coordination,
and human rights and humanitarian assistance.
The year 2015 marks the beginning of a new
chapter in Afghanistan’s history. For the first time
since the days of the Taliban, the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) are responsible for securing
the country. The new Government of national unity, led
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, has
committed itself to an ambitious programme of reform.
The 13-year-long International Security Assistance
Force mission to Afghanistan concluded at the end
of 2014 and has now been followed by the NATOled non-combat Resolute Support Mission, which is
training, advising and assisting the ANSF. Australia is
contributing military personnel to Resolute Support and
$100 million per year until 2017 to sustaining ANSF.
Civilian casualties remain a serious concern and
have regrettably continued to increase over the past
year. We thank UNAMA for its continued reporting on
civilian casualties in Afghanistan.
The national unity Government has achieved a great
deal in its first months, but Afghanistan’s economy
and Government finances remain a serious concern.
We welcome President Ghani’s ambitious vision for

15-06968

16/03/2015

The situation in Afghanistan

reform, set out in his paper entitled “Realizing Selfreliance”. We also applaud the Afghan Government’s
steps to combat corruption, especially steps to review
the fraud charges against the Kabul Bank and recent
steps to reduce leakages in Afghanistan’s Customs and
Revenue Departments. We look forward to receiving
the action plan for implementing the priorities outlined
in the Afghan Government’s “Realizing Self-reliance”
paper.
Electoral reform, drawing on the lessons from the
two rounds of voting in 2014, will help build a democracy
that Afghans can be proud of. Australia welcomed
President Ghani’s commitment to electoral reform,
including the planned Electoral Reform Commission.
We urge the Afghan Government to take that forward as
a priority. We also encourage the Afghan Government
to appoint a full and inclusive Cabinet when the Afghan
Parliament sits again after the winter recess.
Afghanistan has made enormous progress in key
areas of human development since 2001. The challenge
for the Afghan Government now will be to protect the
gains of the past 14 years, particularly when it comes
to basic-service delivery, such as health and education.
Australia also looks to the Afghan Government
to continue to work to improve the place of women
and girls in Afghan society. We have welcomed the
renewed commitment by the Afghan Government to
the rights of women and girls, including steps towards
implementing the national action plan on women, peace
and security. Full implementation of the action plan and
the Elimination of Violence against Women law must
be priorities.
Achieving a political settlement with the Taliban
will set the foundation for a lasting peace for Afghanistan
and its region. The Government of national unity has
made impressive progress in strengthening regional
relationships, which is a critical first step towards
creating the preconditions for formal talks between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban. The prospects
for peace are promising. We urge Afghanistan and its
partners to continue to approach reconciliation with a
sense of purpose and pragmatism.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier on
behalf of the European Union (EU).

S/PV.7403

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151) and welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Nicholas Haysom. I thank him for his briefing and
wish him every success in his new appointment. We
are keeping our fingers crossed for his mission, and we
are sure it will be successful. Slovakia will continue
to offer full support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement and for
his ongoing activities to bring about a brighter future
for his country.
Slovakia welcomes the fact that Afghanistan
entered its transformation decade at the beginning of
2015, having assumed full leadership and ownership
of its national affairs. We note with appreciation the
mutually respectful nature of the relations between
Afghan leaders President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah and their teams. That approach is the only
way forward in addressing the country’s challenges in
a sustainable, strategic and cohesive manner.
I would like to touch upon the various challenges
that Afghanistan is facing.
Despite the volatile nature of its security situation,
Afghanistan is not alone. There is now the Resolute
Support Mission, which is an entirely new element
based on new foundations. As set forth in Security
Council resolution 2189 (2014), adopted by this body
in December 2014, that non-combat, training, advisory
and assistance operation will work in close coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan. I am proud that
my country is a part of it. We must also recognize
the work done by the civilian EU Police Mission in
Afghanistan, which is focused on police training and
the rule of law and to which Slovakia also contributes.
All of those engagements contribute to a better securitysector environment and should be fully supported by all
the main stakeholders.
With regard to political developments, Afghan
leaders can fully rely on the support of the international
community, including Slovakia. However, the most
prominent support can and will only come from the
Afghan people, and it is up to their representatives to
earn their trust and credibility by leading by example.
We encourage all steps towards increased internal
stabilization, including sound political leadership in
the parliamentary elections process and the reform
agenda. The process of reconciliation is a fundamental

15-0696833/34

S/PV.7403

The situation in Afghanistan

prerequisite to sustainable development in Afghanistan.
We encourage Afghan leaders to inspire their fellow
politicians and other potential candidates in Kabul,
as well as in other regions, to conduct an ambitious
schedule of elections and reforms.
Economic, financial and budgetary reforms are
perhaps the most challenging area of reform to promote
peaceful development. And I think that the people of
Slovakia have really already confirmed that, because
over the past 20 years, the country has gone through
substantive economic reforms. As I have stressed before,
Afghanistan is not alone and Slovakia, together with
other countries and organizations, wishes to continue
its development assistance programmes. But from our
own national experience, foreign aid can only help to
overcome the difficult problems of the initial phase of
a country’s transformation. The most important, and
at the same time challenging and painful, part of the
process is deep structural reform. It is essential in order
to encourage foreign private investors and develop
domestic small and medium enterprises. Again on this
point, Slovakia is ready to offer its own experience with
transformation at any time if requested.
In connection with regional cooperation, we have
taken note, with appreciation, of increased positive
engagement on the part of neighbours of Afghanistan,
complementing Afghan efforts to strengthen regional
relations. Their support is critical and essential,
especially in addressing cross-border threats, like
counter-narcotics efforts and the illicit trafficking of
drugs.

34/34

16/03/2015

Slovakia fully supports a free and democratic
Afghanistan. We support its economic and social
development in accordance with the traditions and
wishes of its people. Afghan leaders — including
President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah — have
offered their people vision and hope. We are pleased that
the reform plan also tackles the areas of the protection
of civilians, the situation of women and girls, freedom
of expression and accountability based on the rule of
law.
The accent on the necessity of economic reforms in
my statement is not accidental. The growth of the illicit
economy can severely undermine the Government’s
efforts, negatively affect the individual and collective
business endeavours of Afghan citizens and ultimately
spoil the momentum of building an unprecedented,
qualitatively better future for Afghanistan. I am
convinced that the Afghan Administration is aware of
that challenge, and we are looking forward to working
closely with Kabul, should our assistance be desired.
I remain positive and encouraged — again thanks to
Special Representative Haysom and the whole UNAMA
team, who continue in their remarkable performance.
And let me wish to all the Afghan people a very
successful year with new hopes and perspectives.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

15-06968
