A/54/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

97th plenary meeting
Thursday, 25 May 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ingólfsson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/54/730/Add.6)

“Review
of
the
problem
of
human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome in all its aspects”, should be included in
the agenda of the current session.
May I take it that the General Assembly
decides to include in the agenda of the current
session this additional item?
It was so decided.

The Acting President: In the letter contained
in document A/54/730/Add.6, the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that,
since the issuance of his communications contained
in document A/54/730 and addenda 1 to 5, Burkina
Faso has made the necessary payment to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of
the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of
work: reports of the General Committee
Fourth report of the General Committee
(A/54/250/Add.3)
The Acting President: In its fourth report, the
General Committee decided to recommend to the
General Assembly that an additional item, entitled

The
Acting
President: The
General
Committee further decided to recommend to the
General Assembly that the additional item should be
considered directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the General Assembly
decides to consider this item directly in plenary
meeting?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 8 and 167 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of
work: reopening of the consideration of agenda
item 167
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
The Acting President: Members will recall
that agenda item 167 was closed at the 70th plenary
meeting, held on 6 December 1999. The item, which
was closed inadvertently, should have remained
open for consideration during the fifty-fourth

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-44879 (E)
`````````

A/54/PV.97

session, in the light of the last paragraph of
resolution 54/65.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

In that paragraph, the General Assembly
invites the Secretary-General to take the appropriate
steps to conclude with the Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty an agreement to regulate
the relationship between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission, to be submitted to the
General Assembly for its approval.

Mr. Jin (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I wish
to inform Member States that, should the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/54/L.85, under
operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to convene a
Second World Assembly on Ageing in 2002 devoted
to an overall review of the outcome of the First
World Assembly on Ageing, as well as to the
adoption of a revised plan of action and a long-term
strategy on ageing. Implementation of the requests
contained in this operative paragraph, in particular
the costs for the convening of the Second World
Assembly on Ageing, would be included in the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20022003.

May I take it, therefore, that the Assembly
agrees that agenda item 167, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty Organization”, remains open for
consideration during the fifty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Social development, including questions relating
to the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family
Draft resolution (A/54/L.85)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that, at its 3rd plenary meeting on 17 September
1999, the General Assembly decided to allocate
agenda item 106 to the Third Committee. Members
will also recall that the item remained open for
consideration during the fifty-fourth session.
In order for the General Assembly to proceed
expeditiously on the item, may I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to consider agenda item
106 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it
that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to
the consideration of agenda item 106? As I hear no
objection, we shall now proceed accordingly.
In connection with agenda item 106, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/54/L.85.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/54/L.85, entitled “Follow-up to
the International Year of Older Persons: Second
World Assembly on Ageing”.

2

In operative paragraph 3, the General
Assembly would accept the offer of the Government
of Spain and decide that the Second World
Assembly on Ageing would be held in Spain in
April 2002. Should the General Assembly accept the
offer of the Government of Spain to host the Second
World Assembly on Ageing, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 40/243,
the difference in costs between New York and Spain
would be borne by the host Government.
In operative paragraph 6, the Commission for
Social Development would serve as the preparatory
committee for the Second World Assembly on
Ageing and be open to participation of all Member
States of the United Nations, members of the
specialized agencies and observers, in accordance
with the established practice of the General
Assembly.
There is provision in the programme budget
for the biennium 2000-2001 for substantive and
conference servicing of the Commission for Social
Development at its thirty-ninth and fortieth sessions.
The provision contained in operative paragraph 6
would imply the servicing of two sessions of the
preparatory committee, one in 2001 and the other
2002, and would require the provision of conference
servicing, including interpretation in all six
languages, the translation, editing and publishing of
the associated documentation in all of the languages,
estimated at $169,000 per session.

A/54/PV.97

Provision has been made in the programme
budget for the biennium 2000-2001 not only for
meetings programmed at the time of the budget
preparation, but also for meetings authorized
subsequently, provided that the number and
distribution of meetings are consistent with the
pattern of meetings of past years. Consequently, no
additional resources would be needed for the
conference servicing for the meetings of the
preparatory committee in 2001. The resource
requirements for the preparatory committee in 2002
would be included in the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2002-2003.
Under operative paragraphs 8 and 9, the
Secretary-General would be invited to establish a
technical committee, funded through voluntary
contributions
and
composed
of
experts
geographically balanced to assist in the formulation
of proposals during the preparatory process.
In operative paragraph 12, the General
Assembly would encourage voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund on Ageing to support preparatory
activities of the Second World Assembly, including
the participation of least developed countries.
The requests contained in operative paragraphs
8 and 12 will be carried out through funding from
voluntary contributions. It is anticipated that
voluntary contributions will be forthcoming to
support the requests.
As regards the use of voluntary contributions
to support the participation of least developed
countries in the Second World Assembly, it should
be noted that this would imply an exception to the
provision of General Assembly resolution 1798
(XVII) of 11 December 1962 on the payment of
travel and subsistence allowances to members of
organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations.
In addition, it is the understanding of the Secretariat
that the support to be provided to least developed
countries would consist of the payment from extrabudgetary resources of the travel cost for one
representative from each least developed country to
attend the Second World Assembly.
In summary, should the General Assembly
adopt the draft resolution, no additional
requirements would arise under the programme
budget for the biennium 2000-2001.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/54/L.85?
Draft resolution A/54/L.85
(resolution 54/262).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 106.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Human rights questions
Draft resolution (A/54/L.84)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that, at its 3rd plenary meeting on 17 September
1999, the General Assembly decided to allocate
agenda item 116 to the Third Committee. Members
will also recall that the item remained open for
consideration during the fifty-fourth session.
In order for the General Assembly to proceed
expeditiously on the item, may I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to consider agenda item
116 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it
that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to
the consideration of agenda item 116? As I hear no
objection, we shall now proceed accordingly.
In connection with agenda item 116, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/54/L.84.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/54/L.84, entitled “Optional
protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/54/L.84?
Draft resolution A/54/L.84
(resolution 54/263).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote after the vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote

3

A/54/PV.97

are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography.

Ms. Batoréu (Portugal): The European Union
welcomes the adoption today by the General
Assembly of the two optional protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child: on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. We hope that those two legal
instruments will become important tools for the
promotion and protection of the human rights of all
children around the world.

First,
Sweden
understands
the
word
“representation” in the definition of child
pornography in article 2 (c) to cover only visual
representation. Secondly, still regarding article 2 (c),
Sweden interprets “any representation, by whatever
means, of a child engaged in real or simulated
explicit sexual activities” not to be applicable to
adults acting, posing or dressing as a child.

The optional protocol on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography, which
implements some fundamental principles of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, represents a
significant step towards improving the standards of
protection accorded to children against those
heinous practices of exploitation. Our goal is to
eliminate those practices, and we stand ready to
support further efforts to combat any practices that
violate the rights of the child in this field.
The optional protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict also constitutes a
fundamental complement to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, and especially so at a time when
we are experiencing an increasing number of armed
conflicts in which children are increasingly targeted
and brutalized, with very negative consequences for
their living conditions and for their enjoyment of
their human rights.
The European Union would like to extend to
all those who participated in the work of the two
drafting groups its appreciation for the remarkable
spirit of cooperation and the constructive approach
they demonstrated, which allowed us to achieve this
successful outcome. The European Union hopes that
these two optional protocols will be subject to early
entry into force.
Mr. Hedman (Sweden): Having just joined the
consensus on the adoption of draft resolution
A/54/L.84, on the question of optional protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography, Sweden would like, in addition to the
European Union statement, make its position clear
as to how we understand article 2 (c) of the optional

4

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote. The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 116.
Agenda item 90 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization
Committee
(Fourth
Committee) (A/54/577/Add.l)
The Acting President: I request the
Rapporteur
of
the
Special
Political
and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), Mr.
Gualberto Rodríguez San Martín of Bolivia, to
introduce the report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee.
Mr. Rodríguez San Martín (Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): It is my great pleasure to introduce the
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) on agenda item 90,
entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”, contained in document A/54/577/Add.1,
for consideration and approval by the General
Assembly.
As members may recall, by its resolution 54/81
of 6 December 1999, the General Assembly
requested the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations to submit a report on its work to the
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session. The Special
Political and Decolonization Committee resumed
consideration of agenda item 90 at its 25th meeting,
held on 22 May 2000. The Committee had before it
the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/54/839). The Special
Political and Decolonization Committee also had

A/54/PV.97

before it a draft resolution sponsored by Argentina,
Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland, which it
adopted at that meeting without a vote; the draft
resolution appears in paragraph 9 of the report of the
Committee before the Assembly this morning.
On behalf of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), I
have the honour to commend the report to the
General Assembly for its consideration and
approval.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) that is before it
today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of vote or
position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee have been made clear in
the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. May I remind members that under
paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the Assembly agreed
that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in
plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as
possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either
in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are
going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance.

We shall now take a decision on the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 9 of the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), document A/54/577/Add.1.
I call on the representative of the United
States.
Ms. Healey (United States of America): We
support the draft resolution before us today, which,
among other things, welcomes and endorses the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. We note the valuable role of the Special
Committee in identifying practical measures to
enhance the capacity of the United Nations to
conduct peacekeeping operations.
We would also like to thank the Chairman of
the Special Committee and the Chairman of the
working group for their efforts this spring.
In the light of the challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping efforts throughout the world
today, we would like to underscore, as stated in the
report, that
“the Special Committee considers it essential
for the United Nations to be in an effective
position to maintain international peace and
security, inter alia, by improving the capacity
to assess conflict situations, by effective
planning and management of peacekeeping
operations, and by responding quickly and
effectively to any Security Council mandate.”
(A/54/839, para. 47)
To this end, we applaud the report’s call for
improving
planning
and
management
of
peacekeeping operations, building capacity for rapid
deployment and shortening procurement times for
vital resources. We also support the report’s call for
the replenishment of the logistics base in Brindisi
and, in particular, the call for a comprehensive
review of all elements within the Secretariat that
play a role in peacekeeping operations.
We regret that the Special Committee could
not reach agreement on other issues, which we
believe would assist the United Nations in
efficiently and effectively deploying peacekeepers.
These issues include the use of Gratis Type II
Personnel, the development of a roster system and
the strengthening of the standby arrangements

5

A/54/PV.97

system. We look forward to working to build a
consensus on these proposals in the future.
Peacekeeping operational reform is a top
priority for my Government, and we therefore call
for further discussion and work on these issues
relating to peacekeeping early in the fifty-fifth
session of the General Assembly. We would also
consider supporting a reconvening of the Special
Committee to discuss important peacekeeping
issues, including the results of the SecretaryGeneral’s panel on peace operations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 9 of its
report.

6

The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/81 B).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 90?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.
