A /68/PV.109

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

109th plenary meeting

Monday, 15 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/68/L.62,
circulated under sub-item (a) of agenda item 19, entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”.
Members will recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 20 September 2013, the General Assembly decided
to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda item 19 to the Second
Committee. To enable the General Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it that
the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (a) of agenda
item 19 directly in plenary meeting and to proceed
immediately to its consideration?

Draft resolution (A/68/L.62)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.62, entitled
“Four one-day structured dialogues on possible
arrangements for a facilitation mechanism to promote
the development, transfer and dissemination of clean
and environmentally sound technologies”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.62?
Draft resolution A/68/L.62 was adopted (resolution
68/310).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations wishing to make statements.
I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.

Sustainable development

Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

a)
Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development

We would first like to thank our co-moderators,
Ambassador Seger and Ambassador De Aguiar
Patriota, for their tireless efforts in bringing forward
the structured dialogues on possible arrangements for
a facilitation mechanism to promote the development,

It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-53448 (E)

*1453448*

A/68/PV.109

transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies. We take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/68/310) on the structured dialogues,
which, in its recommendations for the way forward,
outlines three functions for a technology facilitation
mechanism: mapping of existing technology facilitation
mechanisms, frameworks and processes on clean and
environmentally sound technologies through creation
of an online knowledge-sharing platform; improved
inter-agency coherence on technology facilitation
through better coordination; and further promotion of
technology needs assessment and capacity-building.
While we do not necessarily agree with all the
details in the descriptions, we acknowledge that the
three functions were indeed identified in the dialogues
as important gaps, and there was a general sentiment
among Member States that addressing them would
promote the development, transfer and dissemination
of clean and environmentally sound technologies. We
therefore believe that the further elaboration of these
functions must be at the core of our future technology
discussions. Conversely, and while we remain open to
considering further ideas and proposals, we believe that
we should not devote additional time to discussing those
elements on which it clearly appeared in the structured
dialogues that no consensus is emerging.
Ms. Onishi (Japan): My delegation would first
like to thank Mr. Seger, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland, and Mr. De Aguiar Patriota, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Brazil, and their team
for their hard work both as co-moderators of the four
one-day structured dialogues on possible arrangements
for a facilitation mechanism to promote the development,
transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies and as co-facilitators of resolution
68/310, just adopted.
Japan is one of the countries that have been keen
to share their knowledge and technologies with the
international community. We are very proud of our
many contributions to the world in this area over
the past several decades. We fully recognize that
without technology it would be impossible to achieve
any development in any country. However, we still
believe that creating a new mechanism within the
United Nations is not the best or most relevant solution
for the development, transfer and dissemination of
technologies.
Our main finding from the dialogue was the
importance of creating an environment conducive to
2/12

15/09/2014

facilitating the engagement of the private sector, which
is the primary developer and owner of technologies.
Such an environment would include a sound regulatory
and policy framework in recipient countries, including
the protection of intellectual property rights, in order
to encourage the private sector to continue and to
increase its innovation of new technologies. On the
basis of this fundamental idea, my delegation stands
ready to continue discussion on how best to address
this important topic in the General Assembly at its next
session.
Mr. Mukerji (India): My delegation would like
to join others in commending Ambassadors Seger of
Switzerland and De Aguiar Patriota of Brazil for their
exemplary role as co-facilitators for resolution 68/310,
which we have adopted today.
We commend the General Assembly for adopting
by consensus resolution 68/310, on structured dialogues
on possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism
to promote the development, transfer and dissemination
of clean and environmentally sound technologies. By
adopting the resolution, the Assembly has provided a
mandate for the continuation of meaningful discussions
on the issue of technology cooperation and linked it
with the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
That is something that we welcome, not least because,
in our view, the mandate of resolution 68/210 remains
unfulfilled.
The resolution we have adopted today mandates
the continuation of discussions based on the
recommendations of the President of the General
Assembly emanating from the four structured dialogues
held during the sixty-eighth session. However, it is clear
that both the summary presented by the moderators and
the recommendations of the President of the General
Assembly build on the discussions on the issue over the
last two years. In fact, it is quite natural to consider the
discussions so far on the issue as part of a continuum
and an organic whole starting from the mandate given
by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20), and including the two reports
of the Secretary-General (A/67/348 and A/68/310),
which unequivocally recommended the creation of
such a mechanism, the discussions in the workshops
during the sixty-seventh session and, of course, the
four structured dialogues convened during the current
session. As we seek to reach a conclusion on the issue
during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
it will be our understanding that our discussions will

14-53448

15/09/2014

build on and base themselves on all those inputs and
processes since Rio+20.
The Indian delegation has long maintained that
without a collaborative approach on international
cooperation on technology transfer and diffusion, the
global achievement of sustainable development will
remain a mirage. The global nature of the challenges
that we confront makes it imperative that a public-goods
approach to global resources is matched by an equally
constructive approach to technology cooperation. As
the international community embarks on a pathbreaking
exercise to translate the normative discourse of ideas on
sustainable development into actionable commitments
through the sustainable development goals, it is all the
more important that discussions on technology transfer
and cooperation also move from long-winded debates
into meaningful and action-oriented outcomes.
Mr. President, you can count on the Indian
delegation’s constructive and proactive engagement
on the issue in the months ahead. We consider a
meaningful outcome on technology cooperation in the
form of the creation of a facilitation mechanism as an
indispensable part of a successful negotiation on the
post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to take this
opportunity to convey my delegation’s highest
appreciation to Ambassador Paul Seger, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland, and Ambassador
Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Brazil, for ably co-moderating the
series of structured dialogues.
The outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288, annex) acknowledged technology as one of the
key means of sustainable development implementation,
along with finance, capacity-building and trade. We are
therefore pleased by the outcome of the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970),
which affirmed technology as a vital component of
means of implementation for sustainable development
globally. Technology is a vital means for overcoming
obstacles to economic expansion and growth,
particularly for developing countries. Technology also
serves to achieve specific development goals through a
more sustainable development path.
Despite that necessity, developing countries are
still facing major challenges in advancing the use of
technology. I am glad that technology in the context of

A/68/PV.109

the sustainable development has received a dedicated
discussion within the General Assembly. The four
structured dialogues give us a good picture of the
overall potential for building a technology facilitation
mechanism. However, we have come to understand
through the summary of the dialogues presented by the
facilitators that more discussion is needed and that the
moderators have recommended further discussions in
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly based
on a number of elements and functions having to do
with technology facilitation.
In that regard, Indonesia welcomes the
recommendations as presented in resolution 68/310 and
looks forward to seeing the process fulfil its objective
of reaching a conclusion at the sixty-ninth session on
a United Nations technology facilitation mechanism to
promote the development, transfer and dissemination
of clean and environmentally sound technologies in the
context of the post-2015 development agenda. For that
purpose, Indonesia stands ready to support the process
in a constructive manner.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The four
structured dialogues on possible arrangements for a
facilitation mechanism to promote the development,
transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies have reconfirmed the importance
of technology to development solutions and generated
ideas about possible next steps. My delegation sincerely
thanks everyone who contributed to a productive
discussion in those dialogues. At the same time, they
also leave us, in our view, with significant work still
to do.
In our view, it is critical to understand the issue
as broader than the narrower question of technology
transfer and to look at what drives and sustains
technological advance innovation and application.
That necessarily entails assessing the institutional
conditions that promote innovation, technology
adaptation and diffusion and the human capital
requirements for deepening of knowledge and expertise.
It requires looking at diverse solution-oriented forms
of international development cooperation. It thus also
involves questions of investment, entrepreneurship,
capacity-building, science, technology, engineering
and mathematics education, especially for women,
and enabling policy and regulatory environments,
particularly around intellectual property. The work
that has been done on technology transfer can be a
basis for what, in our view, is still needed, namely, a

14-534483/12

A/68/PV.109

more substantial, independent, analytical exercise in
due diligence and a much better understanding and
fuller range of views from the private sector, which we
believe is both a key source and supporter of innovation,
research and commercialization of new technology.
The United States also believes that in addition
to preparing for the absorption and adoption of new
technologies, receiving countries must implement
strong legal regimes to help protect innovations. That
includes creating rules that stimulate competition,
entrepreneurship, commerce and investment, and a
robust and well-enforced intellectual property regime.
Without that kind of intellectual property protection,
many innovators would be unwilling to transfer or
share their new technologies.
On the issue of linking the discussion of technology
transfer to the post-2015 development agenda, it is
important to clarify that what the Open Working
Group sent forward (A/68/970) was not a consensus
document but a working proposal that reflects differing
views, including in relation to technology, which was
minimally discussed in the Group. We therefore remain
committed to working with all colleagues toward
formulating the post-2015 development agenda in the
context of our financing for development discussions
and in the context of any follow-on to those dialogues,
in order to ensure the holding of substantive and
productive discussions that can help us chart a path
forward.
Ms. Carayanides (Australia): I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Brazil and Switzerland for their
work as co-Chairs on this issue. Australia remains
committed to continuing discussions on technology
transfer and facilitation under resolution 68/310, just
adopted.
We note the mandate for continuing discussions
is focused on environmentally sound technologies,
and while we recognize the post-2015 context, our
view is that those discussions do not encompass
technology facilitation writ large. We also view that
intellectual property is not a barrier or a constraint
to technology transfer or facilitation. Rather, it is
critical to the development of new and innovative
technologies. The creation of domestic environments
conducive to investment and innovation is the best
method to boost countries’ technological capacity, and
the use by States of international norms and standards
and intellectual property regulations will continue to
encourage investment and develop local capacities and
4/12

15/09/2014

technology. We therefore look forward to finding ways
to help all States connect with existing technologies
during discussions at the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 29 (continued)
Report of the Security Council
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 29, jointly with
agenda item 123, entitled “Question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters”, at its 46th
to 49th and 56th plenary meetings, held on 7, 8 and
21 November 2013, respectively.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the report of the Security Council contained in
document A/68/2?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 118 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of members to the need for an early agreement on the
agreed text of the draft resolution on the organization
of the United Nations Summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda as soon as possible at
the sixty-ninth session. It is my hope that the document
will be finalized promptly in order for the Assembly
to move forward with the necessary preparatory work
for the Summit. In this regard, I will be forwarding
the current version of the text to the President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session for further

14-53448

15/09/2014

consideration and issuance as an “L” document of the
sixty-ninth session.
At this stage, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to Ambassador Petersen of Denmark
and Ambassador Aisi of Papua New Guinea, the
co-facilitators of the informal consultations on this
process, for their dedicated work in guiding the
consultations during the current session.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 14 and 118.
Agenda item 38
The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-eighth session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 39
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the General
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of this item by the Assembly until further notice.
In connection with the item, I have received a note
verbale dated 15 May 2014 from the Permanent Mission
of the Comoros to the United Nations requesting the
inclusion of this item in the provisional agenda of the
sixty-ninth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include the item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of the sixty-ninth
session?

A/68/PV.109

It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 42 to 47
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include items 42 to 47 in the
agenda of the sixty-eighth session, in accordance with
paragraph 4(b) of the annex to its resolution 58/316, of
1 July 2004.
In resolution 58/316, the General Assembly
decided that these items shall remain on the agenda for
consideration upon notification by a Member State.
Accordingly, these items have been included in the
draft agenda of the sixty-ninth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
42 to 47?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Before proceeding further, I
should like to inform members about the status of the
consideration of the draft resolution entitled “Outcome

14-534485/12

A/68/PV.109

document: the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples”.
It is my understanding that Member States would
wish to have more time to consider this item. In this
regard, I will be forwarding the text to the President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session for
further consideration and action by the Assembly at the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.
Agenda item 85 (continued)
The rule of law at the national and international levels
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/213/Add.1)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 85
to the Sixth Committee.
To enable the General Assembly to consider the
item expeditiously, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider agenda item 85 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The President: The report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Strengthening and coordinating
United Nations rule of law activities” (A/68/213), which
was submitted in accordance with resolution 67/1 of
24 September 2012, and issued in July 2014, was not
considered by the Assembly during its current session.
In this connection, I received a letter dated
9 September 2014 from the Permanent Representatives
of Denmark and Mexico to the United Nations
requesting that the document be considered by the
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to consider the addendum to the
report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule of law activities,
circulated in document A/68/213/Add.1, at its sixtyninth session under the item entitled “The rule of law at
the national and international levels”?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 85.

6/12

15/09/2014

Agenda item 128
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-eighth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 128 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
The President: Members will recall that, at its
53rd plenary meeting, on 18 November 2013, the
Assembly elected Mr. Koffi Afande of Togo as a
member of the International Tribunal for a term of office
beginning on 18 November and ending on 31 December
2013.
Members will also recall that under agenda item
129, the Assembly adopted decision 68/416 at its
72nd plenary meeting, on 23 December 2013.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to include agenda item 129 in the draft agenda of the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly. May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to include
agenda item 129 in the draft agenda of its sixty-ninth
session?

14-53448

15/09/2014

It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 129?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-eighth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 149 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 149?
It was so decided.

A/68/PV.109

Agenda item 175
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
The President: Members will recall that, at its
75th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2014, the Assembly
decided to include this item on the agenda of its sixtyeighth session.
In connection with this item, I have received a
letter dated 11 September 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Sweden to the United Nations. The
Permanent Representative of Sweden has requested
that consideration of this item be deferred to the sixtyninth session of the Assembly. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to defer consideration of the item and
to include in the draft agenda of the sixty-ninth session
the item entitled “Investigation into the conditions
and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of
Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party
accompanying him”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 175?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 153

Agenda item 64 (continued)

Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor

Report of the Human Rights Council

The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-eighth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 153 and to include it in the draft agenda
of the sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 153?
It was so decided.

The President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered this agenda item at its
52nd plenary meeting, on 13 November 2013. Members
will also recall that, under agenda item 64, the Assembly
adopted resolution 68/144 at its 70th plenary meeting,
on 18 December 2013. By that resolution, the Assembly
decided, inter alia, to conclude its consideration of
Human Rights Council resolution 24/24 before the end
of its sixty-eighth session. In that connection, I have
received a request to defer consideration of Human
Rights Council resolution 24/24 to the sixty-ninth
session.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to defer
consideration of Human Rights Council resolution
24/24 to the sixty-ninth session.
It was so decided.

14-534487/12

A/68/PV.109

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to conclude its consideration of Human Rights
Council resolution 24/24?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
64.
It was so decided.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to make statements.
Mr. Townley (United States of America): We wish
to return briefly to agenda item 64 and the decision
taken moments ago to defer its consideration to the
sixty-ninth session. We simply want to state for the
record our concern that the agenda item had been
closed and was not reopened by the Assembly before
it was addressed, and that we were not recognized on a
point of order prior to that decision. Our views on the
substantive issue are well known, and we believe that
further consultations on that important issue should
have been held prior to today’s decision.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Kaljulate (European Union): Regarding the
decision just made concerning agenda item 64, we
would also like to put on record our understanding
that there were no discussions on that decision, and we
would also like to note that our position on the issue is
well known.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items, which have been
considered at previous meetings, remain open for
consideration during the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 10, 14 to 16, 18, 19, 19 (b),
19 (h), 21, 21 (d), 22 (b), 23, 30, 33 (b), 35, 36, 63, 70,
70 (a) to (d), 85, 111, 112, 114, 114 (b), 115, 115 (a), 116,
116 (h), 118, 121, 124, 125, 131 to 135, 137 to 148, 150 to
152, 154 to 165 and 176.
As members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 33, entitled “Strengthening
the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of

8/12

15/09/2014

disputes, conflict prevention and resolution”; sub-item
(d) of agenda item 70, entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts
to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences
of the Chernobyl disaster”; agenda item 133, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”; and
agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda items 9, 10, 14 to 16, 18,
19, 19 (b), 19 (h), 21, 21 (d), 22 (b), 23, 30, 35, 36, 63, 70,
70 (a) to (c), 85, 111, 112, 114, 114 (b), 115, 115 (a), 116,
116 (h), 118, 121, 124, 125, 131, 132, 135, 137 to 148,
150 to 152, 154 to 165 and 176 in the draft agenda of the
sixty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda items 9, 10, 14 to 16, 18, 19, 19 (b), 19 (h), 21, 21
(d), 22 (b), 23, 30, 33 (b), 35, 36, 63, 70, 70 (a) to (d), 85,
111, 112, 114, 114 (b), 115, 115 (a), 116, 116 (h), 118, 121,
124, 125, 131 to 135, 137 to 148, 150 to 152, 154 to 165
and 176 at the present session?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join
everyone here as we mark the closing of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, and to be doing so in
this beautifully, elegantly renovated General Assembly
Hall. I am grateful to all those who have worked
tirelessly for this, as well as to Member States for their
patience and endurance in supporting and waiting for
the reopening of the Assembly. We will have a formal
opening on 24 September. Until then, I would just like
to make a personal observation about the President of
the General Assembly.
Mr. President, I think you should have the privilege
of presiding for at least one day in this beautifully
renovated Hall. You have often told me that you have
regretted being the only President of the General
Assembly in the history of the United Nations who
has not been able to sit in the proper presidential chair.
So you are presiding in this Hall for the first and last
time. You are leaving an important legacy as far as
your presidency is concerned, and I thank you for your
patience.

14-53448

15/09/2014

We are wrapping up a vital year of work and
progress. I commend the President of the General
Assembly, Ambassador John Ashe, for his leadership,
and would like to express my deep admiration for his
vision and commitment. Throughout his presidency, he
has led by example, doing his utmost to ensure that the
work of the General Assembly proceeded in a highly
effective, efficient and timely manner. He is surely
one of the most punctual Presidents of the Assembly
in United Nations history — and I would again like to
thank you very much, Sir, for leading by example.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Vice-Presidents, the Committee Chairs and all those
who have been so instrumental in the successful
work of the Assembly during such challenging times.
This has been an eventful year. We started with a full
agenda and consequential tasks — helping to lay the
foundations for success in 2015 with the Millennium
Development Goals, the post-2015 development agenda
and a meaningful new agreement on climate by the
end of next year. We also faced many global crises that
left the Security Council paralysed, and on which the
General Assembly rose to act.
Mr. President, through it all, you demonstrated wise
leadership in steering our global discussions towards
constructive solutions. You came to the United Nations
from a small island with a big capacity for working with
other countries. You used your training as an engineer
to build consensus. You also brought a longstanding
commitment to sustainable development that you
translated into results. Your leadership as co-Chair of
the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development laid a foundation for our deliberations on
sustainable development goals.
When the world lost one of its most inspiring leaders,
President Nelson Mandela, the General Assembly came
together to celebrate his life at a special meeting (see
A/68/PV.61). Thanks to the efforts and initiative of
the President and the Assembly, the United Nations
will always honour and remember Madiba through the
United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize.
Through your leadership, Sir, the General Assembly
reached out to the world at large, even bringing
questions sent through social media into thematic
debates and high-level events. Above all, I believe this
session of the General Assembly has truly set the stage
for the success of the post-2015 development agenda,
including through a number of important thematic
debates and valuable high-level events. Member

A/68/PV.109

States and civil society came together over the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on
Sustainable Development Financing. And progress was
fostered through dialogues on a technology facilitation
mechanism and the accountability framework.
I applaud all of that action. It will have a positive
effect on our collective long-term future, as will your
efforts, Sir, to revitalize the work of the General
Assembly in order to enhance its responsiveness and
better accommodate the needs and demands of Member
States. Once again, I thank all those here for their work
during this sixty-eighth session. I look forward to the
leadership of the incoming President, His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa, in carrying this work forward over the
next year.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I would now like to make a closing statement, and,
as can be imagined, I will do it from the rostrum for the
first and only time.
We are now at the close of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, and this is the last
time I will have the singular honour of addressing the
Assembly as its President. As I look out across the
Hall, I am indeed honoured to see so many friends
and colleagues with whom I have toiled in this very
Hall — well, not this brand-new one, but we get the
picture — in a collaborative effort aimed at addressing
global challenges. Those here who know me very well
know that I like to keep it short, and here is where I
would like to say goodbye and good luck — and that is
my farewell speech.
On second thoughts, permit me to share just a few
more words with the Assembly as I prepare to hand over
to my very able successor, the former Foreign Minister
of Uganda, His Excellency Mr. Sam Kutesa, President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
Today is a far cry from that day in June of 2013
when I took — and I counted them — 33 steps from my
country’s seat to the rostrum to accept the Assembly’s
acclamation as its President at its sixty-eighth session.
As the Secretary-General just said, we are sitting in
a renovated Hall, and on that day the Hall in which I
accepted that acclamation did not look anything like
this. But at the end of the day, the work we did together
was neither temporary nor makeshift in any way. We
took some decisions that I hope will be lasting. Let

14-534489/12

A/68/PV.109

me thank the folks from the Capital Master Plan for
giving me the opportunity to stand here before the
Assembly — in fact, to put it bluntly, they saved my
bacon. Timing in life, as they say, is indeed everything.
I recall that many here — who are still my
friends — used to remind me throughout the session
that I might very well go down in history as the first
President of the General Assembly never to have
occupied this rostrum. To them, my friends, I say that
they were wrong. I am here in live and living colour on
the very last day of my presidency. I could not have got
here without their help. That is why, despite the slings
and arrows that they have thrown my way, they are still
my friends.
However, the question remains — and it is
valid — what have I done with the opportunity that
Member States have provided? Let me try and answer
that question.
On that day in June 2013, I asked Member States
to join me in a quest, that is, to turn their attention
from the preoccupation at that time with peace and
security to another pillar of the United Nations, namely,
development (A/67/PV.87). To be more specific, I asked
them to join me in setting the stage for the post-2015
development agenda. Have I succeeded? Only they can
answer that question. As we look back over the sixtyeighth session, Member States will recall that, on that
date, I told them that I would convene six thematic
debates and high-level events and that I would give them
the opportunity to tell everyone, including themselves,
what they would like to see in the emerging post-2015
development agenda. Member States took me on blind
faith. For that, I profusely thank them. We were able to
have a full discussion with all stakeholders, including
civil society. For the very first time, they were able
to feel as though they were part of a journey that the
international community was about to commence.
We could turn to the normal metrics that one
uses to judge success, that is, numbers. I could tell
Member States that, during the sixty-eighth session, the
Assemby adopted a total of 300 resolutions and some 80
decisions. However, numbers never really tell the whole
story. We know that, in the United Nations context, the
whole story is not ever “whole” or a “story”. The world
is far more complex than that. Let us look beneath the
numbers.
We have an opportunity in crafting the post-2015
development agenda to develop something in a collective

10/12

15/09/2014

way that is going to be participatory and inclusive
and has as its overarching objective the eradication
of extreme poverty. That is no small undertaking and
will require a collective effort. It will require Member
States to act front and centre in an intergovernmental
forum, such as this body.
However, the international community cannot,
as Rio+20 adequately showed, do that alone. It needs
partners, which it will find in civil society and the
private sector. It must meet an accommodation because
whatever it ultimately agrees on, the international
community will need those partners to help it to
implement that agenda if we are ultimately to be
successful in that quest. That will require a sea change
and a departure from the norm and the way in which
we normally do business. We are at the threshold of
crafting a new development paradigm. That is going to
require a departure from the norm.
Member States will have to make the commitment
but they will need partners to help them take whatever
they commit to forward, since the sustainable
development agenda that they are considering is vastly
different from the one that was originally envisaged
back in 1992. Tremendous challenges and, indeed,
opportunities lie ahead. That is going to require,
literally, every shoulder to the wheel.
Within that, the international community will have
to pay keen attention to the most vulnerable groups.
On the social side, that will certainly include women
and young people. For far too long, women have been
treated as second-class citizens. Today and henceforth,
we hope that that is no longer the case because if, indeed,
they compose 50 per cent of the world’s population and
gave birth to the other half, we can no longer ignore
them. They must be full partners going forward.
If this is about the future, we have to include
young people, not by just simply telling them that we
are planning for them. They have to be involved in the
planning because this, ultimately, will be about them.
They will inherit the Earth. They must therefore be an
integral part of the international community’s work as
it seeks to craft the new agenda.
Member States achieved a number of other things
during the sixty-eighth session. For example, they
successfully completed the fourth Biennial Review of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and saw the
launch of the first-ever United Nations web portal for
victims of terrorism.

14-53448

15/09/2014

In social, humanitarian and cultural matters,
we also saw a number of important achievements.
There was the high-level Declaration that was the
product of the High-level Dialogue on Migration and
Development (resolution 68/4). There was a renewal of
political commitment by our leaders to wrestle against
the major health, social and economic threats posed
by non-communicable diseases (resolution 68/300)
and the subsequent call for strengthened multisectoral
approaches for their prevention and control. We achieved
consensus in the negotiations on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system, bringing to a satisfactory closure
two years of protracted consultations.
As we have just heard from the SecretaryGeneral, Member States agreed to establish the Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela Prize in tribute to the extraordinary
life and legacy of one of the greatest statesmen and
humanitarians whom the world will ever see. That
prize will serve not only as a tangible reminder of his
service to humankind, but also as a potent inspiration
to all who work tirelessly to improve human well-being
and bravely confront human hatred, repression and
violence.
We also witnessed the unveiling of the winning
design for the permanent memorial to and remembrance
of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. With the Assembly proclaiming 2015-2024
as the International Decade for People of African
Descent, which is expected to be launched immediately
after the general debate of the sixty-ninth session,
the descendants of the estimated 20 million Africans
who were sold into slavery can now look to the
United Nations for a reshaping of the narrative and
consequences of that event and discover how new and
constructive approaches can be used.
One of my objectives during the sixty-eighth session
was to make progress on revitalizing and reforming this
institution of ours, and I am pleased that we were able
to achieve some progress in that area with the adoption
of an ambitious new resolution on the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly (resolution 68/307),
the inauguration of the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, the adoption of a resolution
on reforming and strengthening the Economic and
Social Council (resolution 68/1), and the adoption of a
mobility framework for United Nations staff (resolution
68/265). We now have new institutions that are intended

A/68/PV.109

to make the United Nations more relevant, responsive
and effective.
The path to reform is one we must still continue
to tread, and never more so than on the thorny issue of
Security Council reform. While it would be foolhardy
to estimate the challenges inherent in getting to a round
of real negotiations on Security Council reform, that
must be a course of action we should never shy away
from. For if we are to attain an organization that is truly
representative and fully reflective of its membership of
the present day, as opposed to that of decades past, we
must, sooner rather than later, seek to make it so. In
that regard, I hope that the membership will endeavour
to build on the somewhat modest momentum achieved
during this session and capitalize on the opportunities
that the next and/or future sessions may offer.
I have frequently observed that a man — or
woman — may be from an island, but never is an island.
And in an increasingly interconnected world, no man
or woman who is engaged in a collective enterprise can
truly say that he or she walks alone. I would therefore
like to thank the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session who have assisted me in the work
of the session, and the various Chairs and co-Chairs
who have taken up important issues and kept our agenda
forward-looking and on schedule. Time is money.
And I would like to thank the many facilitators and
co-facilitators who have also assisted in this endeavour.
But I would be somewhat remiss if I did not take
a moment to praise our Secretary-General, who has
steadfastly continued to lead the Organization with
skill, dedication and self-deprecating humour; with
diminishing resources and an agenda that expands
exponentially, all against a backdrop of a world that
is fraught with daily crises and seemingly intractable
problems. I thank him and his entire Executive Office
for all the support they have given me and my team from
day one. I would also like to acknowledge the support
I have received from virtually all of the Secretariat,
in particular the Department of Management, the
Department for Economic and Social Affairs and the
Department of Public Information. But through it
all, one, the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management and its Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Gettu, has been steadfast in its support
to the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
Whatever successes we have achieved they have been
an integral part of.

14-5344811/12

A/68/PV.109

To my own dream team — the men and women of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session, whose professionalism, hard
work and dedication have made possible whatever we
have achieved during the session — to each and every
one of them, I simply say thanks.
Now as I take my leave, I have no greater hope than
that our work may empower today’s young girls and
boys to pursue their dreams and make the difference
they want to see in the world, a world that is finally
gender neutral. Each of us has a part to play in making
that a reality. As I say farewell and pass the torch to
my successor, I would like to wish him and his team
much success in the sixty-ninth session. I have had my
moment, and I would like to thank everyone here for
making it memorable.

15/09/2014

Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We will now observe a moment of
silent prayer or meditation. I invite representatives to
stand for a minute.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-eighth session
The President: Before closing the session, I would
like to invite to the rostrum the President-elect of the
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Mr. Sam Kutesa, to
hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

12/12

14-53448
