S/2018/526

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
On the initiative of the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, a conference
for the Libyan parties was held in France on 29 May 2018 aimed at bridging the gap
between Libyans and bringing about stability in Libya. The conference was attended
by the President of the Presidency Council of the Government of National Accord,
the President of the House of Representatives, the President of the High Council of
State and the Commander of the Libyan National Army, with the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ghassan Salamé, and a number of
State representatives. A joint statement was adopted at the conference emphasizing
the eight-point declaration for the achievement of stability in Libya.
Thus, upon instructions from my Government, I should like to inform you that
we are seeking the support of your esteemed Council for the content set out in the
joint statement (see annex) issued at the Paris conference that would lead to the
achievement of peace and stability in Libya, while emphasizing the following
elements:
1.
The need to commit to a constitutional and legal foundation for the
elections;
2.
To urge all parties to commit to the provisions stipulated in the joint
statement, and the need to hold accountable those who obstruct the implementation
of the statement;
3.
To comply precisely with the timelines set in the statement, namely
16 September 2018 as the date to set the constitutional basis for elections and adopt
the necessary electoral laws and 10 December 2018 as the date set to hold
parliamentary and presidential elections.
The Government of National Accord is awaiting the strong support provided by
the Council for this initiative, in which we see a big opportunity to take Libya out of
the current political crisis and achieve safety and stability in the country, and hopes
to have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Council.
(Signed) Elmahdi Elmajerbi
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires a.i.
Permanent Mission of the State of Libya to the United Nations

18-09555 (E)

130618

*1809555*

S/2018/526

Annex to the letter dated 1 June 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Libya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
Joint statement by Fayez al-Sarraj, Aguila Saleh, Khalid Meshri,
Khalifa Haftar
Paris — 29 May 2018
Recalling the commitment of the international community to support the peace,
security, and stability of Libya;
Recalling that the current political and security situation in Libya is not
sustainable;
Recalling the resounding call of all Libyans for credible, inclusive, and peaceful
elections;
In accordance with the December 17, 2015 Libyan Political Agreement (LPA);
In accordance with the inclusive political roadmap presented at th e United
Nations (UN) on September 20, 2017, and endorsed by the international community:
Against the backdrop of a Libyan-owned process and the full engagement of all
Libyan parties involved, we committed in Paris on May 29, 2018, under the auspices
of the UN and in the presence of representatives of the international community, to
work constructively with the UN to realize credible and peaceful elections as soon as
possible and to respect the results of these elections when they occur. We further
agreed to the following principles, in support of the UN ’s efforts to stabilize Libya:
Recognition of the importance of developing a constitutional basis for elections
and support for the United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary General
(SRSG) as he consults with Libyan authorities on a proposal and timeline for adopting
the constitution. The adoption of the constitution will be a key moment for the
sovereignty of the Libyan nation.
Agreement on the organization of parliamentary as well as presiden tial
elections, as determined by the SRSG, in consultation with the Government of
National Accord (GNA), House of Representatives (HoR), High State Council (HSC),
and High National Electoral Commission (HNEC). The parties have committed to set
the constitutional basis for elections and adopt the necessary electoral laws by
September 16, 2018 and hold Parliamentary and Presidential elections on December
10, 2018. Elections must be well-prepared with all the Libyan institutions, to advance
the shared objective of stabilizing and unifying Libya.
Commit solemnly to accept the requirements for elections outlined in the
SRSG’s briefing to the UN Security Council on May 21, including a new session of
voter registration for an additional period determined by the High National Election
Commission in liaison with the UN.
Libyan leaders commit to accept the results of elections, and ensure appropriate
funds and strong security arrangements are in place. Those who violate or obstruct
the electoral process will be held accountable.
Agreement to work constructively with the UN to ensure that the required
technical, legislative, political, and security conditions are in place for national
elections, including the adoption and implementation of the requisite electoral la ws
by the HoR according to the adopted timeline, and the consultation mechanism with
the High State Council (HSC) agreed on in the LPA.
2/3

18-09555

S/2018/526

Libya’s official security forces, with appropriate support and coordination from
the UN as well as regional organizations and international community, will be
responsible for safeguarding the electoral process and ensuring the right of all
Libyans to peacefully and democratically express their will about the country ’s
future. Any obstruction or interference with the voting process will not be tolerated,
and those responsible will be held accountable.
Commitment to improve the atmosphere for national elections by all means
possible, including by moving the seat of the HoR in line with the Constitutional
Declaration, and working to eventually phasing out bring an end to duplication
parallel of government institutions and structures government and institutions, and to
for encourage HoR and HSC to work immediately on the unifying of the Libyan
Central Bank and other institutions.
Commitment to support the United Nations efforts in building professional,
accountable, and unified military and security institutions, to encourage the ongoing
Cairo dialogue, and to work constructively toward the unification of Libya ’s military
and security institutions.
Agreement to participate in an inclusive political conference to follow-up on the
implementation of this statement, under the UN auspices and with respect for the
timeframe and modalities determined by the SRSG, alongside with Libyan
institutions. As Libyan leaders make these commitments, the international community
stands united in support of all Libyans as they work constructively with the UN
toward credible, secure, and peaceful national elections and strive to realize a more
prosperous future for the people of Libya through appropriate and substantial reforms
to their economic model.

18-09555

3/3
