United Nations

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4321st meeting
Friday, 18 May 2001, 3.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cunningham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Ahsan
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Franco
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Latona
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Ms. Lee
Mr. Ben Youssef
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Eldon

Agenda
The situation in East Timor
Interim report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (S/2001/436)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-37751 (E)

*0137751*

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Portugal. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Portugal
supports fully the statement delivered by Ambassador
Pierre Schori of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.
East Timor has been a success story for the
United Nations, but our collective task is yet to be
completed. It is imperative that the Council and the
international community do not fail in providing the
necessary means the United Nations needs to perform
its duty in East Timor. In fact, the coming months will
be crucial for the successful transition of East Timor to
independence. Portugal is fully committed to
participating in that process. We also consider that it is
of vital importance that the Security Council maintains
its strongest interest and engagement in the birth of this
new Member State of the United Nations.
Portugal appreciates the work that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) has been undertaking in implementing its
very complex and comprehensive mandate. In that
connection, I would like to express my gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing provided to the Council earlier
by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi. We also
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the progress
already achieved in areas as diverse as ensuring
security, establishing a civil administration and
restoring basic services to the population.
We also welcome the latest developments in the
preparations for the election of members of the
Constituent Assembly, including the efforts made in the
area of civic and voter education, as well as in
fostering the conditions for the participation of women
in the political process. We see this election as the first
major step on the way to political independence. Its
success in the long run will depend as much on the
capacity of the internal political forces to make
democracy and good governance the driving force
behind their actions, as on the support the international
community will be able to provide to the East Timorese
Government structures.

2

Portugal agrees with the approach taken in the
report of the Secretary-General regarding the planning
for the future presence of the United Nations in East
Timor. We note the establishment in Dili of a working
group for post-UNTAET planning. Indeed, a detailed
evaluation of the needs of East Timor after
independence is urgently required. We believe that the
focus of this exercise must be kept on the conditions on
the ground, where the input of the Timorese is best
taken into account. Needless to say, any plans and
strategies that are defined without the involvement and
the views of the Timorese would be impossible to
implement successfully.
In that regard, I am pleased that the Council was
able to hear today two key Timorese representatives,
Mr. Xanana Gusmão and Mr. Ramos-Horta. Let me
thank you, Mr. President, for making that possible. I
think the Council recognized their presence as a
valuable contribution to a better understanding and
assessment of the real situation on the ground, with all
the authority that comes from their legitimate,
historical responsibilities.
We also noted with keen interest the remarks of
the Secretary-General on the security situation in East
Timor, in particular those highlighting the continued
risks and uncertainties. Portugal concurs with the
Secretary-General’s assertion that it would be prudent
to maintain the military component of UNTAET in its
present form until the East Timorese Government has
established itself. Further, we believe strongly that any
subsequent change must be made only on the basis of a
detailed assessment of the security situation on the
ground. In that context, we must keep in mind that the
mandate the Security Council gave to UNTAET was to
prepare East Timor for independence. The election of a
Constituent Assembly is only one step in that process.
It is not an end in itself and it is not the end goal of the
United Nations presence in East Timor.
Let me also stress the importance of a swift and
comprehensive solution to the situation of the East
Timorese refugees in West Timor, as well as to the
situation of the continued militia activity in that area.
We fully share the views expressed by the European
Union on that question and on the need to ensure that
all those responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law be brought to justice.
The substantial engagement and support of the
international community will still be needed in East

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

Timor after independence. It is fundamental to ensure
the continuity of UNTAET’s work in all areas. The
Secretary-General has rightly stated in his recent report
entitled “No exit without strategy”, referring to East
Timor, that
“In order to ensure that independence is
successful and viable, a follow-on peacekeeping
mission will be required to support the new
State.” (S/2001/394, para. 42)
We look forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on what this follow-on mission may
look like and what the needs will be to support it. The
recommendations should include a realistic assessment
of the capacity of any implementing partner to carry
out tasks that the Security Council has entrusted to
UNTAET.
To conclude, I would like to say that East Timor
is a unique case — unique because of the
circumstances that brought about the United Nations
presence in the territory and unique because of the
complex and multidimensional, yet clear and
achievable, mandate this Council has given to
UNTAET. Our collective goal is to ensure that East
Timor becomes a viable, independent and democratic
State. We cannot waver in this endeavour.
The President: I meant to note at the outset of
the discussion this afternoon for the information of
Council members that Mr. Gusmão has an appointment
with the Secretary-General at 4 p.m. and will be
leaving shortly before then, but Mr. Ramos-Horta will
be remaining with us for the remainder of the meeting.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council and to make
his statement.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Two years ago we witnessed the signing of a tripartite
agreement at the United Nations authorizing the
holding of the 1999 election in East Timor, the first in
a series of very difficult phases that the people of
Timor had decided to go through in order to become an
independent country. The elections to be held in
August 2001 will mark a new turning point in this
endeavour. We would like to pay a tribute to the
members of the Timorese Government and the
international personnel, who are working together to
achieve this goal.

(spoke in English)
It is important that we all stay the course on East
Timor. We recognize that in due course the scope of
United Nations involvement will need to be reduced.
We believe, nonetheless, that we should not act
precipitately to reduce resources, military or civilian.
We all want this operation to succeed. Let us proceed
with circumspection and draw down only in such
numbers and at such time as we are sure that our doing
so will not prejudice that success that we are seeking.
At the same time, we call upon the East Timor
authorities to exercise reasonable budgetary restraint.
Let us not, however, gloss over the worst threat
there is to further progress, and that threat is impunity.
As many of us in this Chamber have said in the past,
there must be no impunity for those responsible for
committing atrocities in East Timor or anywhere else.
We commend the ongoing efforts being made by the
fledgling judicial system in East Timor to bring about
justice there for past crimes, and we welcome the clear
position of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
Timorese leadership, rejecting impunity and pursuing
accountability.
But East Timor should not be left alone in this
endeavour. Indonesia also must live up to its
commitment to bring perpetrators to justice. The
verdict and sentences in the trials for last September’s
killings of three staff members of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in West Timor are deeply disturbing and
distressing. Sentences of mere months given to those
who openly confessed to murder can only reduce the
confidence the international system has in Indonesia’s
justice system. The murdered UNHCR personnel were
colleagues of us all, as much as the people around this
table are our colleagues. They were there working on
our behalf, and we owe them justice at least. The
sentences for the perpetrators are an affront to the
deceased, they are an affront to us all, and they are
simply unacceptable. No one in this Chamber credits
for one instant that these murders were anything other
than acts of cowardice and thuggery. Treating them
lightly only encourages further attacks. To paraphrase
the words of our Jamaican colleague, justice has not
only not been done, it has been seen not to have been
done.

3

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

Canada endorses the recent statements by the
Secretary-General, by High Commissioner for
Refugees Ruud Lubbers and by UNTAET regarding the
unacceptable outcome of these cases and the need for
there to be sentences proportionate to the crimes. We
are encouraged that an appeal to these sentences has
been filed by the Indonesian authorities, and we hope
that this matter will be dealt with expeditiously and
effectively. Were the Indonesian system to prove
unable to defend the rule of law and enforce
internationally accepted norms of legal behaviour, the
international community would have no choice but to
pursue other means to ensure that justice is served.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting and Mr. Annabi for his
presentation of the report.
We welcome the presence of Mr. Xanana Gusmão
and Mr. José Ramos-Horta here today. Indeed, I think
we are honoured to have them here today because they
are no longer only Timorese leaders; because of their
struggle for democracy and human rights they are
indeed real world statesmen.
Allow me to express our deep appreciation to Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team for the impressive
achievements of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in preparing
East Timor for its full independence.
The political vision of the Timorese leadership so
well represented here has been instrumental in this
entire process. In this respect, we pay tribute to Mr.
Xanana Gusmão, while fully respecting his decision to
resign as President of the National Council.
The organization of the forthcoming election for
the Constituent Assembly will certainly be the first test
case for the embryonic democratic institutions of East
Timor, and the support of the international community
for the electoral process in all its phases, from the
registration of voters to the certification of elected
officials, is essential. We are confident that these
elections for the Constituent Assembly will create a
solid basis for sustainable democracy in East Timor.
We also agree that civic education and training are
essential components of this endeavour.

4

Political squabbling and dissent among opposing
currents of thought are part of the democratic life of
any State, and it cannot be different in East Timor. The
most important point is the need for all political parties
to remain committed to settling their differences
through dialogue and institutional channels and, at the
absolute grass-roots level, for East Timorese society to
clearly reject any form of political violence.
In this respect, we are encouraged by the
spontaneous drive of the East Timorese towards
reconciliation, as mentioned in paragraph 18 of the
report. The statements made today by Xanana Gusmão
and José Ramos-Horta are encouraging, especially
because of their insistence on the idea of tolerance as
the foundation for a truly democratic East Timor.
As we enter the crucial stages of the transition to
independence, the support of the international
community becomes even more important. For its part,
Brazil remains fully committed to the efforts to build a
democratic and stable East Timor. That was the main
thrust of the visit of President Fernando Henrique
Cardoso to East Timor last January.
In order to underline the practical aspects of our
assistance to East Timor, President Cardoso personally
presided over the launching of Brazilian cooperation
projects in the fields of capacity-building, professional
training and education. As a follow-up to President
Cardoso’s visit, a Brazilian technical mission is
currently visiting East Timor in order to identify
opportunities for cooperation in the area of agriculture.
We hope to build on our experience of South-South
cooperation with a view to strengthening cooperation
with East Timor and expanding the areas covered by
Brazilian projects.
In the security area, the report calls attention to
persistent militia activities in and around the refugee
camps of West Timor and in the border area. We
therefore recognize the importance of maintaining a
credible dissuasive capacity on the ground. The report
also highlights the need to reinforce the judicial
system. Accountability is the keyword for healing the
wounds of recent tragedies in East Timor.
The Indonesian Parliament’s decision to establish
an ad hoc tribunal to deal with gross violations of
human rights in East Timor is a positive step. But the
limitation later imposed on the jurisdiction of this
tribunal would mean that massacres such as the ones
that occurred in Suai and Liquica could not be

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

prosecuted. We are also dismayed by the very light
sentences given to those responsible for the killings of
staff members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. In this case, justice has
yet to be done.
We were very much encouraged to learn about the
very advanced stage of planning for the United Nations
presence after independence in East Timor, referred to
in paragraphs 25 to 29 of the report. We note, however,
that besides a residual military presence, which might
be warranted, the bulk of United Nations and
international assistance to East Timor will be
concentrated in capacity-building. The future presence
will essentially be aimed at the far-reaching tasks of
nation-building — the establishment of effective
democratic institutions coupled with the creation of
economic opportunities for all.
Post-independence assistance to East Timor and
the main thrust of the United Nations presence in the
country, therefore, should preferably assume the form
of a massive technical assistance and capacity-building
project, stressing full ownership by the East Timorese
of their own future. As a matter of principle, planning
for the future United Nations presence should not be
reported to the Security Council only.
As future efforts in East Timor will concentrate
on post-conflict — or, rather, post-crisis — peacebuilding, this is an area that certainly requires
enhanced interaction between the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council. In this respect, we regret that, for reasons that
do not need to be discussed now, the planned meeting
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council to deal with precisely such questions
relating to post-conflict peace-building did not take
place.
We are glad, however, that that meeting has not
been ruled out. We believe that it would be helpful to
develop an operational model for coherent and systemwide action in post-conflict situations. We all agree
that there is a need for a comprehensive approach,
including
key
aspects,
such
as
democracy
consolidation, human rights and sustained economic
growth, to address the needs of countries emerging
from crises, and that a long-term development
programme must always be an essential part of any
post-conflict peace-building effort.

We now have to think about how to maintain a
strong stimulus for the international community to keep
its engagement and commitments for the development
of East Timor. The statements of Mr. Gusmão and Mr.
Ramos-Horta reassure us that the East Timorese
leadership is on the right track. The challenge before us
is to back their efforts by devising an appropriate
institutional basis for sustained help for the prosperity
of East Timor and its people.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for giving me the opportunity to participate
in today’s discussion. I would also like to welcome the
two eminent representatives from East Timor, Mr.
Gusmão and Mr. Ramos-Horta. Their participation is
especially valuable as we enter the critical final stage
of our efforts for the independence of East Timor.
My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his work in producing his well-considered report.
As described in it, preparations for the election of the
Constituent Assembly on 30 August, including the
registration of voters and parties, are well under way.
So is the consideration of a United Nations presence in
East Timor after independence. But many difficult
tasks lie ahead, and the future is fraught with
uncertainties which, unless they are seriously
addressed, could jeopardize the progress made so far.
Today I would like to underscore several points
which my delegation believes are essential for bringing
about a viable East Timor. Most importantly, the
political transition must be effected through a process
that is open, fair and democratic. We strongly support
the efforts of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to this end,
most notably in drawing up, with the people of East
Timor, a specific timetable for the election of the
Constituent Assembly and compiling electoral
regulations, and voter education programmes.
Japan, for its part, is sponsoring a seminar on
electoral law, organized by UNTAET, and is
considering other contributions in support of the
electoral process, including the dispatch of electoral
observers.
I would like to stress here that every effort must
also be made in order to ensure that the electoral

5

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

process will be conducted in an orderly manner. As
noted in the Secretary-General’s report, there is a
widely shared concern among the Timorese population
that the political process may not remain peaceful. We
therefore fully support UNTAET’s policy of zero
tolerance for violence, and urge UNTAET to ensure
that effective contingency support will be given to the
police by the military component.
I would also like to add that it would be prudent,
as suggested by the Secretary-General, to maintain the
military component essentially in its present form, at
least until the establishment of the East Timorese
Government. Needless to say, future changes in the
size, configuration or mandate of the military
component must be based on the objective security
assessment at the time.
The issue of East Timorese refugees in West
Timor remains a matter of serious concern. While it is
important to give those refugees the opportunity to take
part in the electoral process, the plight of the refugees
in the absence of international humanitarian workers
and the reported incidents of friction between the
refugees and the local population are indeed
worrisome.
We have to admit that the refugee problem is
complex and difficult. It is for this reason that we
would like to urge the Indonesian Government to
continue its best efforts to resolve the problem by
addressing the issue of militia activities, as well as the
broader issue of reconciliation. It is equally important,
of course, for the international community to provide
necessary support to such an effort.
In this context we welcome the decision of the
United Nations Security Coordinator to organize an
inter-agency security assessment mission to West
Timor this month. Here I would like to stress anew the
importance of the safety and security of international
personnel.
We also share the concern of the international
community over the judiciary process in Indonesia with
respect to the Atambua incident, in which humanitarian
workers were murdered. It is evident that all parties
concerned, particularly the host country, should firmly
deal with those engaged in such hostile actions. This
would in turn serve as a deterrent to future such
incidents.

6

Violations of human rights and humanitarian law
should be dealt with firmly, and Japan was encouraged
by the steps taken by the Indonesian authorities, such
as the Parliament’s decision to establish an ad hoc
tribunal to address gross violations. But we share the
Secretary-General’s concern over the limited
jurisdiction of the tribunal, and we hope that the
Indonesian Government will address the issue in such a
way that would help ease our concern.
Lastly, I would like to touch briefly upon the
United Nations presence after independence. It is
evident that addressing the economic and social
dimensions of the situation will be essential if East
Timor is to develop as a viable sovereign State. As we
have emphasized in the past, ensuring continuity in the
provision of international assistance is essential in
order not to jeopardize the progress that has so far been
made towards nation-building.
In this context, we welcome the fact that
UNTAET and the United Nations at Headquarters have
established a working group and an integrated mission
task force to draw up a blueprint for the future United
Nations presence. We look forward to discussing the
blueprint at the forthcoming donor conference to be
held in Canberra in June.
The people of East Timor have come a long way
on the path to independence. But they will continue to
need the support and cooperation of the international
community before and after independence. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to assure the
Council and the representatives of East Timor that
Japan will remain committed to help build a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous East Timor.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of New Zealand. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): May I first express
my delegation’s pleasure at seeing Mr. Ramos-Horta
and Mr. Gusmão in the Council today as we consider
the important matters covered in the SecretaryGeneral’s interim report. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the excellent briefing given by Mr.
Annabi this morning.
As one of the larger troop contributors to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), with a battalion group and

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

helicopter detachment deployed in the Western Sector,
we share the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
security situation in the territory. Recently, the
situation has been generally good. In part this can be
attributed to the robust response made by the
peacekeeping force to militia incursions during the past
dry season. The positive contribution of the Indonesian
armed forces to the relative stability on the border
during this period should also be acknowledged. But
the situation does remain unpredictable.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he
says the overall capability of the militias has not
diminished and they remain a force to be reckoned
with. Their continued existence in spite of Security
Council resolutions calling on the Government of
Indonesia to disarm and disband them is a matter of
great concern to us. In this regard we recall that those
responsible for the murder of United Nations
peacekeepers Private Leonard Manning of New
Zealand and Private Devi Ram Jaishi of Nepal have yet
to be brought to justice. New Zealand looks to the
relevant agencies of the Indonesian Government to
expedite, in close cooperation with UNTAET, the
prosecution of Jacobus Bere, who has admitted killing
Private Manning. We expect also that others involved
in these attacks on United Nations peacekeepers in East
Timor will be arrested and put on trial.
We must also join others in recording our dismay
at the manifestly inadequate sentences handed down to
those who carried out the brutal murders of the three
workers of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Atambua,
West Timor, last September. The international
community cannot hope to promote the safety of
United Nations personnel when those who have
admitted carrying out such acts receive such trivial
sentences. Therefore we welcome the Indonesian
authorities’ decision to appeal these sentences, and we
look forward to justice being fully served.
We also share the Secretary-General’s deep
disappointment at the extremely limited jurisdiction of
the Indonesian ad hoc human rights tribunal for East
Timor, and we join others in asking Indonesia to bring
to account those responsible for the serious human
rights violations committed in East Timor during 1999.
The international community must remain closely
engaged on this issue.

Across the border the situation of the refugees in
West Timor remains unresolved. While we
acknowledge recent initiatives by the Indonesian
Government in this area, we urge greater expedition in
implementing plans to register, resettle and repatriate
the refugees in accordance with international standards.
Taking all these things into account, we believe
the Secretary-General’s emphasis on a prudent
approach when it comes to security is the right one.
This is reinforced when we look ahead to the political
calendar leading up to East Timor’s independence. The
Secretary-General
has
provided
an
objective
assessment of all the relevant factors. We agree with
his proposal to review the question of force levels
again after the election of the Constituent Assembly.
East Timor’s independence is now not far away,
yet a very great deal remains to be done. We fully share
the Secretary-General’s view that there will be a need
for a significant international presence in the postindependence period. New Zealand wishes to see an
appropriate and adequately resourced United Nations
presence beyond independence, with core military,
police and civilian administration functions funded by
assessed contributions. These core functions are too
critical to be left to the vagaries of voluntary funding,
and there are established parallels elsewhere for what
we are proposing.
We are pleased that detailed planning for the
United Nations post-independence presence is
underway in Dili and at Headquarters. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights the importance of this
planning being based on a careful assessment of East
Timor’s needs and conducted in close consultation with
the people of East Timor. We agree that the ultimate
goal is to ensure that the new State can exist on its
own.
We believe the Secretary-General described the
situation now before us most aptly when he said in his
recent report on the closure or transition of
peacekeeping operations, “No exit without strategy”,
and I quote him here:
“The essential requirement in the case of
East Timor is to ensure that the enormous
sacrifices of the East Timorese, the substantial
investments of the international community, and
the cooperation of the parties required to bring
about a successful transition to independence are
not squandered for lack of international attention

7

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

and support for the new State”. (S/2001/394,
para. 43)
This is the challenge we collectively face and we must
not allow ourselves to be diverted from it.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, at the outset let me extend my
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to express my appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his report. I extend a
special welcome to the eminent leaders of East Timor,
Mr. Xanana Gusmão and Mr. José Ramos-Horta, and
thank them for their presentations.
Since its inception one and a half years ago, the
activities of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) have been
quite successful in all areas of post-crisis management,
including security maintenance and nation-building in
East Timor. The case of East Timor is, thus far, one of
the few success stories of the United Nations and the
international community in general. We all remember
the time of tough decisions faced by all the parties
concerned in 1999. Enough has been done to save East
Timor from its chaotic situation, but much remains to
be done to make it stand on its own.
As we all know, this year is especially important
in East Timorese history, with major political events
such as the election of the Constituent Assembly and
the establishment of the independent Government.
Given the importance and symbolism of this mission,
the continuous support of the international community
is crucial. In this regard, the Republic of Korea is more
than willing to do its part.
Allow me to highlight a few issues that my
delegation finds particularly important for the
sustainability of an independent East Timor.
First of all, the upcoming Constituent Assembly
election is of paramount importance not only in itself,
but also because it will lay the groundwork for future
elections. My delegation is pleased that the East
Timorese themselves have launched the preparations
for the upcoming election, with professional and
systematic assistance from the international community

8

and with the United Nations Development Programme
playing a central role. Despite some concerns about
possible delays in the tight electoral schedule, we
remain hopeful that the entire process will be
implemented smoothly.
It is my delegation’s view that, during the period
of elections and subsequent debate on the Constitution,
the most important thing is the maintenance of security
and social order. To ensure peaceful and democratic
elections and unhindered debate on the political
system, the role of the international and local military
and police components will be more important than
ever. It is our hope that both the local and international
security components will maintain particular vigilance
in a concerted effort.
For the start of a new era of reconciliation and
national unity of all East Timorese people, a solution to
the refugee problem will be crucial. In this regard, we
are pleased with the return of over 3,000 refugees last
March and April. We recognize the efforts made by the
Indonesian Government in refugee-related issues, and
we expect Indonesia’s plans for refugee registration to
be implemented soon, without fail. We once again call
upon
Indonesia
and
concerned
international
organizations to expedite their efforts and strengthen
their coordination to better address this complex
refugee problem.
With regard to capacity- and institution-building,
we highly appreciate the efforts thus far of UNTAET
and other international organizations in all areas. For
these diverse and time-consuming tasks, the emphasis
should be on increasing the Timorese people’s
ownership of their nation and institutions, and on
promoting the real participation of as many people as
possible. We hope that the donors conference in
Canberra next month will provide an opportunity to
discuss in greater depth the mid- and long-term
strategy of the international community to assist the
people of East Timor.
Let me make some comments on the United
Nations role in East Timor this year and beyond
independence. My delegation takes note of the
Secretary-General’s report that there is a widely shared
fear among the Timorese people about the uncertainty
of the political and security situation this year. Bearing
that in mind, we are concerned that the debate in the
United Nations regarding the early exit of United
Nations personnel might unintentionally send a wrong

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

signal to security-threatening elements. Therefore, we
believe that it is very important for the Security
Council to convey to the Timorese people its firm
commitment to protect them until, and even after,
independence.
The United Nations mission cannot replace the
new independent Government of East Timor, nor
should it remain there indefinitely. However, the report
of the Secretary-General contains some important
elements that deserve our attention. The SecretaryGeneral pointed out that a self-reliant East Timorese
police and defence force cannot be completed in one or
two years. Therefore, we believe that the continued
presence of international military and police
components will be necessary after independence,
though reduced in accordance with the developments
on the ground.
It is our view that the reduction of UNTAET,
particularly the military and police components, should
be carried out in a gradual and phased manner. Before
the reduction, however, a clever and clear exit strategy
should be prepared. In this regard, my delegation
appreciates the continuing deliberations of the
UNTAET working group and welcomes the recent
establishment of the integrated mission task force in
the Secretariat. We expect them to continue an in-depth
study on exit strategies that takes into account both the
need for cost-effectiveness and the objective of
fulfilling peacekeeping mandates.
We also expect them to present to the Security
Council
and
troop-contributing
countries
a
comprehensive blueprint on the post-independence
engagement of the United Nations in East Timor. My
delegation would like to emphasize the need for close
consultation with troop-contributing countries during
the whole process of preparing and implementing the
troop withdrawal or relocation.
All in all, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the continued involvement and
assistance of the international community for East
Timor so that the progress achieved at great cost will
not be impaired.
Let me conclude by expressing my delegation’s
appreciation of the efforts of the Secretary-General and
those responsible for UNTAET’s mission. We expect
the next report of the Secretary-General at the end of
July to include practical recommendations on the future
role of the United Nations in East Timor. We look

forward to continuing to participate in this important
debate.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and to express my appreciation for providing us
with this opportunity to address issues related to East
Timor and the prevailing situation in East Nusa
Tenggara. Our felicitations go to the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom for the manner
in which he conducted the work of the Council last
month. Permit me also to welcome wholeheartedly to
the Council our dearest friends, Mr. Xanana Gusmão
and Mr. José Ramos-Horta.
Before proceeding further I should like to take
this opportunity to reiterate and reaffirm the position of
my Government with regard to building a strong
foundation for future relations between the peoples of
East Timor and Indonesia and to cooperating with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) in facilitating the territory’s
transition to independence. To that end, the Indonesian
Government remains fully committed to steadily and
constructively resolving the outstanding issues once
and for all.
Those efforts are reflected in the fifth round of
meetings held between Indonesia and UNTAET, which
took place at Bali on 15 and 16 May 2001, to address
questions relating to registration of refugees,
citizenship, pensions for former civil servants and
agreement on airspace and postal services, including
the Oecussi transit agreement. With regard to the latter,
it has been agreed that the issue will be discussed at the
next meeting Joint Border Committee. There was also
agreement regarding payment arrangements for
pensions, including the launching of a joint appeal for a
special fund. At the end of the meeting, the agreed
minutes were subsequently signed by both delegations.
With reference to the interim report, I should like
to share some observations as to its contents.
On the issue of East Timorese refugees, the
Indonesian Government along with UNTAET, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization

9

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

for Migration (IOM) jointly conducted an information
campaign from 9 to 11 April 2001. We sincerely hope
that this undertaking will expedite the repatriation
process, as it has proved successful in providing the
refugees with first-hand information on the situation in
East Timor and in enabling them to make an informed
decision as to whether to be repatriated to East Timor
or to be resettled in Indonesia. At the same time, the
refugees are entitled to the right to voice their opinions
freely concerning the popular consultations, for this is
indeed the true meaning of democracy.
We question the report with regard to the
allegations of disinformation. The report refers to such
uncorroborated sources as an Indonesian newspaper
citing an unnamed local administration official in East
Nusa Tenggara as if such actions were attributable to
my Government.
Yet, the continued imposition of the Phase V
security category by the United Nations has indeed
impeded the return of the refugees. My delegation
therefore trusts that the United Nations Security
Coordinator will dispatch his team to the area no later
than this month. Meanwhile, the registration planned
for 6 June is expected to take place as scheduled. That
is to be preceded by a socialization process that will
take place from 21 May to 5 June, in which UNTAET
is invited to participate. Similarly, invitations have
been extended to 32 diplomats from Jakarta to witness
the registration process on 6 June. This can be
undertaken due to the improved security in and around
the refugee camps.
Thus we fail to understand the assertion that the
security situation “remains unpredictable”. Let me
assure this body that, for its part, the Indonesian
Government has done its utmost in promoting security,
law and order, and will continue to do so.
These results have been widely acknowledged in
such places as the report of the Portuguese
parliamentary delegation on its visit to Australia,
Indonesia and East Timor from 22 February to 8 March
2001. Similar observations were made at the last Bali
meeting by the head of UNTAET’s political affairs
department, Ambassador Galbraith, who stated that
occurrences of security incidents have been minimal.
With regard to cross-border incidents, the
responsibility to prevent such incidents from occurring
rests with both Indonesia and UNTAET, as manifested
through the holding of regular coordination sessions to

10

maintain law and order in those regions. Regretfully,
five United Nations peacekeeping soldiers recently
entered East Nusa Tenggara and went so far as to
question local Indonesian people and to check their
identifications. Fortunately, the prompt intervention of
the local military commander prevented the incident
from getting out of hand. Indeed, there can be no
justification for any party to overreach or go beyond its
mandate.
On the issue of justice and impunity, let me once
again reiterate my Government’s unswerving
commitment to bring to justice those responsible for
human rights violations. It should be noted that
presidential decree No. 53/2001 has established ad hoc
human rights courts to adjudicate documented cases of
human rights abuses in East Timor in 1999 and in
Tanjung Priok in 1984. It is also to be noted that the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
regarding cooperation in legal, judicial and human
rights matters requires the consent of the Parliament to
be in full conformity with the Indonesian legal system.
With regard to the criminal trials of the six
persons accused of the killings of the three UNHCR
workers in Atambua in September 2000, despite the
verdict handed down by the North Jakarta District
Court, I wish to emphasize that their trials have not
been concluded. On the contrary, the judicial process is
still underway, as the prosecutor is now appealing the
matter to the High Court, with the possibility of again
appealing to the Supreme Court — the highest court in
the Indonesian justice system. It is therefore prudent
for all concerned parties to refrain from making hasty
judgements until a final decision is taken.
Closely linked to the problems of refugees and
justice is reconciliation, which my delegation considers
as the key element in resolving comprehensively the
issue of East Timor. It is the firm position of my
Government that a genuine reconciliation between and
among the East Timorese will become the solid
foundation whereby an atmosphere conducive to peace
and harmony can be promoted, thereby eradicating the
root causes of conflict. It is important to emphasize
that reconciliation and retribution do not go hand-inhand. To be truly successful, the process of
reconciliation requires bridging vast differences while
leaving past tragic incidents to history.
Therefore, true justice and stable peace have to be
achieved in tandem and in a balanced manner.

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

Ultimately it is only for the East Timorese people
themselves to determine the path to be taken in order to
be one nation and people. Thus, it is incumbent upon
the international community to support and promote
such endeavours. In other words, its implementation
must not be relegated to a future date but must be
pursued as a matter of urgency. It is in this context that
at Bali on 5 and 6 May this year the Government of
Indonesia yet again facilitated reconciliation talks
between representatives of the National Council of
Timorese Resistance (CNRT) and the East Timorese
refugees in East Nusa Tenggara.
By promoting and enhancing direct people-topeople contact between and among the East Timorese,
it is hoped that the refugees can gain confidence in the
reception that awaits them on their return to East
Timor. It is therefore legitimate in this context to also
address the refugees’ genuine concerns regarding their
security in East Timor, particularly taking into account
the recent brutal acts of violence against returnees.
One of the results of the aforementioned
reconciliation talks was the request that UNTAET
respect the political rights of the East Timorese
refugees to participate in the democratic elections in
East Timor and not exclude them for technical reasons.
As East Timorese, it is their fundamental and basic
human right to participate in determining East Timor’s
future. Moreover, we also welcome the planned visit of
Monsignor Basilio do Nascimento to the camps by the
end of this month as another step to further promote the
reconciliation process. In this context, we sincerely
hope that the reconciliation talks between the CNRT
and Uni Timor Aswain (UNTAS), scheduled to be held
on 24 and 25 May 2001, will make significant progress
as a follow-up to a similar event held in Bali last year
that was considered a milestone, as it was the first time
that both sides had the opportunity to meet and foster
harmony and cooperation.
Before concluding, I would like to allude to a
specific point — that to satisfactorily resolve any
dispute, including that of East Timor, it is essential that
the reports of the United Nations be impartial,
balanced, objective and based on reliable sources of
information. Biased and contradictory statements of
facts, as well as references to unverifiable sources of
information, can also be prejudicial to the interests of
Member States. Similarly, we would expect media
sources and so-called unnamed sources to demonstrate
a greater sense of ethical responsibility.

As Indonesia is in the transitional period towards
full democracy, my Government has, through a process
of dialogue and cooperation with the international
community, worked to strengthen legal mechanisms. At
present Indonesia is in the process of finalizing, with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, technical assistance for the
enhancement of the capacity of the Indonesian
administration of justice for the prosecution of human
rights violations.
Finally, over the long term and in anticipation of
post-UNTAET East Timor, my Government seeks to
establish a durable, wide-ranging and mutually
beneficial relationship with East Timor. Trade and
investment, as well as cooperation in the socio-cultural
fields, will be central to this effort. Therefore, the
creation of conditions conducive to the interaction of
the people of East Timor and the people of the
neighbouring Indonesian province of East Nusa
Tenggara is important, for the legal and political
separation of East Timor from Indonesia cannot erase
the reality of the centuries-old societal and family links
between them. Hence, when UNTAET completes its
mandate, it is our sincere hope that these links will
flourish.
The President: I would like to ask Mr. Annabi
now if he wishes to respond to any questions or to
comments.
Mr. Annabi: I think the first question related to
the reported lack of progress in obtaining payment of
electricity bills and airport charges. I take that on board
and will revert to it once we receive the technical
information on this from UNTAET. I know they have
been working on these issues, but I am not in a position
today to give you a precise answer.
Ambassador Doutriaux of France had raised
certain questions.
(spoke in French)
I would like to say that we did take due note of
the questions raised by the French delegation regarding
the structure and the strength of UNTAET. The
Secretariat will address those questions in the report
that the Security Council has requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit at the end of July. For the time
being, I only wish to say that some of our bitter
experiences of the last decade have taught us that it
would not be prudent to take the risk of jeopardizing

11

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

the considerable investments made by the international
community in East Timor by prematurely reducing the
troop level of UNTAET.
The recommendations in the Secretary-General’s
report of 2 May are based on a strict analysis of the
potential threat that could set back the preparation
process for the independence of East Timor. The
Secretary-General is firmly convinced that any
premature reduction in troop level must be avoided. He
will nonetheless continue, in consultation with our
Timorese partners, to follow closely, the evolution of
the security situation, on the understanding that he
would not hesitate to propose to the Council in due
course any reduction that he might find realistic and
reasonable.
Ambassador Doutriaux also asked whether the
security assessment mission would take place this
month. As stated in the report, the Security Coordinator
has taken the decision to dispatch this assessment
mission, and we still hope that it will be able to take
place in the near future.
(spoke in English)
One question was whether refugees in camps in
West Timor would be able to vote. The electoral
regulation adopted by UNTAET on this is very clear.
East Timorese who wish to register and vote in the
elections of 30 August will have to come to East Timor
to register and then to vote. But measures have been
taken to ensure that registration stations and polling
booths will be located close to the border with West
Timor so that refugees who wish to vote would be
given that possibility. UNTAET does not believe,
however, that for obvious reasons it will be possible to
organize the vote in West Timor.
I was also asked to provide more information on
the integrated mission task force. This task force was
established about a month ago. It has been meeting
regularly here at Headquarters. As the Council knows,
on the ground UNTAET has also established a working
group that will interact with the task force, and a senior
official has been appointed to go and support the work
of the working group. He will shuttle between the task
force and the working group in East Timor to ensure
that the detailed planning on the ground and the policy
decisions that will have to be made here in consultation
with the agencies and departments concerned are in
sync.

12

This task force includes a core group drawn from
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, and
holds larger meetings as required so as to enable other
agencies that can contribute to the planning of the postindependence phase to make their own contribution.
I was asked whether I could elaborate on the
reasons for the decline in the return of refugees
between March and April. It is true that there were
very few returns in April. The fact is that, as the
Secretary-General’s report indicates, the situation in
the camps is still not conducive to the return of
refugees, and the intimidation and disinformation that
have taken place are still having an effect on the
refugee population in the camps. Of course, they are
also still subject to the influence of militias that have
not been disarmed or demobilized, as requested under
Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).
I do, however, have a piece of good news in this
regard; it only reached us over lunch, which is why I
did not include it in my briefing this morning. As our
colleague from Indonesia said, during talks held in
Denpasar, UNTAET and the Indonesian Government
reached agreement on the resumption of pension
payments to former Indonesian State employees
residing in East Timor. This was characterized by a
member of the UNTAET delegation as a breakthrough.
We hope that this agreement will now be promptly
implemented because it could, of course, encourage
refugee return.
A second development, which could also play a
role in encouraging refugee return, is the agreement to
include a reference to a planned compensation fund for
former State employees in the consolidated appeal for
West Timor refugees, which is expected to be launched
jointly by Indonesia and the United Nations in July.
This fund could also provide an inducement for the
return of refugees to East Timor.
I was also asked to provide information on the
role of United Nations Volunteers. We do, indeed, have
a large number of United Nations Volunteers in East
Timor; as of the end of April, the exact number was
664. They are playing an important role in the
preparations for the elections for the Constituent
Assembly, in particular by assisting in civic education
and civil registration. In fact, when I visited East Timor
in March, some of the registration stations were being

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

entirely manned by them. And, of course, they will also
assist in the other phases of the electoral process. So
we use them whenever we can in our operations,
because they are obviously a cost-effective resource.
I think the last question was from the
Ambassador of Sweden, speaking on behalf of the
European Union, who suggested that further efforts
should be made to increase capacity-building in
governance, including in the districts. I fully agree that
there is a lot of work to be done there. We should
remember, however, that East Timor has been less
fortunate than some other territories seeking
independence, and that until recently very little
attention had been paid to the training of East Timorese
experts and administrators.

first began to spread after the incident at the New Year,
it started essentially when a group of youths attempting
to enter a New Year’s party were barred — they had
not been invited. They began to throw stones at those
at the party, and the situation degenerated into
violence. Another incident involved a mosque. A group
of drunken youths on their way home saw a car inside
the grounds of a mosque. They entered and asked for
the car, and, of course, the people in the mosque said,
“No”. The youths then left and began throwing stones,
and stones soon began flying in both directions.

The President: I would now like to give the floor
to Mr. Ramos-Horta for any comments or observations.

The most serious incident took place in Baucau,
when a fight between youth groups resulted in the
burning of the local mosque. The United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timorese leadership condemned that
action, and subsequently Sergio Vieira de Mello took
the initiative of mobilizing funds to repair the mosque.
The Portuguese Commissioner responsible for
humanitarian assistance to East Timor, Father Victor
Melicias, accompanied by the most prominent Muslim
leader in the city of Lisbon, travelled to East Timor and
offered financial assistance. Subsequently, we all met
with the Muslim leaders in Dili and Baucau. I
personally went to Baucau to meet with the youths who
burned the mosque to tell them that that was not
enough in terms of our contribution — that we were
not merely going to pay for it, but that they had to
show their repentance by contributing manually to
rebuilding the mosque, a condition which they
accepted. That is what we did.

Mr. Ramos-Horta: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor again. I will not add much to what
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, has
already said in terms of clarification. I would like to
make just two points, the first in relation to the
political atmosphere — the political divisions and
tensions — and the second in relation to our own
efforts at reconciliation, adding to what I said earlier.

There was also an ugly incident in Viqueque that
involved youth groups, in particular groups involved in
martial arts. Strangely enough, many of the conflicts
erupt after a soccer match — perhaps our youths watch
too many European soccer matches. They are inspired
by activities on the soccer field, and it is almost
inevitable that after each soccer match the losing side
does not accept the result.

First, I would like to say that we take seriously
the concerns expressed here by almost everyone
regarding the political tensions and divisions. However,
of the several incidents that took place in the course of
2000 and in the first few months of this year, we would
consider only two to be politically related. I speak with
direct knowledge of the facts, because I was called
upon in almost every one of them to go and talk with
those involved in the incidents and help resolve the
problems. To my surprise, contrary to the rumours that

Unfortunately, when violence starts, it sometimes
takes on a political dimension when each faction calls
on its own gangs, its own people. So I would say that
this has essentially been the cause of 90 per cent of the
violence that has occurred in East Timor. Fortunately,
so far the political violence has been confined to one or
two incidents.

UNTAET is doing its best, but of course it takes
time to create a generation of managers and
administrators; it does not happen overnight. UNTAET
will continue to consider this as an essential priority as
it develops its plans and strategy for the postindependence period, in close consultation with
Xanana Gusmão and José Ramos-Horta and their
colleagues. In fact, when we met this morning before
the Council meeting, they were stressing the fact that in
their view there will be a significant and substantial
continuing need for international expertise after
independence, in view of the severe lack of qualified
administrators.

Are we going to be able to maintain a relative
level of peace and stability in the months ahead when,

13

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

of course, political tensions will increase? That is a big
question. But to answer that, what I said earlier is that
we are putting even greater efforts into the process of
not only reconciliation between the pro-independence
majority and the pro-autonomy group, but we —
Bishop Belo and I — are also starting, with the support
of Xanana Gusmão and Sergio Vieira de Mello, a
comprehensive campaign extending many months into
the future to promote a culture of non-violence, of
tolerance. In this regard, we have discussed with the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the diplomatic
missions in Dili how they can assist us by providing
resources. It is difficult to address the issues of a
culture of violence, of a people traumatized and
accustomed to abuse by State law enforcement
agencies for a quarter of a century, and it is difficult to
suddenly drop the temptation to engage in violence.
We are conscious of the fragility of the peace in
East Timor. Peace and tranquillity is a reality, but, as
we have said a number of times, it is still very fragile
because of all the psychological and emotional aspects.
In terms of justice, I failed to add in my previous
comments that we have established a regulation
creating a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
However, a new aspect of this Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is that we intend to go back all the way to
1975, because, as I personally have stated on a number
of occasions over the years, as has President Xanana
Gusmão, we, the East Timorese side, cannot blame
only Indonesia for what happened in 1975 and
thereafter. The first acts of violence and the first resort
to weapons in 1975 were by us, the East Timorese,
starting with the civil war in August 1975. The first
weapons used then were not Indonesian weapons. The
first people killed in East Timor were not killed by
Indonesian soldiers. Therefore, we must also have the
courage and the humility to search back into our own
history and to apologize to our own people. Only then
can we have the moral authority and the tranquillity of
mind and of conscience to demand real justice from
others. This, then, is the task of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission that has been set up and is
broadly representative of the Timorese society.
I conclude by referring also to the political
divisions in East Timor. This is what the United
Nations, Peter Galbraith and all diplomatic missions
tell us: multi-party; that we have to have freedom of
expression; and that our National Council has to take it
seriously. President Xanana Gusmão, in the time he

14

spent in the Council — he went to the Council against
my advice because he wanted to go — experienced a
bit of the new climate of democracy in East Timor.
When Xanana Gusmão resigned I stepped in and
offered to lead the Council. Most of the Council
members spoke against my leaving foreign affairs, and
the next day I had to go back to foreign affairs because
the Council members showed their maturity and their
understanding of the importance of foreign affairs for
East Timor. They said, “This is not your place”, so I
dutifully presented my resignation to Sergio Vieira de
Mello. I essentially lasted only 24 hours in the National
Council.
That was my first experience in the National
Council and I began to wonder why the Council was
being criticized. To me it seemed no different from the
many experiences I had had in attending as a guest
many parliaments around the world — the United
States Congress, the Portuguese Parliament, the Italian
Parliament, the British Parliament and a few others that
we do not attend but watch on television. The National
Council has been very constructive. It has adopted
numerous regulations, and it takes its job seriously.
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi also experienced
the National Council in his recent visit to East Timor. I
do not know whether he wishes to repeat that
experience. I also do not think I will readily accept
returning to the Council to participate in debates there
unless it is absolutely necessary. However, it illustrates
the positive developments in East Timor.
The crucial question that has been asked is
whether we are going to be able to handle the debate
and the divisions in a civilized way. We are, of course,
working hard to answer that. I cannot say that we will
succeed 100 per cent, but we are working towards that
goal, so that the divisions, the conflicts and the debate
remain in the realm of civility.
I thank you, Mr. President, members of the
Security Council and the rest of the international
community present today, as well as others that are not
present, for your continued support. It is thanks to your
generous support and thanks to the generosity of the
soldiers of the peacekeeping force, the civilian police,
the international civil servants, the non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations Volunteers who
are there that we have come this far. We have produced
almost a miracle in a year and half. The task ahead is
still great, but with the Council’s continued
engagement, as President Xanana Gusmão said a while

S/PV.4321 (Resumption 1)

ago, we hope to return here in different circumstances
to thank the Council as a sovereign State and to say
that we did not waste or betray your trust or the
resources that you have put into building this new
democratic State.
The President: I thank you for those remarks. I
also wish to thank Mr. Annabi and especially Mr.
Ramos-Horta and, through him, Mr. Gusmão, for their
presence here today. Your contributions certainly
enriched our discussion.
As I said before when speaking in my national
capacity and now say as President of the Council, I
think clear messages were sent today from the Council,

and I hope that those to whom they were addressed will
heed them and take them to heart. I think it is
appropriate also to say a word of appreciation on
behalf of the Council for the effort being made by
Sergio Vieira de Mello and by the troop contributors as
well in helping to deal with this situation.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

15
