General Assembly---Si.xth Special Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE . 4.D HOC COMMITTEE
OF THE SIXTII SPECIAL SESSION

CONTENTS
Resol•lion No.

Till•

3201 (S-VI)

Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Eco .
nomic Order
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a Ne" lnteina
tional Economic Order

3202 (S-VI)

Orlter ded.foru
Study of the problems of raw materials and development

3201 (S-VI). Declaration on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order

The General Assembly
Adopts the following Declaration:

DECLARATION ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
A NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER
We, the Members of the United Nations,
Having convened a special session of the General
Assembly to study for the first time the problems of
raw materials and development, devoted to the consideration of the most imponant economic problems
facing the world community,
Bearing in mind the spirit, purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United N atlons to promote the
economic advancement and social progress of all
peoples,
Solemnly proclaim our united determination to work
urgently for THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER based on equity' sovereign
equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States, irrespective of their economic and social systems which shall correct inequalities and redress existing injustices, make it possible
to eliminate the widening gap between the developed
and the developing countries and ensure steadily accelerating economic and social development and peace
and justice for present and future generations, and, to
that end, declare:
1. The greatest and most significant achievement
during the last decades has been the independence
from colonial and alien domination of a large number of peoples and nations which has enabled them
to become members of the community of free peoples. Technological progress has also been made in
all spheres of economic activities in the last three
decades, thus providing a solid potential for improving the well-being of all peoples. However, the remaining vestiges of alien and colonial domination,
foreign occupation, racial discrimination, apartheid
and neo-colonialism in all its forms continue to be
among the greatest obstacles to the full emancipation

,,,...

Dat, of adopt10t1

! May 1974

3

l May 1974

7

l May 1974

13

and progress of the developing countries and all the
peoples involved. The benefits of technological progress are not shared equitably by all members of the
international community. The developing countries,
which constitute 70 per cent of the world's population, account for only 30 per cent of the world's
income. It has proved impossible to achieve an
even and balanced development of the international
community under the existing international economic
order. The gap between the developed and the developing countries continues to widen in a system
which was established at a time when most of the
developing countries did not even exist as independent States and which perpetuates inequality.
2.. The present international economic order is in
direct conflict with current developments in international political and economic relations_ Since 1970,
the world economy has experienced a series of grave
crises which have had severe repercussions, especially on the developing countries because of their
generally greater vulnerability to external economic
impulses. The developing world has become a powerful factor that makes its influence felt in all fields
of international activity. These irreversible changes
m the relationship of forces in the world necessitate
the active, full and equal participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application
of all decisions that concern the international community.
3 AIi these changes have thrust into prominence
the reality of interdependence of all the members
of the world community. Current events have brought
into sharp focus the realization that the interests of
the developed countries and those of the developing
countries can no longer be isolated from each other,
that there is a close interrelationship between the
prosperity of the developed countries and the growth
and development of the developin~ countries, and
that the prosperity of the international community
as a whole depends upon the prosperity of its constituent parts. International co-operation for development is the shared goal and common duty of all
countries. Thus the political, economic and social
well-being of present and future generations depends
mott than ever on co.-<Jperation between all the

4

General Assembly--Sixth Special Session

-----------------

---------

members of the international community on the basis
of sovereign equality and the removal of the disequilibrium that exists between them.
4. The new international economic order should
be founded on full respect for the following principles:
(a) Sovereign equality of States, self-determination of all peoples, inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territories by force, territorial integrity and noninterference in the internal affairs of other States;
(b) The broadest co-operation of all the States
members of the international community, based on
equity, whereby tlfe prevailing dis(>arities in the
world may be banished and prospenty secured for
all;
( c) Full and effective participation on the basis
of equality of all countries in the solving of world
economic problems in the common interest of all
countries, bearing in mind the necessity to ensure
the accelerated development of all the developing
countries, while devoting particular attention to the
adoption of special measures in favour of the least
developed, land-locked and island developing countries as well as those developing countries most seriously affected by economic crises and natural calamities, without losing sight of the interests of other
developing countries;
(d) The right of every country to adopt the economic and social system that it deems the most
appropriate for i~s own development and not to be
subjected to discrimination of any kind as a result;
(e) Full permanent sovereignty of every State
over its natural resources and all economic activities.
In order to safeguard these resources, each State is
entitled to exercise effective control over them and
their exploitation with means suitable to its own
situation, including the right to nationalization or
transfer of ownership to its nationals, this right being an expression of the full permanent sovereignty
of the State. No State may be subjected to economic,
political or any other type of coercion to prevent
the free and full exercise of this inalienable right;
(/) The right of all States, territories and peoples under foreign occupation, alien and colonial
domination or apartheid to restitution and full
compensation for the exploitation and depletion of,
and damages to, the natural resources and all other
resources of those States, territories and peoples;
(g) Regulation and supervision of the activities
of transnational corporations by taking measures
in the interest of the national economies of the
countries where such transnational corporations
operate on the basis of the full sovereignty of those
countries;
(h) The right of the developing countries and
the peoples of territories under colonial and racial
domination and foreign occupation to achieve their
liberation and to regain effective control over their
natural resources and economic activities;
(i) The extending of assistance to developing
countries, peoples and territories which are under
colonial and alien domination, foreign occupation,
racial. discrimination or apartheid or are subjected
to economic, politicarl or any other type of coercive
measures to obtain from them the subordination of
the exercise of their sovereign rights and to secure
from them advantages of any kind, and to neocolonialism in all its forms, and which have estab-

----·-

----·-----

-

----------- -----------

lisheJ or are t:ndeavouring to establish effective
control over their natural resources and economic
activities that have been or are still under foreign
control;
(j) Just and equitable relationship between the
prices of raw materials, primary commodities, manufactured and semi-manufactured goods exported
by developing couJtries and the prices of raw materials, primary commodities, manufactures, capital
goods and equipment imported by them with the
aim of bringing about sustained improvement in their
unsatisfactory terms of trade and the expansion of
the world economy;
( k) Extension of active assistance to developing
countries by the whole international community,
free of any political or military conditions;
(I) Ensuring that one of the main aims of the
reformed international monetary system shall be the
promotion of the development of the developing
countries and the adequate flow of real resources
to them;
(m) Improving the competitiveness of natural
materials facing competition from synthetic substitutes;
(n) Preferential and non-reciprocal treatment for
developing countries, wherever feasible, in all fields
of international economic co-operation whenever
possible;
( v) Securing favourable conditions for the transfer of financial resources to developing countries;
(p) Giving to the developing countries access to
the achievements of modern science and technology,
and promoting the transfer of technology and the
creation of indigenous technology for the benefit of
the developing countries in forms and in accordance
with procedures which are suited to their economies;
(q) The need for all States to put an end to the
waste of natural resources, including food products;
( r) The need for developing countries to concentrate all their resources for· the cause of development;
( s) The strengthening, through individual and
collective actions, of mutual economic, trade, financial and technical co-operation among the developing
countries, mainly on a preferential basis;
(t) Facilitating the role which producers' associations may play within the framework of international co-operation and, in pursuance of their aims,
inter alia assisting in the promotion of sustained
growth of the world economy and accelerating the
development of developing countries.
5. The unanimous adoption of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade~ was an important step in the
promotion of international economic co-operation
on a just and equitable basis. The accelerated implementation of obligations and commitments assumed
by the international community within the framework of the Strategy, particularly those concerning
imperative development needs of developing countries, would contribute significantly to the fulfilment
of the aims and objectives of the present Declaration.
6. The United Nations as a universal organization should be capable of dealin$ with problems
of international economic co-operation in a compre11 Resolution 2626

(XXV).

Resolutions adopted on the report of the ..4d Boe Committee

hensive manner and ensuring equally the interests
of all countries. It must have an even greater role
in the establishment of a new international economic
order. The Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, for the preparation of which the present
Declaration will provide an additional sou_rce . of
inspiration, will constitute a significant contribu~on
in this respect. All the States Members of the (!ruted
Nations are therefore called upon to exert maximum
efforts with a ·view to securing the implementation
of the present Declaration, which is one of the
principal guarantees for the creation of better conditions for all peoples to reach a life worthy of
human dignity.
7. The present Declaration on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order shall be
one of the most important bases of economic relations between all peoples and all nations.
2229th plenary meeting
1 May 1974
3202 (S-VI). Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order

The General Assembly
.
Adopts the following Programme of Action:

PROGRAMME OF ACTION ON THE ESTABLISH_MENT OF A NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER
CONTENTS
Poq,

Seel.,,,.

Introduction

............. .

I. Fundamental problems of raw materials and
primary commodities as related to trade and development
JI. International mone1ary system and financing of
the development of developing countries .
III. Industrialization
IV. Transfer of technology
v. Regulation and control over the activities of
transnational corporations
VI. Charter of Economic .Rights and Duties of States
VII. Promotion of co-operation among developing
countries
VIII. Assistance in the exercise of permanent sovereignty of States over natural resources ....... .
IX. Strengthening the role of the United Nations system in the field of international economic cooperation
X. Special Programme

5

5
7
8
8
8

8
9

9

9

10

INTRODUCTION

1. In view of the continuing severe economic imbalance in the relations between developed and developing countries, and in the context of the constant and
continuing aggravation of the imbalance of the economies of the developing countries and the consequent
need for the mitigation of their current economic difficulties, urgent and effective measures need to be taken
by the international community to assist the developing countries, while devoting particular attention to
the least developed, land-locked and island developing
countries and those developh.g countries most seriously

s

affected by economic crises and natural calamities
leading to serious retardation of development processes.
2. With a view to ensuring the application of the
Declaration on the Establishment of a New Intema-.
tional Economic Order,6 it will be necessary to adopt
and implement within a specified period a programme
of action of unprecedented scope and to bring about
maximum economic co-operation and understanding
among all States, particularly between developed and
developing countries, based on the principles of dignity and sovereign equality.
I.

FuNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OF RAW MATERIALS AND
PRIMARY COMMODITIES AS RELATED TO TRADE AND
DEVELOPMENT

l. Raw materials
All efforts should be made:
(a) To put an end to all forms of foreign occupation, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonial, neocolonial and alien domination and exploitation through
the exercise of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources;
(b) To take measures for the recovery, exploitation,
development, marketing and distribution of natural
resources, particularly of developing countries, to serve
their national inter~ts, to promote collective self-reliance among them and to strengthen mutually beneficial
international economic co-operation with a view to
bringing about the accelerated develQpment of developing countries;
·
(c) To facilitate the functioning and to fu:r:ther the
aims of producers' associations, including thc;ir joint
marketing arrangements, orderly commodity trading,
improvement in the export income of producing developing countries and in their terms of trade, and sustained growth of the world economy for the benefit
of all;
·
(d) To evolve a just and equitable relationship between the prices of raw materials, primary commodities, manufactured and semi-manufactured goods exported by developing countries and the prices of raw
materials, primary commodities, food, manufactured
and semi-manufactured goods arid capital equipment
imported by them, .and to work for a link between the
prices of exports of developing countries and the prices
of their imports from developed countries;
( e) To take measures to reverse the continued trend
of stagnation or decline in the real price of severnl
commodities exported by developing countries, despite
a general rise in commodity prices, resulting in a decline in the export earnings of these developing countries;
(f) To take measures to expand the markets for
natural products in relation to synthetics, taking into
account the interests of the developing countries, and
to utilize fully the ecological advantages of these
products;
(g) To take measures to promote the processing
of raw materials in the producer developing rnuntrfos .

2. Food
All efforts should be made:
(a) To take full account of specific problems •,)f:
developing countries, particularly in times of food
e Resolution 3201 (S-VI).
