A /67/PV.96

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

96th plenary meeting

Friday, 23 August 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
12 at its 42nd plenary meeting, on 28 November 2012.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution before it today, it will be necessary to reopen
the consideration of agenda item 12. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Sport for peace and development
Draft resolution (A/67/L.77)
The President: It is a great honour to preside
over this meeting of the General Assembly, at which
we will adopt a historic draft resolution (A/67/L.77)
proclaiming 6 April as the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace.
At the outset of my remarks, I would like to express
my heartfelt gratitude to Her Excellency Ms. Isabelle
Picco, Permanent Representative of Monaco, and His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari, Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, for their tireless efforts to
secure consensus on the wording of the draft resolution.

On behalf of the United Nations, allow me to
welcome and extend my sincere appreciation to
Mr. Jacques Rogge, President of the International
Olympic Committee (IOC), and to pay tribute to the
broad legacy of achievement during his 12-year tenure
at the helm of the IOC, including the attainment of
permanent observer status at the United Nations, in
2009. For his distinguished contributions to the world
of sport and beyond, we owe him a big debt of gratitude.
Last, but certainly not least, I am proud to
acknowledge the presence of my nation’s favourite son,
the world’s number-one men’s tennis player, Mr. Novak
Djokovic. His accomplishments on the court have been
widely recognized. But more importantly, I believe
one can draw inspiration from his personality and
strength of character, his steadfastness of purpose
and his fortitude to persevere. Allow me to use this
opportunity to congratulate him once more on having
received the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year
award in recognition of his charitable work and the role
he plays as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. We look
forward to following his remarkable career for many
more years to come.
Sport’s significance for the improvement of an
individual’s character and a society’s welfare traces its
origins back to the very dawn of our civilizations — to
pharaonic Egypt and ancient China. It was the classical
Greeks, however, who began to place sport at the very
centre of their identity, establishing the Olympic Games
some two and a half millenniums ago. The quadrennial
celebration of the springtime of humankind, as it has
been called, gave participants the opportunity to reach

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-43823 (E)

*1343823*

A/67/PV.96

for greatness and to achieve their aristeia — their
finest moment. Victors’ heads were adorned with olive
wreaths and red ribbons were tied around their hands
to symbolize the banishment of weapons from the
Olympics.
Those rituals were performed out of respect for
the command of the Oracle at Delphi to practise peace
through sport, codified through the law of ekecheiria,
or sacred truce, which enabled athletes and spectators
not only to travel to the Games safely, but forbade
anyone to make war during the time they were taking
place. The Olympic creed was inspired by the words of
the Greek philosopher Epictetus:
“the most important thing in the Olympics is not
winning, but taking part; the essential thing in life
is not victory, but contesting well and nobly”.
To this very day, that immortal phrase represents the
true essence of the Olympic spirit.
In many ways, sport is an embodiment of
humankind’s most valiant characteristics. It requires
perseverance and discipline, engendering the principles
of personal integrity, fair play and honourable
competition, and inspiring us to push ourselves beyond
limits, in Lord Tennyson’s unforgettable verse, “to
strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.” I believe those
words frame the universal values of sport, which in
contemporary times the United Nations, together with
the IOC, has sought to promote.
In 1993, the General Assembly adopted resolution
48/11, which called for the observance of a truce during
the Games, intending not only to halt hostilities between
belligerents but also to strengthen international efforts
to promote peace and reconciliation among Member
States. In 2010, at the High-level Plenary Meeting on
the Millennium Development Goals (see A/65/PV.3),
which was held at United Nations Headquarters, Heads
of State and Government adopted landmark resolution
65/1, which acknowledged sport as a powerful tool in
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Across the globe, sport programmes have been used
to deliver HIV/AIDS prevention messages, help curb
obesity rates, promote children’s and maternal health
and further gender equality. The draft resolution before
the Assembly today builds upon those initiatives, in
recognition of the fact that sport has a unique power to
attract, mobilize and inspire people around the world.

2

As the General Assembly takes further steps to
define the post-2015 agenda, I hope that the values
inherent in sport will inform our deliberations on how to
define the sustainable development goals. I would like
to extend an appeal to Member States to come together
at this critical moment and fulfil the tasks set by world
leaders in June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, directing the
world on the path of sustainable development.
In establishing this International Day, let us pay
tribute to the great legends of the past whose athletic
achievements, character and moral fortitude have
earned them a place of distinction in the pantheon of
Olympic glory — champions such as Jesse Owens, who
defied fascist ideology through his stunning victory in
Berlin in 1936. Let us also honour our contemporary
heroes and the virtues they personify. They ignite the
sentiments of hope and possibility, reminding us of the
splendid potential of humankind. And let us express
deep esteem for the para-athletes who, in their quest
for sporting distinction, are bravely defying disabilities
and defeating negative stereotypes.
Sport can be a powerful handmaiden for peace and
reconciliation. It can bring us closer through a shared
celebration of achievements of universal appeal and
attraction. Ethnic, religious and economic divisions
fall by the wayside, along with prejudice, fear and
misunderstanding.
In the words of the greatest living statesman,
Nelson Mandela, a heroic figure whose political legacy
and moral weight has left a lasting mark on our times,
“Sport has the power to change the world. It has
the power to inspire and unite people in a way that
little else does.”
For young and old, male and female, rich and
poor — every match, every competition represents
a new opportunity to triumph. The stadium, the
swimming pool, the dusty local pitch — such sites are
transformed into places where greatness is within reach
for all, where purity of endeavour is on full display
and where any individual’s abilities can be seen and
admired without reservation. In effortlessly throwing
asunder all human barriers, sport is indeed the world’s
universal language.
I now give the floor to the representative of Monaco
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.77.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): By designating
us as co-facilitators to conduct the consultations that

13-43823

A/67/PV.96

have led today to the General Assembly’s impending
declaration of an International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace, you, Mr. President, did the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia and me the
honour of recognizing the contribution of the Group
of Friends for Sport for Development and Peace to
the work of the Organization. Like you, Sir, and many
delegations, Tunisia and Monaco are convinced of the
power of sport to contribute to the realization of our
shared aspirations.
Before formally introducing the draft resolution, I
would like to make the following correction to it. I will
continue in English, as that was the language in which
the text was submitted for printing and introduction.
(spoke in English)
Paragraph 5 should read as follows:
“Also requests the Secretary-General to bring
the present resolution to the attention of States and
the organizations of the United Nations system.”
(spoke in French)
It is my honour, on behalf of the sponsors listed in
document A/67/L.77 and the additional sponsors, which
will be announced before its adoption, to introduce the
draft resolution entitled “International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace”.
As you, Mr. President, said, since 1993 sport has
been on the agenda of the General Assembly as a
means of achieving a more peaceful and better world.
The appeal launched by the General Assembly every
two years to Member States to observe the Olympic
Truce is part of the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations. Sport transcends borders, bringing together
men, women, young people and older people — of all
countries, all cultures and all ages — around universal
values, such as respect for others, tolerance, humility
and equality. Reconciliation through sport in countries
in crisis or emerging from conflict now exists and
should be increased because it offers prospects for peace
and inclusion. At a time when we are endeavouring
to breathe a final political breath into achieving the
Millennium Development Goals, every effort deserves
be encouraged. Since the fifty-eighth session, the
General Assembly has recognized sport as a means of
promoting education, health, development and peace.
In the draft resolution before us, we wanted to link
sports to physical activity, a central element of good

health and well-being. In fact, physical activity allows
us to reduce the risk of non-communicable diseases, for
example, and other illnesses.
Among the many international days proclaimed
by the United Nations, none has been on sports. We
have now filled that void, and now, every 6 April, we
will have an opportunity to continue the spirit of the
first Olympic Games of the modern era, held in Athens
in 1896. Of course, the purpose of the International
Day of Sport for Development and Peace is not only
devoted to professional sports; it is also seeks to pay
tribute to sports in general, which epitomizes both the
noble values that we all aspire to, including surpassing
ourselves.
The success of its annual celebration will be
especially poignant because it relies on a number
of initiatives and activities undertaken by all sport
partners. In that regard, let me recognize in particular
the importance of activities conducted and promoted by
the Office on Sport for Development and Peace since its
inception in 2001.
In our work, we will count on the wholehearted
support of the International Olympic Committee and
the International Paralympic Committee, symbols of
a movement that defends an ideal of human progress
and which cooperates already in a substantial way with
the Organization through a number of partnerships,
the latest being the holding of the third edition of
the International Forum on Sport for Peace and
Development.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/67/L.77.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft resolution,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Papua New
Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Thank you, Sir, for
giving me this opportunity to make a short statement
on the draft resolution on the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace (A/67/L.77). Papua New
Guinea welcomes the draft resolution.
Sporting activities bring together peoples at all
levels, including different groups, nationalities and

13-438233

A/67/PV.96

countries, to share challenges and develop bonds of
friendship and promote tolerance and understanding.
The Olympic Games, World Cup soccer, regional
games and other sporting activities, for example, bring
a sense of unity and friendship among competitors and
nationalities. International sports also enable people to
know and understand other peoples and cultures.
In the case of Papua New Guinea, we are a
country of great contrasts. We have a population of
approximately 7 million people, with hundreds of
different tribes and ethnic groups with their own unique
cultures and traditions. We are also in the Guinness
Book of World Records for having the largest number
of languages — more than 800.
Such a contrast brings tough challenges to our
Government to try to instil a sense of unity among all
of our people for peaceful coexistence among the many
different tribal, ethnic and regional groupings in our
country. Disputes between individuals often result in
tribal and ethnic clashes because of the diversity of
the groups that make up the country. However, when
Papua New Guinea plays regional or other international
sports, the entire country is united. Great patriotism
and national unity are evident among the people. Tribal
or ethnic conflicts are forgotten as everyone is united
in their support for the national team.
Papua New Guinea will host the regional South
Pacific Games in July 2015. The Games will bring
together sportsmen and sportswomen from all the 23
Pacific Island countries and territories to compete in
all forms of sport, including athletics, football, rugby,
tennis and other sports. In preparation for the Games,
our Government has invested more than $18 million
this year to upgrade sporting facilities, which reflects
our commitment to funding sports as a channel towards
development and peace in our country.
Undertaking regular sporting activities also
enables people to stay fit and healthy. It means less risk
of developing an unhealthy lifestyle and its associated
diseases. Excelling in sports also brings great fame
and wealth to teams and individuals. Sporting icons
in boxing, golf — today we have a tennis icon present
with us — and other sports inspire young people to take
up sports with dreams of emulating their idols.
Again, Papua New Guinea strongly supports the
draft resolution before us as a means of promoting
development and peace through sports.

4

The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.77, entitled “International Day of
Sport for Development and Peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.77, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia,
Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Eritrea, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, South Africa, Spain,
Suriname, Switzerland and Turkmenistan.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt without a vote draft resolution
A/67/L.77, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/67/L.77, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 67/296).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States of America.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to have joined the consensus
on today’s resolution on the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace (resolution 67/296). We also
welcome the presence in the Hall today of members
of the international sport community, in particular
Mr. Jacques Rogge, President of the International
Olympic Committee, and Mr. Larry Probst, President
of the United States Olympic Committee.
The United States is home to a vast array of
sporting communities and activities. Americans of
every identity and background participate in sports,
from backyard play and little leagues all the way
to professional and international competition. That

13-43823

A/67/PV.96

diversity and universality of participation is what
makes sport the opportunity to advance development
and peace, as noted in today’s resolution.
The United States delegation is particularly
pleased to see that the resolution emphasizes the
importance of safeguarding human dignity without any
discrimination whatsoever. Part of what makes sport so
important is that it promotes inclusiveness and brings
together people of different ages, races, religions,
social status, abilities, sexual orientations and gender
identities. Sport cuts through all segments of society
and is instrumental in empowering people of diverse
backgrounds and identities while fostering tolerance
and respect for all people, no matter what they look
like, where they worship or whom they love.
At the recent Forum on Sport for Peace and
Development, co-hosted by the United Nations and
the International Olympic Committee in early June,
there were many examples cited of sport being used
to promote positive social change, development and
conflict resolution. The United States recognizes that
sport diplomacy is a valuable means to strengthen
cultural relations among nations. Through our
SportsUnited programme, thousands of people from
more than 100 countries have participated in sports and
cultural exchanges.
The further use of sport as an educational tool has
long been underestimated. With the introduction of the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
we can further extend the good work that happens
around development and peace through sport, provided
we build upon the universality that lies at the core of
sport’s appeal to the citizens of all our countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union, who wishes to make a statement
following the adoption of resolution 67/296.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
of delivering this statement on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. I warmly welcome
the presence here in this Hall of the President of the
International Olympic Committee, Mr. Jacques Rogge.
The European Union and its member States welcome
the establishment of the International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace, 6 April, which commemorates
the revival of the modern Olympic Games, and would
like to reaffirm their commitment to multilateral action
to promote sports and their importance for development
and peace.

Sport is an important means to promote
inclusiveness for people independently of their age,
race, religion or belief, social status, disability, sexual
orientation and gender identity. It can bring people
together, help overcome cultural, linguistic and other
barriers and contribute to the fight against all forms of
discrimination.
The European Union and its member States also
acknowledge the important role of the United Nations
Office on Sport for Development and Peace and its
work in that regard.
The European Union and its member States would
also like to reiterate their position concerning the
proclamation of international days, years and decades,
which must be consistent with the international
guidelines we have collectively agreed in Economic
and Social Council resolution 1980/67, which were
reaffirmed twice, in General Assembly resolutions
53/199 and 61/185. While joining the consensus on the
resolution just adopted (resolution 67/296), we will
continue to actively defend respect for the Economic
and Social Council guidelines on future proclamations
and give priority to efficiency and cost-effectiveness
of the work of the General Assembly, in support of its
revitalization.
Ms. Hewanpola (Australia): Australia is proud
to support the resolution adopted today (resolution
67/296) proclaiming the International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace. As a proud sporting nation,
we are committed to the ideals of sport and its potential
to inspire, unite and promote understanding across
language, cultural and geographic divides.
The declaration of the International Day of
Sport for Development and Peace helps to promote
the potential of sport, its contribution to education,
health and physical fitness and the development of
other important life skills, including confidence, selfesteem, teamwork, cooperation, social interaction,
communication, tolerance and peaceful conflict
resolution. Ultimately, sport has the potential to help us
reach our development goals, to promote understanding
and to achieve sustainable peace. Today’s resolution
makes clear the important role of the United Nations in
furthering those ideals.
We thank you for this initiative, Mr. President,
and we celebrate the power of sport to promote social
inclusion and to bring together people of differing ages,
genders, races, cultures, faiths and status, including

13-438235

A/67/PV.96

sexual orientation and gender identity. As they say, sport
provides a level playing field where all participants are
equal, an ideal that is to be promoted throughout the
world.
Mr. Calvo Calvo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to thank the co-facilitators, the
delegations of Monaco and Tunisia, for all their efforts
and congratulate them on their successful work. My
country would also like to welcome Mr. Jacques Rogge,
President of the International Olympic Committee,
and the great tennis player, Mr. Djokovic, who were
present with us today for the adoption of this important
resolution (resolution 67/296).
Costa Rica was proud to have sponsored the
initiative to proclaim 6 April as the International Day of
Sport for Development and Peace. Our country has been
working for several years on the development of policies
that allow us to use sport as a means of promoting a
more inclusive, supportive and healthy society. We are
therefore confident that the proclamation of this Day
will motivate us to continue our work, with the goal of
strengthening our aspirations for peaceful coexistence
and sustainable human development through economic,
social, environmental and cultural development. We
would therefore stress that sport is an intrinsically
holistic activity, as it is one of the best contributions
to comprehensive human development and, alongside
music and the other arts, promotes the joy of learning
together.
Costa Rica strongly believes in promoting human
rights as a preventive measure. Just as human rights
education has a double impact on the empowerment of
people and respect for the rights of others, we recognize
the potential of sport to serve as a universal language
that helps build the values ​​of respect, understanding,
diversity and tolerance among human beings, as well as
to promote peace and development.
Over the past year, Costa Rica has carried out
several activities focused on sport. We are co-chairs
of the Group of Friends of Sport for Development and
Peace at the United Nations in Geneva, through which
we organized various activities focused on people with
disabilities during the most recent session of the Human
Rights Council and on the importance of physical
activity for public health at the World Health Assembly.
In March, we hosted the tenth Central American
Games, held in San José. During the Games, we
headed up the founding of the first Central American

6

commission for peace through sport, made up of all the
Olympic Committees of Central America.
From 9 to 11 September, we will host the first Global
Youth Summit, jointly organized by the Government of
Costa Rica and the International Telecommunication
Union, in which sport as a tool for physical and mental
health, in addition to its usefulness in protecting the
rights of children, will be one of the central issues
discussed.
All those activities and projects show that our
Government, led by President Laura Chinchilla
Miranda, continues to follow our decades-old policy
focused on strengthening the civil tradition of our
country and committed to development and education
in their broadest sense.
We therefore invite all Member States to take
concrete actions to make sport a fundamental right that
generates social transformation and is accessible to all
people, regardless of age or social status, in the pursuit
of a more full, healthy, free and peaceful life.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel is pleased to have sponsored
this resolution (resolution 67/296) and recognizes the
fundamental role sport can play in promoting peace and
development. Sport is woven into the fabric of Israeli
society, and we are particularly proud that, in many
international sporting events, Jewish and Arab Israelis
participate side by side, without bias or discrimination.
We thank Mr. Wilfried Lemke, the United Nations
Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace,
for his devoted efforts to promote tolerance and
understanding. We are honoured that he has visited
Israel on various occasions and participated in the
“Sport as a mediator between cultures” conference,
co-hosted by Israel and Germany with the support of
UNESCO. Mr. Lemke’s Office has been instrumental
in promoting programmes such as Sports for Life
and a running partnership between Israel, Jordan and
Germany that brings together Jewish and Arab youth to
play soccer and build understanding.
We also applaud this resolution for recognizing
the valuable role of the International Paralympic
Committee. We are inspired by the Paralympic values
of courage, determination, inspiration and equality.
Paralympic athletes push the limits of their physical
abilities and, in doing so, break down countless
boundaries.

13-43823

A/67/PV.96

At the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, the
International Olympic Committee failed to uphold the
universal values of the Olympics. Israel remembers
in honour the many Jewish athletes who were barred
from competing in the Games in Nazi Germany. We
also recall the Munich Olympic massacre in 1972, when
11 members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken
hostage and eventually killed.
The delegation of Israel supports the resolution’s
call to place sports at the service of humankind and
without any discrimination whatsoever. We interpret
that to include, inter alia, race, religion and nationality,
sexual orientation and gender identity. By supporting
today’s resolution, we can ensure that the tragedies of
the past will serve as a clear lesson for the future.
Mr. Adamov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus welcomes the adoption of resolution 67/296.
We participated in the drafting of the resolution and
sponsored it.
We believe the contribution of sport to peace to be
a very important one. In order to achieve peace, sport
needs to be constantly supported, with many efforts by

States and the International Olympic Committee (IOC).
Sport should not be used for political purposes that run
counter to the goal of civilized and friendly relations
among States. Such actions are at odds not only with
the principles of sport but also the spirit and letter of
the Olympic Charter. We see such actions as potentially
destabilizing.
Belarus would like to see friendly multilateral
relationships in sport, and so we must be more active
in defending sport. The United Nations and the IOC
must be more active in doing so, as must others. It is
important that the United Nations adopt cooperation
mechanisms that can be used to protect and defend the
spirit of the Olympics, and not allow certain States to
engage in discriminatory actions that run counter to
that spirit.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

13-438237
