S/PV.8513

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8513th meeting

Wednesday, 17 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Annen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2019/305)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-11333 (E)
*1911333*

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

of President Omer Al-Bashir. It would be appropriate to
update the Council on key developments since that date.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2019/305)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with article 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
Mr. Mamabolo is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Khartoum.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/305, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour for me to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur and
the work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in line with the
Secretary-General’s 90-day report that is already
before the Council (S/2019/305). I also wish to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Niels
Annen, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany.
As Council members know, the Secretary-General’s
report covers the period up to 3 April. Since then, a lot
has happened in the Sudan in general, and in Darfur,
in particular. Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
already briefed the Council on 12 April on the removal
2/22

17/04/2019

As Council members know, General Awad Ibn
Auf, former Vice-President and Defence Minister,
who took over as the head of the Transitional Military
Council following the change and resigned a day later
in response to popular demands by protesters who
spearheaded the demands for a change of Government.
He named General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan as his
successor. Upon assuming the position, General
Al-Burhan announced a number of steps aimed at
stabilizing the situation, including the lifting of the
daily curfew across the country, the release of political
detainees and the imposition of a ceasefire across the
country, among other measures.
The Transitional Military Council has also
indicated that it will carry out reforms of some of
the Government’s institutions, including the National
Intelligence and Security Service. Indeed, the Council
is replacing high-ranking Government officials who are
said to be unpopular with the demonstrators, perhaps
in an attempt to gain trust and confidence. Yesterday,
the Chief Justice and the Attorney-General were
replaced. General Al-Burhan announced further that
the transitional military phase would last a maximum
of two years, ending with a handover of power to a
civilian arrangement.
However, protests continue in Khartoum and other
parts of the country, with a sit-in at the headquarters of
the Sudanese Armed Forces demanding the immediate
transfer of power to civilians. It is worth noting that
the Transitional Military Council has since initiated
dialogue with the Declaration of Freedom and Change,
the umbrella body of the protestors, and other elements
of the opposition, on a feasible transitional mechanism
that would be all-inclusive and representative of all
Sudanese interests.
In an important development, on 15 April the
African Union Peace and Security Council (AUPSC)
issued a communique calling on the Transitional
Military Council to install a transitional civilian
authority within 15 days, failing which the Sudan
would be suspended from participation in all African
Union (AU) activities. While there are has been no
reaction so far on the part of national stakeholders, the
Transitional Military Council is likely to consider the
AUPSC statement a setback.
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The changes at the federal level have an obvious
impact on Darfur. Since the removal of President
Al-Bashir, internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
other protesters in Darfur have engaged in acts of
violence, including arson on the premises of the National
Intelligence and Security Services and the ruling party,
as well as houses of community leaders perceived to
have collaborated with the previous regime. Such
incidents have occurred in many locations, including
El Fasher, Nyala, Kass, Zalingei, Golo, Nertiti, Kutum,
Kabkabiyah, Saraf Omra, El Geneina and Mournei. In
Kalma IDP camp, clashes between IDP youth groups
on 13 April led to the reported death of 15 IDPs.
There have been reports of confrontations between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the National Intelligence
and Security Service in Darfur, particularly when the
Armed Forces attempted to protect the protesters.
Let me assure the Council that in the midst of all
these developments, UNAMID has remained vigilant,
maintaining a robust posture, particularly in the
Jebel Marra area of responsibility, which is where we
have peacekeeping troops. The Mission’s day-to-day
operational activities continue. We have intensified our
patrols, particularly in and around IDP camps, and we
continue interacting with partners on the ground. With
regard to the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and assets, I am pleased to report that so far
the United Nations has not been a target and that all our
staff are accounted for.
Allow me to now focus on the Secretary-General’s
report before the Council (S/2019/305). With the
adoption of resolution 2429 (2018), on 13 July 2018,
the Mission continued with its reconfiguration and
drawdown. The reduction of the military component
from 8,735 to 4,050 personnel by 30 June is on track.
The strength of UNAMID police has also decreased
from 2,500 to 2,283 personnel. UNAMID police
advisers have been deployed to State liaison functions
and are also co-located with the Sudanese police forces.
UNAMID and the United Nations country team
also continue to implement the transition strategy
in preparation for the Mission’s withdrawal. In this
regard, $15 million has been allocated to State liaison
functions in the 2018-2019 UNAMID budget for the
joint implementation of programmatic activities with
10 individual United Nations country team entities
with which UNAMID has signed memorandums of
understanding in the areas of the rule of law, human

S/PV. 8513

rights, resilience and durable solutions for IDPs and
host communities.
UNAMID staff, integrated within the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, have
expanded protection monitoring to return areas and
areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn. Similarly,
the United Nations Development Programme and
UNAMID have adjusted conflict-prevention projects
to improve targeting and increase sustainability after
the Mission’s eventual exit. UNAMID staff are also
supporting the United Nations Population Fund in
strengthening prevention and response to gender-based
violence, including community-based mechanisms.
As regards programmatic activities, a shift in focus
from institutional to community-based projects may
be required in the light of the continuation of the
state of emergency and uncertainties surrounding the
transition modalities.
The security situation in Darfur remained calm
in the reporting period. However, clashes between the
Government and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid (SLA-Abdul Wahid) in Jebel Marra were more
frequent but contained to a few locations, while the
footprint of the Sudanese Armed Forces was readjusted
in recent weeks to focus on urban areas in the light of
the protests. On 28 January, the Government extended
the unilateral cessation of hostilities indefinitely while
the movements extended the ceasefire for three months
on 8 February. Incidents of intercommunal clashes also
remained low, while some violence continued to occur
between herders and farmers, mainly in North and
West Darfur.
Humanitarian partners continued to provide
assistance in Darfur, with a focus on the provision
of life-saving needs to vulnerable groups through
the delivery of basic social services, particularly for
newly displaced IDPs and those affected by conflict.
However, their activities continue to face challenges in
accessing some areas in Jebel Marra localities in South
and Central Darfur owing to continued restriction of
access by the Sudanese authorities on security grounds.
UNAMID experienced a total of 10 access denials and
two restrictions of movement, compared with seven
in the previous reporting period. Such access denials
prevented UNAMID from verifying reported fighting in
several areas in Darfur. In an unexpected development,
a UNAMID integrated patrol on a humanitarian escort
to Feina village in South Darfur on 26 March was
denied access by an SLA-Abdul Wahid commander.

19-113333/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

UNAMID continued to engage the Government to
further strengthen mechanisms for addressing human
rights concerns in Darfur. During the reporting period,
UNAMID documented 59 new cases of human rights
violations and abuses involving 129 victims. UNAMID
also continued to support the re-establishment of
the criminal justice chain in return areas, with the
rehabilitation of a rural court and construction of a
district court, three rural courts, a land registry and
prison dormitories for male and female prisoners alike
in North Darfur. UNAMID, in collaboration with the
Sudanese judiciary, also organized mediation trainings
for 25 rural court judges and provided capacity-building
support through trainings on human rights and prison
duties for 59 newly recruited prison staff.
The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur continued to face challenges as a result
of capacity and resource constraints. With regard to
the peace process in Darfur and in the context of the
changes that have taken place in recent days, the call by
the Transitional Military Council on the non-signatory
armed movements to engage politically and be a part
of the ongoing dialogue has yet to receive a tangible
response. In a recent statement, signed by Malik
Agar and Minni Minawi, the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front — which includes the Sudan Liberation ArmyMinni Minawi (SLA-MM), the Justice and Equality
Movement-Gibril (JEM/Gibril) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army/North — distanced themselves from
the ongoing discussions between the Transitional
Military Council and the Declaration of Freedom and
Change forces, saying it was too early to hold a meeting
with the Transitional Military Council.
However, the SLA-MM and JEM/Gibril have
indicated to the mediation that they still intend to
pursue the Darfur peace process in a manner that
addresses the underlying causes of the conflict. Their
reasoning is that there is risk should the Darfur peace
process be merged into the current dialogue, because
the causes that led to the conflict in the first place may
not be properly and independently addressed. In that
regard, acting in consultation with the Special Envoy of
Qatar and in support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, UNAMID continues to seek
ways of commencing talks between the movements
and the Sudanese authorities. On his part, the leader of
the Sudan Liberation Army, Abdul Wahid Nour, issued
a statement on 13 April rejecting the Transitional
Military Council, terming it as an attempt to reproduce
4/22

17/04/2019

the previous regime. The Security Council should call
on him to seize the opportunity and engage politically
with the Sudanese authorities.
At this juncture, I wish to say that, while we
are on track with the mission’s drawdown process,
the political situation in the Sudan has drastically
changed and has the potential to affect our mandate
implementation going forward. For instance, we were
scheduled to hand over Sector East headquarters in Ed
Daein on 15 April. We have since delayed the handover
by two weeks pending further clarity as the state’s
administration keeps changing. Meanwhile, UNAMID
is in the process of establishing contact and working
relationships with the new administration at both the
federal and state levels.
Darfur is not, and cannot be, immune from what
is happening at the national level. The incidents of
violence in displaced persons’ camps in Darfur in
reaction to the events in Khartoum attest to the fragility
of the security situation in Darfur, which had hitherto
been increasingly calm and stable, with the exception
of the Jebel Marra area. It is my hope that the situation
does not deteriorate further or have a negative impact
of UNAMID’s envisaged exit.
As much as it might not be desirable, the current
situation provides a chance for the Sudanese to seize the
opportunity to resolve all their conflicts, including the
one in Darfur. The Council should urge the people of
the Sudan to take a holistic and all-inclusive approach
that is representative of all Sudanese.
The President: I thank Mr. Mamabolo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.
Well before the latest developments in the Sudan,
humanitarian needs in Darfur and other parts of the
country were already growing due to the economic
crisis. People who had been receiving humanitarian
assistance now require greater support. The broader
population has also been affected by the worsening
economy. There is a risk that more people might slide
into greater vulnerability and poverty.
The direct impact on humanitarian operations
from the recent political events has so far been limited,
and regular operations have continued. That includes
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a major campaign to vaccinate children against polio
and measles being carried out in South Darfur and
other states. However, the humanitarian community is
monitoring the situation closely.
We are very concerned about the protection of
civilians, particularly in Darfur, where localized
fighting continues. Reports of incidents of violence
involving internally displaced persons — including
internally displaced persons killed in Kalma camp in
South Darfur on 13 April — are worrisome. In addition,
the start of the school year in Darfur, scheduled for
1 April, has been delayed, impacting education and
services tied to school attendance.
The economic crisis in the Sudan has had a
significant impact on humanitarian needs and
operations, including in Darfur. That includes rapid
currency devaluation, rampant inflation, increasing
prices for food and medicine, a marked decline in
purchasing power and intermittent shortages of daily
bread and fuel supplies. The World Food Programme
reports that the price of sorghum is 70 per cent higher
as compared with the same time last year, impacting
people’s purchasing power for a staple food. According
to the latest analysis, 5.8 million people are presently
food-insecure, up from 3.8 million the year before. That
includes 1.9 million people in Darfur. With the start of
the lean season in May, the number will increase.
Shortages of imported commodities have also
impacted health care and other services. According to
the Central Bank of the Sudan, imports of medicine
in 2018 dropped by a third as compared to 2017. With
increases in costs of medical services ranging from 50
to 100 per cent, households are less able to afford health
care and are more vulnerable to health risks. Shortages
of food and high prices also worsen protection risks,
as people turn to negative coping mechanisms, and
fewer children attend school. Women and the elderly
continue to be particularly affected, as households
are prioritizing food for their children. This situation
adds to what were already high and long-standing
humanitarian needs.
There have been significant improvements in
security in recent years, with some people displaced
by conflict returning home. Yet 1.9 million people
remain displaced by conflict, more than 1.6 million
of them in Darfur, and many of them have been
displaced for well over a decade, as members well
know. Hundreds of thousands of children in Darfur

S/PV. 8513

are acutely malnourished. In Central, East, North, and
South Darfur less than half of the population has access
to clean water. The World Food Programme reports
that a growing proportion of internally displaced
and refugee populations — already among the most
vulnerable — cannot afford enough to eat.
For those reasons, and thanks to the generous
contributions of Member States, the United Nations
Central Emergency Response Fund last week
allocated $26.5 million to assist vulnerable people
in areas that have seen some of the largest increases
in food insecurity linked to the economic situation,
including in East, North, South and West Darfur. The
Sudan humanitarian fund is also providing more than
$20 million in complementary funding.
But more support is needed. This year humanitarian
partners are appealing for $1.1 billion to assist
4.4 million of the most vulnerable people, which
represents a bit more than half of the overall needs
identified in the country, including 2.4 million people in
Darfur. Humanitarian needs and response requirements
will also be reviewed in the coming months to reflect
the ongoing impact of the economic situation, as well
as any impact that might emerge from the current
political events.
Sustaining humanitarian support is particularly
important, as there continue to be significant constraints
on longer-term development assistance for Darfur and
other parts of the Sudan. Without expanded social
safety nets, the ongoing economic situation will have
serious consequences. Greater support for development
activities is needed, alongside scaled up Government
investment in crucial services such as social protection.
The situation in the Sudan also has implications
for the broader region. I would like to recognize
the Government’s generosity in hosting refugees,
including nearly 150,000 South Sudanese in Darfur.
I hope that support continues. The Sudan has also
been a vital route for the provision of humanitarian
assistance — particularly food aid — into South Sudan.
With critical life-saving assistance to be provided in
the coming days and weeks, we hope the Government
will continue to facilitate those movements.
Ensuring that the most vulnerable are supported
requires sustained humanitarian access to all people in
need. Recent years have seen significant improvements.
Partners are able to move more easily and assist people
in more areas, particularly in Jebel Marra. However, we

19-113335/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/04/2019

continue to call on all parties in the Sudan to allow the
humanitarian community to assist people in need. We
also call on the Government to take further measures
to improve the operating environment for humanitarian
organizations, especially by lifting bureaucratic
impediments to movement and facilitating impartial
needs assessments and protection activities. At this
critical time, it is essential to ensure that the people of
Darfur and the rest of the Sudan receive the assistance
and the support they need.

Turning to UNAMID, let me underline that we
are dedicated to working with the United Kingdom as
co-penholders, and with all of the Council members
here around the table, as well as with our partners in
the African Union, on the way forward for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
are convinced that it is the joint responsibility of all of
us here in the Council to ensure that the decade-long
international engagement in Darfur and for the people
of Darfur delivers concrete and lasting results.

The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.

It is in that spirit that I would like to thank our
briefers today. They shed light on the areas of progress,
but also showed us where more effort is needed. I
would like to refer in particular to reports of sexual and
gender-based violence still being committed in Darfur,
including by Government personnel. Those atrocities
need to be stopped and the perpetrators held to account.
The briefing by Ms. Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, also highlighted that
we still need to find durable solutions for the almost
2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur. That
speaks to a broader point: we as the international
community need to remain engaged in Darfur and take
a longer-term view. Despite progress made in the last
years, many of the drivers of the conflict in Darfur are
yet to be comprehensively addressed.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State of Germany.
Let me start by expressing how honoured I feel
to take part in the deliberations of this organ. When
Germany presented its candidature for a non-permanent
seat, we pledged to be a strong partner in helping to
forge sustainable peace. Germany believes in the
value of long-term engagement by the international
community in conflict situations such as the one that
we are discussing today, that is, Darfur in the Sudan.
Before I turn to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), let me
underline that we cannot address Darfur in a vacuum.
Over the last weeks, we have witnessed significant
developments in Khartoum and in the Sudan more
broadly. Personally, I am impressed by the will and
determination of the Sudanese people to stand up
peacefully for a different future. Germany believes
that the voices of the people need to be heard as the
Sudan charts a new way forward. Therefore, Germany
welcomes the statement by the African Union, which
strongly underlines the imperative of a civilian-led
and consensual political transition in the Sudan. We
echo that clear political message from the region, and
we call upon all actors in the Sudan to move in that
direction with determination, urgency and, above all,
without violence.
As developments unfold in Khartoum, we have
to carefully consider their impact on the situation in
Darfur. It is fair to say that we do not have a clear and
full picture yet. But I believe that we as members of the
Council should carefully monitor the interplay between
political developments in Khartoum and the situation
in Darfur. Reports about recent clashes in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur, resulting
in a number of IDPs being killed, serve to underline
this point in a most deplorable way.
6/22

We remain concerned about a lack of access to
justice, a security sector that remains largely unchecked
due to weak governance, and continued reports about
human rights violations. Additional factors such as
climate change potentially exacerbate tensions among
the populations in Darfur and impede development
and economic opportunities. Land remains one of
the key issues that has not yet been settled. Not all of
those challenges can be addressed by a peacekeeping
mission, nor should they be. Therefore, the transition
process from peacekeeping to peacebuilding becomes
increasingly important. My Government is committed
to playing an active role in shaping the transition. To us,
that means focusing on the following two things.
First, we have to do everything so that UNAMID — as
long as it is deployed in Darfur — delivers against the
mandated tasks in the areas of mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. We think that the mission has made
progress working together with other United Nations
entities over recent months, including on supporting
capacity-building in the areas of the rule of law and
human rights, as well as in finding durable solutions
for IDPs and host communities. We must keep that
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

up. We welcome the transition concept and commend
the United Nations on progress on this, in particular
through establishing state liaison functions. We must
continue to work and back it up with the appropriate
financial support.
Secondly, Germany is convinced that, for the
transition to be successful, we need a collaborative
relationship among the decision-making authorities in
the Sudan, the international community and the United
Nations with respect to Darfur. That partnership must
be built on mutual trust and with the common objective
of sustaining peace in Darfur.
Therefore, if we want to develop a way forward
for the planning post-UNAMID, it is essential that we
have an in-depth conversation with the Sudan. That
conversation needs to include the current obstacles
to the functioning of UNAMID, such as access
denials — which have been mentioned. Looking forward,
that conversation also has to do with strengthening
the capacity of rule of law institutions. It has to be
about revitalizing the political process for Darfur and
about cooperating with the international community,
including through a presence of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission.
And eventually it needs to be a conversation about the
Government of the Sudan assuming responsibility for
tasks that currently lie in UNAMID’s hands. This is
not a technical exercise; it needs political engagement.
Germany stands ready for that. But clearly, as things
are evolving in Khartoum, we currently do not have a
counterpart on the Sudanese side to engage with in this
important conversation.
That brings me back to my first remark: we cannot
simply de-link the political developments in Khartoum
from our joint work on UNAMID. We will have to take
a close look at the time plans. Artificial timelines do not
help the people in Darfur, and blindly following them
might risk our investment as members of the Council.
Our decisions on the future of UNAMID must be
shaped by developments on the ground, not by budget
lines. The Secretariat will present its thinking on this
soon. We look forward to those proposals, carefully
charting our way forward on UNAMID as the situation
continues to evolve in Khartoum.
Lastly, given today’s uncertainties, we see it as the
responsibility of the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, to make sure that, once

S/PV. 8513

UNAMID leaves, Darfur does not relapse into conflict.
We must prevent a cliff in terms of political attention,
political support for mediation and practical support
on such key issues as the rule of law, human rights
and peacebuilding. That needs to be avoided because,
frankly, we cannot afford it.
We owe it to the people of Darfur to continue our
support. That is why Germany believes that we should
have a strong United Nations presence in Darfur once
UNAMID is gone. Such a presence, in our mind,
would consolidate and further advance the political,
peacebuilding and development objectives in Darfur.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): We all know that
today’s meeting takes place in uncertain times in
the Sudan. The African Union Peace and Security
Council issued a clear statement two days ago. Recent
developments and what happens over the coming days
have an impact on Darfur and, potentially, the wider
region. The Council has to consider the implications
of these important political developments. I will
therefore divide my intervention into two parts: first,
on the wider situation in the Sudan; and, secondly, on
the impact of that wider situation on Darfur and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
On 11 April, we witnessed the climax of four
months of peaceful protests demanding change and a
better future for the Sudan. Let us admire the bravery
and determination of the Sudanese people, which saw
the removal of a President who had headed a brutal
regime for 30 years. However, the legitimate change
that the Sudanese people are demanding has not yet
been achieved. The Transitional Military Council must
listen to the people, who continue to protest.
First and foremost, the authorities must protect
the ongoing peaceful protests and continue to
exercise restraint. The Sudanese authorities have a
responsibility to uphold human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to peaceful assembly.
There must be no violence and no forced removal of
protesters. We are at a moment when the Sudanese
authorities have an opportunity to build trust with their
people and the international community. They should

19-113337/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

seize this opportunity and demonstrate that they are
genuinely committed to ending the Sudan’s history of
violent repression.
The people are saying that the Sudan needs a
political system that is inclusive, respectful of human
rights and the rule of law and properly constitutionally
rooted. The United Kingdom stands with the Sudanese
people and supports the African Union’s call for the
Sudan to return swiftly to civilian rule. All need to
work together in an inclusive political transition. In
particular, women have played a critical role in the
protest movement. Their contributions will be vital
in the political transition process and the subsequent
civilian-led Government.
From the beginning, the protestors have demanded
accountability. The United Kingdom supports their
call. We believe that there must be justice for the
crimes committed by individuals within the former
Government of the Sudan. It is right that the Sudanese
people should hold those individuals accountable. Of
course, we fully support the International Criminal
Court and expect the full cooperation of all States with
the Court and its Prosecutor.
The latest political developments have a direct
impact on Darfur. We, like others, are concerned by
reports of violent clashes in several locations in recent
days, which have resulted in civilian death and injury.
In particular, on 15 April, as reported by UNAMID, in
the Kalma internally displaced persons (IDP) camp, 16
IDPs were killed. I have a question for the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur. What was the response of
the two UNAMID formed police units stationed in
Kalma to that incident? We have also seen the negative
impact of recent political turmoil on the Darfur peace
process, which is currently stalled. It is vital for the
future stability of Darfur, but also the wider Sudan
and the region, that we as a Council maintain our
expectation that progress will be made in finding a
peaceful solution to the root causes of the conflict.
Throughout UNAMID’s drawdown, the United
Kingdom has consistently called for a gradual and
sensible approach, guided by the situation on the ground,
and we share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
ongoing political and economic uncertainty pose a
number of challenges for a responsible exit of UNAMID
and the transition to peacebuilding. The international
community must not abandon its responsibility to
ensure that the handover of UNAMID responsibilities
8/22

17/04/2019

and assets is done appropriately and to those with the
capacity to manage the ongoing tasks. There remains
a high level of need in Darfur, and the root causes of
conflict have not yet been resolved.
An immediate step that the Transitional Military
Council could take to build confidence and alleviate
need would be to abolish the burdensome system of
approvals and permits that hinders the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We need to think carefully
about how best we tackle those issues after the eventual
departure of UNAMID, in particular with regard to
what sort of African Union and United Nations presence
on the ground is needed to provide the expertise and
programmatic ability and ensure a proper flow of
financial support to address ongoing challenges. We
therefore encourage the African Union and the United
Nations to make recommendations to the Council on
what those future arrangements should be.
The Sudan is at a crossroads. The Transitional
Military Council faces a choice. It should listen to the
Sudanese people, respect their legitimate demand for
civilian rule and enable the transition to a system that
respects human rights, democracy and fundamental
freedoms, and delivers accountability. Making that
choice would mean a new Sudan. It would be a Sudan
respected in the international community of nations.
It would bring support and resources from across the
globe, both to underpin the resolution of long-standing
peace processes, including in Darfur, and to support
the Sudan’s own economic and social development. It
would herald a new chapter in the Sudan’s relations with
its region and the world. The people of the Sudan have
shown incredible bravery and perseverance in their
dignified demands for an end to a brutal, unaccountable
regime that has impoverished its own people through
decades of economic mismanagement. The Sudanese
people have forced change in their country. I salute
them. Let us stand by them.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mamabolo and
Ms. Mueller, and also acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Niels Annen.
First, with regard to the progress made in the
situation in the Sudan, we welcome the overall
improvement in security in Darfur, with the exception
of the hotspots in Jebel Marra, where the conflict
between the Government and the rebel forces of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid persists. At
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the same time, we are concerned about instances of
intercommunal violence and the destruction of farms,
reported in Central and North Darfur states.
I also express our deep concern about the increase
in criminal incidents victimizing internally displaced
persons, as well as the suspension of some humanitarian
activities and the restriction and denial of access to the
personnel of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Above all, however,
we are concerned about continuing reports of sexual
abuse against women and girls by uniformed military
personnel. It is regrettable that that remains an ongoing
feature of the conflict and that many such cases are not
reported by the victims for fear of reprisals. We reiterate
our call for the implementation of the framework for
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in order to respond to cases
of sexual and gender-based violence.
Secondly, we draw attention to the stalemate in
the peace process and the repercussions that current
events may have on it. Although the current political
dynamics raise challenges and uncertainty, it is crucial
that the process be put in motion to ensure the return
and relocation of displaced persons, the settlement
of land issues and the establishment of judicial
and reconciliation entities, as well as the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund. There is an
urgent need for an open dialogue process to determine
the future interlocutors in the Government, both at the
national and the local levels, and to attribute national
ownership as a guarantee of the sustainability of
the process.
Thirdly, I express our concern about the recent
events in Khartoum and the consequent uncertainty
experienced by the Sudanese people. The Sudan is
facing a struggle in the midst of social protests and
disproportionate governmental reactions, with a toll
of dozens of dead and wounded, and, as often happens
in such processes, a high human cost. Every day we
hear stories like those of Babarki, a doctor who helped
wounded demonstrators at his home and was allegedly
executed, and Fatih, a university student was fatally
shot in the head. Those are tragic events involving a
people who ask only that their concerns be heard and
addressed. The Dominican Republic reiterates its call
for calm and that bloodshed be avoided at all costs.

S/PV. 8513

The time has come to leverage this opportunity
for a democratic and peaceful transition and minimize
the possibility of a violent outcome. The Sudanese
people deserve not only an opportunity for political
and economic recovery but also to be recompensed for
their prolonged suffering within a reasonable amount
of time. The time has come to establish an inclusive
political system that upholds human rights and the
norms of international law, and above all that will
restore trust among Sudanese people.
We reiterate that the challenges facing the
Sudan should be resolved through consensus with
the participation of all actors, including the equal
participation of women, with a view to restoring
democratic order, good governance and the well-being
of the people. As the representative of the United
Kingdom rightly pointed out, we find ourselves at a
decisive moment in time. Any decision that is taken,
will leave its mark on the future of democracy for the
Sudanese people.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
welcome you, Mr. President; it is great to have you join
us in the Security Council today.
Over the past days, we have seen a dramatic and
significant series of events unfold in the Sudan. However,
the demands of the Sudanese for a representative
Government have not yet been met and the situation
remains tense. Protesters and opposition groups are
calling for a quick transition to civilian authority, and
the African Union (AU) said on 15 April that it will
withdraw the Sudan’s membership if the transition is
not made within 15 days. We agree with the Sudanese
people that the first step is forging a new transitional
body that includes the leadership and participation
of civilians representing the diversity and breadth of
Sudanese society.
We are concerned by the impact of the events
in Khartoum on the security and stability of Darfur,
including last Saturday’s deadly attack on a camp
of internally displaced persons that other speakers
have cited, and we continue to receive reports
of violence resulting from protests in Darfur. In
addition, the United States is deeply concerned that
violence between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction
increased during the reporting period. We are also
troubled that crimes against displaced persons and
vulnerable civilians increased, and with them a rise in

19-113339/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

fatalities. Such violence worsens the possibilities for a
humanitarian response in an already severe situation
and has prevented humanitarian actors from accessing
the most vulnerable to provide life-saving services
and assistance.
Violence has also prevented United Nations
peacekeepers
from
carrying
out
important
prevention-and-response patrols. Despite those
challenges, the United States strongly encourages the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to redouble its efforts to address the
spike in violence and prioritize the safety and security
of civilians.
The joint United Nations-AU report on UNAMID’s
future, due in May, will be an opportunity to provide a
set of prioritized benchmarks, while also recommending
possible trajectories for the mission. The United States
expects the strategic report to also consider the events
of the past several months and weeks and their impact
on the stability and security of Darfur.
Even with the significant events, the Government
and parties should show measurable and sustainable
progress on prioritized benchmarks, in particular,
demonstrating the Government’s ability and capacity
to protect and provide for the Darfur people and
addressing the root causes of the conflict. Absent such
evidence of progress, the United States is supportive of
the Council considering all options as we seek to bring
long-term peace and stability to Darfur.
The United States commends the people of
the Sudan for their resilience and commitment to
non-violence as they express their legitimate demands
for an inclusive and representative Government that
respects and protects human rights. The United States
urges all parties to continue the process towards an
inclusive, civilian transition, amid an atmosphere of
restraint and calm. We stand ready to work with partners
in the Council and the region to support those efforts.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, in presiding over this
meeting, and we thank our briefers Mr. Mamabolo and
Ms. Mueller for their updates.
I would like to focus my remarks on three
fundamental points: the situation in Darfur, the
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the future
of Darfur.
10/22

17/04/2019

On the situation in Darfur, the Secretary-General’s
recent report (S/2019/305) has confirmed the continued
decrease in all kinds of violations in Darfur over the
past four years. In addition, the region is enjoying
relative security and stability, while displaced persons
continue to return. We reiterate that their dignified,
safe and voluntary return is necessary and that the
international community should continue supporting
their return amid the difficult circumstances. We
welcome the allocation of $26 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund as humanitarian assistance
for those in need.
Accordingly, we emphasize the need for the work
to continue as proposed by the Secretary-General
and set out in resolution 2429 (2018) and in the
Security Council’s presidential statement of last year
(S/PRST/2018/19).
On the withdrawal of UNAMID, the Council
affirmed in the presidential statement that the progress
made on achieving the benchmarks and indicators for
the withdrawal will contribute to the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. As per the SecretaryGeneral’s report, there has been sustained progress in
a number of areas, and there is an ongoing need for
additional efforts in other areas. There is therefore
a need, now more than before, for our Council to
move forward the agreed issues in order to continue
the implementation of UNAMID’s exit strategy, in
accordance with resolution 2429 (2018).
On the future of Darfur, as members of the Security
Council we must take into consideration the impact of
stability in Darfur on the Sudan and its region. We
must not forget the great human, political and material
investments made first by the people of the Sudan, and
then by the African Union and the United Nations over a
decade and a half. We would be committing an injustice
against Darfur and its people if we allowed their hopes
for a life of dignity and a better future to be dashed. We
therefore call on the members of the Council to unite at
this critical juncture and resist divergence because of
our positions or slogans.
We have closely followed developments in the
Sudan and call on all parties to be calm, practice
maximum restraint, denounce violence and pursue
dialogue in order for the transitional political process
to be successful. We express our hope that the measures
taken to address the recent developments will achieve
security and stability in the brotherly Sudan and that
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

they will respond to the aspirations of its people. We
call on the Sudanese people to prioritize their national
interest over everything else with a view to achieving
unity, sovereignty, stability and territorial integrity in
the Sudan.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that what is happening
in the Sudan is a domestic affair that should not be
interfered with, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations. We call once again for all concerned to abide
by the Security Council resolutions on the Sudan.
We further call for our discussions to be limited
to our subject matter and not to allow the current
circumstances to divert us from what the Council has
agreed upon in its resolutions.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
Sudan is going through a phase of profound change.
Therefore, before addressing the issue of the prospects
for the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), I would like
to return to the political situation in Khartoum and its
consequences for Darfur.
First, with respect to the political situation,
France calls for the formation of a transitional civilian
Government to reactivate a democratic process and
enable elections to be held as soon as possible. We
therefore call for the early appointment of a consensual
transitional authority, led by civilians, to begin a
democratic process and hold free, inclusive and
transparent elections as soon as possible.
The Sudanese people have shown great maturity in
calling for reforms and political renewal at the country’s
helm. The voice of the people must be fully heard. Only
a credible and inclusive process will make it possible
to meet the aspirations of the Sudanese people and
ensure that the country enacts the necessary political
and economic reforms.
France is prepared to support a civilian transition
process and in that context to support the Sudanese
people in their aspiration to greater freedom, a strong
rule of law and sustainable and equitable development.
France takes note of the commitment of the Transitional
Military Council to pursue dialogue with the opposition
in order to establish a civilian transitional Government
and encourages all stakeholders to engage in dialogue
in a spirit of conciliation and consensus and to show
restraint in order to avert violence.

S/PV. 8513

We are convinced that justice for victims is vital in
order to build a lasting peace and a strong democracy.
The very grave crimes that have been committed in
the Sudan, in particular in Darfur, including sexual
violence and violence against children, should not go
unpunished. In that connection, I wish to recall the
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, in conformity with resolution 1593 (2005).
Secondly, in this context of transition, stability
must be preserved in Darfur. We are all clearly very
concerned at the possible repercussions on Darfur of
the political changes under way in the Sudan. France
is concerned about the incidents documented in Darfur
since last week, in particular those between security
forces, and we continue to closely monitor developments
on the ground.
Darfur remains a fragile region where the root
causes of conflict, in particular access to land and
the future of displaced persons, have not been truly
resolved. In that context, we must work together to
ensure that the changes under way do not rekindle the
conflict in Darfur. In recent years we have been able,
in particular thanks to UNAMID, to reduce the level of
violence; we must safeguard that achievement.
In that regard, it is important to swiftly establish
a civilian transition authority that is recognized by the
international community and could be a trustworthy
and responsible interlocutor for UNAMID and the
parties to the conflict. In that connection, I welcome
the mission entrusted by the Secretary-General to his
Special Adviser, Nicholas Haysom.
But we must go further. The major changes under
way in the Sudan could provide an opportunity to
relaunch the peace process. France calls on the future
Sudanese authorities and all armed groups to seize
this opportunity and engage in the peace process in
good faith. It is also crucial that the new Sudanese
authorities facilitate humanitarian access, put an end
to the restrictions on the movement of the UNAMID
and create the conditions necessary for the dignified,
safe and voluntary return of the more than 2 million
displaced persons.
Finally, on my third and final point, the situation
in the Sudan requires prudence with regard to the
timetable for UNAMID’s withdrawal. France has
always supported a gradual exit of UNAMID, taking
account of the situation on the ground. In the light of
what the Joint Special Representative, Mr. Mamabolo,

19-1133311/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

has just shared with us regarding the impact of the
situation on UNAMID, current events must lead us to
be even more prudent and to wait for the situation, in
particular the institutional situation, to stabilize before
we set a timetable for UNAMID’s exit.
I take this opportunity to reiterate our appreciation
for the work carried out by the mission under difficult
conditions as well as for the work of United Nations
agencies and humanitarian actors to provide vital
assistance, as Ms. Mueller has just underscored.
UNAMID’s withdrawal is essentially a transfer of
responsibility to the Sudanese State, and its exit must
therefore be conducted in close cooperation with the
Sudanese authorities. It is necessary to wait for new
authorities to be appointed to engage in dialogue with
them regarding the mission’s exit.
Through their peaceful mobilization in recent
weeks, the Sudanese people, in particular women and
young people, have set an example of dignity and
civic-mindedness. France hopes that the transitional
Government that will be established will fully live up
to the high standards set by that example and intends
to ensure that it has our collective support. It is up to
the Council to support the Sudan and to work to ensure
stability in Darfur in this transitional phase.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to express our appreciation to you, Mr. Minister of
State, for the timely convening of this meeting and for
the very important briefings delivered by Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo and Ms. Ursula Mueller.
As a number of speakers before me have noted, we
cannot fail to refer to recent events such as the overthrow
of President Omer Al-Bashir and the ongoing protests
in much of the country. The message of the Sudanese
people is clear: they are demanding profound change
and the democratization of the country. Peru supports
the legitimate aspirations of the Sudanese people for a
civil administration that would put in place a peaceful,
trustworthy and inclusive transition process, with all
represented parties, that would make it possible to
undertake the necessary constitutional reforms and to
set out once again on the path to democracy through
the holding of free and fair elections in a reasonable
time frame.
In this context, the support of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development is important so as to ensure a peaceful
12/22

17/04/2019

transition, taking account in particular of the serious
humanitarian and social situation in the country,
particularly in Darfur.
We deplore the fact that the gains made in
December in the Darfur peace process could be
affected by the political crisis. We refer here to the
recent outbreaks of violence in refugee camps and to
the decision of the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi to reverse
their agreement to renew talks with the Sudanese
Government in January.
Also alarming is the decision of the opposition
Sudan Call alliance to withdraw from the agreement
on the road map to put an end to the conflict in the
Sudan in the context of the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel, signed in 2016 with
the Government.
Given this complex political juncture, we deem it
vital to revert to the agreements reached and put an end
to the violence. We call on all parties to cease hostilities
in Darfur definitively, so that it becomes possible to
resolve pending substantive issues through dialogue.
We commend the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
its cooperation with the national and local authorities,
the country team and other related groups to facilitate
the mediation and reach sustainable solutions to the
driving forces of the conflict, including access to land
and resources.
We would also express our deep concern at the
grave situation of human rights in Darfur and regret
that in many cases, violations of fundamental rights
affecting internally displaced persons, especially
women and girls, have been associated with the
Sudanese Armed Forces.
In this context, it is of the greatest importance that
UNAMID be able to effectively implement its mandate
throughout Darfur, especially in the Jebel Marra area.
We hope that the Sudanese Government will be able
to guarantee the mission and humanitarian personnel
unfettered access to the zone.
While the process of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID is under way, as planned, the current context
presents a number of challenges for the mission’s exit
and its transition towards peacebuilding. To that end,
we deem it necessary that UNAMID’s withdrawal take
place in an atmosphere of caution, taking into account the
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

situation on the ground. The mobilization of resources
will be key in order to facilitate a peacebuilding process
that is satisfactory in the long run.
Finally, we wish to reiterate our support to the
African Union, the United Nations team, agencies of the
United Nations system and UNAMID for their efforts
to tackle the tremendous challenges facing Darfur on a
daily basis.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to welcome
your presence at this meeting, which highlights
the importance of the situation in the Sudan and
the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It congratulates the briefers, Mr. Mamabolo
and Ms. Mueller, and would like, in the light of their
detailed reports, to make the following comments on
the political situation in the Sudan and its impact on the
peace process in Darfur.
Côte d’Ivoire has been closely following the
recent developments in the political situation in the
Sudan, which has been marked by the deposition of
President Omer Al-Bashir and the establishment by the
Sudanese army of a Transitional Military Council for
a two-year period. The situation opens up an alarming
period of uncertainty given the potential risks of the
deterioration of the sociopolitical and security climate
and the possible repercussions on the region.
In that connection, my country urges the military
authorities to spare no effort to preserve peace and
stability in the Sudan. We therefore call on them to
engage as soon as possible in inclusive consultations
with all the country’s stakeholders with a view to
arriving at consensus solutions that respond to the deep
desires of the people of the Sudan, echoing the 15 April
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on the situation in the Sudan, which
urges the Transitional Military Council to transfer
power to the competent civilian and political figures as
soon as possible. We note the willingness expressed by
the military authorities to work with the opposition to
establish a civilian Government and respect the Sudan’s
international obligations. We encourage them to
conduct that process in accordance with the guidelines
and due diligence of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union in order to restore constitutional
order and hold democratic elections, which would
ensure peace and stability.

S/PV. 8513

With regard to Darfur, my delegation supports
the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/305), which notes the relative stability in the
region as a whole, with the exception of the Jebel
Marra area. We also welcome the fact that people are
gradually returning to their areas of origin and that
UNAMID is assisting local authorities in managing
intercommunal tensions and ensuring access to land
and resources. However, those achievements should
not make us lose sight of the many challenges related
to finding viable solutions to the root causes of the
conflict, the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur and the persistent sexual and genderbased violence.
My country believes that resolving the crisis in
Darfur depends on the implementation of an inclusive
political process, involving all stakeholders, including
the movements that have not signed the Doha Document.
We therefore remain concerned about the withdrawal
of some of the non-signatory movements from peace
negotiations and of the Sudan Call alliance from the
2016 Roadmap Agreement of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, following decisions taken
by the Sudanese Government in response to popular
protests in the country. We therefore urge the armed
groups to work together with the Sudanese authorities
to ensure that the hostilities are truly at an end. We also
urge all the stakeholders working to resolve the crisis
in Darfur who have influence on the parties to redouble
their efforts and ensure that the Sudan Call alliance
rejoins the peace talks.
My delegation calls on the new authorities to work
to safeguard the achievements of the peace process
in Darfur. We continue to believe that a successful
transition will be an unquestionable advantage in solving
the problems encountered in mobilizing resources to
implement the peace agreements. It is also essential to
ensure that the international community, along with
regional and subregional stakeholders, supports the
authorities in their quest for viable solutions to the root
causes of the conflicts with the aim of guaranteeing
resilience in Darfur.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
international community, the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to remain committed to providing
assistance to the Sudan, which is at a crucial stage in
its history, in order to preserve the achievements of the
political process under way in Darfur and to respond to

19-1133313/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Sudanese people’s deep desire for peace, democracy
and development.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank the briefers for their statements. I
would like to underscore three points: first, the need
for a credible and inclusive transition in the Sudan;
secondly, the situation in Darfur; and thirdly, the
importance of fighting impunity.
First, the situation in Darfur must be considered in
the broader context of the whole country and cannot
be seen in isolation. Belgium is concerned about the
current situation in the Sudan. We reiterate our call for
showing restraint in the use of force, avoiding violence
and ensuring full respect for human rights, including
freedom of assembly and freedom to demonstrate.
Belgium welcomes the 15 April communiqué of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
(AU), which emphasizes the importance of arriving
as soon as possible at a solution to the current crisis
that is based on respect for the constitutional order
and reflects the aspirations of the Sudanese people.
The communiqué also requires the Sudanese military
to hand over power to a civilian-led transitional
political authority, in accordance with the will of the
people and the constitutional order. A consultative and
inclusive process that involves all political actors and
stakeholders should ensure consensus on a transition
led by civilians and lead to the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections as soon as possible.
Belgium has noted the announcement of the release
of political prisoners, an essential measure that will
help to establish a climate of mutual trust with a view
to reconciliation.
At this fragile moment, it is important that in
recognition of the crucial role of the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Security Council should back their efforts to find a
peaceful solution, and we support the efforts of the
Secretary-General in that regard.
Secondly, the situation in the Sudan has an
undeniable impact on the issue of Darfur and the peace
process. The Council should therefore continue to
monitor the situation in the rest of the country closely
and assess its effect on the drawdown and exit process
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. In that regard, we look forward to the joint
report of the United Nations and the African Union
on the strategic review. In any case, we must take a
14/22

17/04/2019

cautious approach to the withdrawal that ensures that
the continued United Nations presence in Darfur is
adequate. In general, establishing the rule of law and
ensuring a fundamental respect for human rights
are key elements for Darfur’s future. The protection
of civilians, an improved humanitarian situation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security-sector reform remain essential to a lasting
solution to the crisis.
Finally, combating impunity is at the heart
of the protesters’ demands in the Sudan. Human
rights violations are among the root causes of the
conflicts there, and we have not forgotten the issue
of the outstanding arrest warrants of the International
Criminal Court. As we know, the Security Council
referred the situation in the Sudan, or more precisely in
Darfur, through resolution 1593 (2005). Based on that,
the Court issued arrest warrants for five individuals.
Belgium would like to point out that resolution 1593
(2005) stipulates that the Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict in Darfur have the obligation to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor and provide them with all necessary
assistance. It is essential to ensure accountability for
past actions.
In conclusion, I would like to express Belgium’s
solidarity with the people of the Sudan and their desire
for a peaceful solution to the situation in their country.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening and presiding over today’s meeting. We
agree with most of your views and recommendations
with regard to Darfur and the situation in the Sudan.
We also want to thank the African Union-United
Nations Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), Ambassador Jeremiah Mamabolo, for his
enlightening briefing, as well as the useful information
provided by Ms. Ursula Mueller.
We are particularly grateful to UNAMID for
their continued efforts in Darfur in their pursuit of
peace albeit under difficult security and climate
change-related challenges. The united efforts of the
United Nations and the international community have
led to substantial progress in building peace in Darfur
and the wider region. Our continued efforts should
preserve the gains that have been made in recent years.
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is our hope that the developments in Khartoum will
not negatively affect the gains made thus far.
We should continue to build on the gains made
in advancing the Darfur peace process and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. It is important that the international community
continue to support those important processes and
encourage all stakeholders to implement the outstanding
provisions of the various commissions and agreements.
It is imperative that adequate support be provided to
internally displaced persons, particularly focusing
on the prevention of sexual violence against women
and children.
The importance of humanitarian support to affected
areas in the Sudan remains a significant lifeline for
many people. It is essential that there be an eventual
transition from humanitarian support to reconstruction
and development in the Darfur area as UNAMID
ultimately exits. Let me pay tribute to development
partners for their kind generosity and humanitarian
assistance to Darfur and the wider Sudan.
South Africa supports the fact that UNAMID should
continue its mission and the course for the drawdown.
But I would like to ask Joint Special Representative
Ambassador Mamabolo if he is proposing a revised
timetable for the drawdown in Darfur given the current
political situation in Khartoum.
We would like to make the following remarks on
the situation in the Sudan and Khartoum.
First, with regard to the wider Sudan, it is critical
that the Sudanese people seize this opportunity to
address all their current differences and ensure an
inclusive arrangement for all Sudanese people as they
find a durable settlement for the current crisis because
the developments in Darfur are inextricably linked to
those in the Sudan and the wider region.
Second, South Africa underscores the importance
of a credible and inclusive transition and transparent
processes and arrangements that will assist in unifying
the Sudan.
Third, the international community should rally
behind the aspirations of the Sudanese people as a whole
as they find a pathway to the future of their country.
Fourth, in its engagement in the Sudan the
Council should further be guided by the regional
approaches and through the African Union (AU) and

S/PV. 8513

the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The
African Union Peace and Security Council communiqué
of 15 April on the situation in the Sudan urgently
appeals to all the AU partners and the international
community to support their efforts through the adopted
communiqué. The unity of the Council in supporting
that approach is vital.
Fifth, the Council should support the SecretaryGeneral’s endeavours in supporting the African Union
in trying to find an acceptable settlement of the Sudan
crisis through peaceful means.
Sixth, South Africa is of the firm view that support
to the Sudanese economy is essential. The need to
address the socioeconomic needs of the Sudanese
people will be paramount in the rebuilding of the
Sudan, as that constitutes part of the root causes of the
current impasse.
Seventh, on accountability, we should give space to
the Sudanese to utilize their own internal mechanisms
to address accountability issues and chart their future.
That will also lay the groundwork for the future peace and
reconciliation of the Sudanese people and, if possible,
promote ethnic, religious and regional tolerance.
Lastly, it is important that the Council call for
calm and for the situation to be resolved peacefully and
amicably through inclusive political processes.
We would like to express our appreciation to the
AU High-level Implementation Panel, led by former
President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki, former
President of Nigeria Abdulsalami Abubakar and former
Foreign Minister of Algeria Ambassador Lamamra.
The Sudan is the biggest African country in terms
of landmass. It borders with more than nine African
countries and numerous countries currently facing
security challenges, as we all know. The manner in
which the Council approaches the Sudanese crisis and
its resolution may have a particular impact on Darfur
and the neighbourhood.
Let us find a common cause and assist the Sudanese
in finding one another as they build peace. We hope
that our own national interests will not outweigh the
interests of the Sudanese people.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): We very much welcome your
presence, Mr. Minister, here among us today. We also
wish to thank Joint Special Representative Ambassador
Mamabolo and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula

19-1133315/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mueller for their comprehensive briefings, including
on the recent developments in the Sudan.
A number of representatives have referred to the
developing situation in Khartoum. Poland also closely
follows the developments, including in the Sudan.
Like other delegations, we support the aspirations
of the Sudanese people to an inclusive, peaceful and
democratic transition, good governance and social and
economic well-being. We support the African Union
call for a swift transition to a civilian Government.
We call on the new Sudanese authorities not
to lose sight of Darfur. With the drawdown of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), we are at a crucial turning point
and the new civilian Government should do its utmost
to provide security, rule of law and basic services in
Darfur. Protecting civilians, promoting intercommunal
reconciliation and dealing with the root causes of the
conflict should be among the top priorities.
Poland welcomes the relative stability of the
security situation in Darfur. At the same time, we are
aware that the progress that has been made is both
volatile and reversible. In that context, we remain
concerned about the continued clashes in Jebel Marra
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid, and the incidents of
intercommunal conflict, which Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller highlighted, and which make it clear
that Darfur requires the Security Council’s continued
attention. I could not agree more with Mr. Annen that it
also requires a long-term engagement on the part of the
international community.
We note with regret and are deeply troubled by
the fact that the human rights violations, in particular
sexual and gender-based violence, as mentioned by
the representative of South Africa, continue to occur
in Darfur. We strongly condemn any targeting of
the civilian population — including by Government
security personnel — especially those who are most
vulnerable, that is women, children and internally
displaced persons. The authorities should spare no
effort to hold the perpetrators accountable and should
do their utmost to fight impunity in Darfur. It is also
vital to address the human rights situation with regard
to ensuring long-term stability in the Sudan, because
human rights violations and abuses are both root causes
of the conflicts and also a constant feature of conflicts
and their concomitant violence. In that context, we
16/22

17/04/2019

welcome the cooperation of the Sudanese authorities
with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and look forward to seeing the new authorities
continue that cooperation.
We reiterate our position that there can be no
solution to conflict in Darfur other than a political
one. We regret that the recent changes in the Sudan’s
internal situation have led to a loss of the momentum
in the peace process and hope that it can be resumed in
the near future.
To repeat once again what we have said on many
occasions in this Chamber, it is our strong belief
that during the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur, particular emphasis should
be put on socioeconomic conditions there with regard
to the provision of basic services, job opportunities,
education for children, basic economic infrastructure,
agriculture and so on, as well as on establishing the
effective rule of law and good governance across the
region. Nor should we forget about the very challenging
humanitarian situation, which as Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller rightly pointed out has been exacerbated
by the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions.
Cooperation among the Government of the Sudan,
the local authorities in Darfur, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team is key to a successful
transition, as are adequate resources. We believe that
the international community should join in the efforts
on the ground in support of recovery and development
in Darfur, or we may run the risk of a relapse into
conflict. As I have already said, the progress we have
achieved is both volatile and reversible. With regard
to the drawdown of UNAMID, we continue to believe
that the Security Council should closely monitor the
impact on the ground of the downsizing of the mission
in order to ensure that the gains achieved in Darfur will
be durable and not be compromised. We look forward
to receiving the results of the strategic assessment of
UNAMID in the context of our upcoming discussion of
the mission’s mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel and the United
Nations country team for their continued dedication
and contribution to the promotion of peace, security,
stability and reconciliation in Darfur.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union, and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their detailed briefings on the situation
in Darfur.
To be honest, after hearing a number of our
colleagues’ statements, we have the distinct impression
that they mistook today’s meeting as an opportunity
mainly to discuss the internal situation in the Sudan
rather than the situation in Darfur. In our view, that
is not right. The Security Council has no mandate to
discuss the evolving political processes in that country.
It is important to avoid any statements or actions that
could be interpreted as interfering in its internal affairs,
and we urge all our colleagues in the Council to keep
that in mind.
As far as the state of affairs in Darfur itself is
concerned, we note that on the whole the situation in
the region has remained stable. There have been no
reports of major armed clashes for some time, and
intercommunal violence is now virtually non-existent.
The Sudanese Government has done a great deal to
normalize life in Darfur, and we hope that those efforts
will continue. It is important that, given the positive
momentum in the region, the process of further
drawing down the military component of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) continues in accordance with resolution
2429 (2018). We share the view that in order to prevent
any relapses into conflict we must avoid the possibility
of creating a power vacuum in the region and focus on
building the capacity of State institutions in Darfur. We
consider this the main task of the transition concept for
UNAMID endorsed in the resolution and designed to
support the Sudanese people in the context of the start
of the peacebuilding phase of the Darfur settlement.
We emphasize the importance of ensuring that
donors deliver on the pledges they have made at previous
donor conferences. Together with a relaxation of the
unilateral sanctions on the Sudan, we believe that should
help to normalize the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in the Sudan as a whole and resolve issues
related to peacebuilding and strengthening security
in Darfur.
We are pleased that almost all the provisions of the
2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have been
implemented. It is regrettable that the unreconciled
armed opposition, while it has lost its presence on the
ground, has not given up its attempts to destabilize
the situation and incite a new wave of violence in the

S/PV. 8513

region. It has been clear for a long time that the reason
the Darfur peace process is stalled is because of the
unconstructive negotiating position of the unreconciled
parties, including the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid. That is clearly the story behind the refusal of
the movements that did not sign the Doha Document to
implement the 6 December pre-negotiation agreement
concluded in Berlin and mediated by the African
Union. Here we should also point to the Sudan Call
alliance’s decision of 20 March to withdraw from
Thabo Mbeki’s amended Roadmap Agreement. It is
regrettable that in reporting such facts the Secretariat
is making the same appeals to everyone concerned. We
are convinced that courting the unreconciled parties in
this way only harms the peace process. We also believe
that rather than encouraging radicals to hold meetings
in their capitals, the external sponsors of the Sudanese
opposition should urge them to come up with more
realistic demands that respond to the goal of advancing
the peace process.
Considering all of this, we see no basis for linking
the events in Khartoum of 11 April with the processes of
the UNAMID withdrawal and the review of the Darfur
sanctions regime, which should progress in accordance
with the existing plans.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to
join others in expressing our appreciation to Joint
Special Representative Jeremiah Mamabolo and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings.
We note recent incidents of violence in Darfur,
including clashes in Kalma camp. Yet we have all said
time and again that the overall security situation in
Darfur remains relatively stable. My delegation draws
reassurance from a significant decline in intercommunal
conflicts, made possible by the active engagement of
State and local authorities supported by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The gradual return of internally displaced
persons, as attested to in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/305), is particularly encouraging. My
delegation cannot overstate the importance of their safe,
voluntary and dignified return. We concur with the
observations that those trends showcase the stabilizing
impact of UNAMID. Indeed, continued improvement in
the security situation has enabled a phased withdrawal
of UNAMID and the implementation of the plan for
its eventual exit in 2020, in line with resolution 2429

19-1133317/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/04/2019

(2018). Against that backdrop, my delegation would like
to make three important points.

including its Peace and Security Council, concerning
the situation in the Sudan.

First, it is imperative to promote further progress in
the Darfur peace process. We regret that no meaningful
progress has been made over the past few months. It is
deeply troubling that clashes involving certain groups
that repeatedly rejected the peace process increased
during the reporting period, and Darfuri armed groups
continue to maintain their destabilizing presence outside
the Sudan. My delegation stands by its conviction that a
military solution is not an option in Darfur. All parties
should end hostilities and direct their energy to the
negotiating table rather than the battlefront. The plight
of the civilian population should be reason enough
to revitalize the process. We therefore welcome the
declaration of a nationwide ceasefire and the invitation
extended to all armed groups to participate in the peace
process and contribute to rebuilding the country.

After years of conflict, Darfuris deserve peace,
stability and prosperity. Momentum in realizing that
hope has been created. It is our conviction that we all
must work together to preserve and capitalize on what
has been achieved thus far in Darfur. For Indonesia,
that would be our clear priority. No party should take
advantage of the situation in the Sudan to let Darfur
backslide into conflict. All stakeholders must exercise
calm and maximum restraint and act in a way that
supports the climate of peace in the country.

Secondly, the sustained engagement of the
international community based on mutual respect
and national ownership is key to preventing a relapse
into conflict. UNAMID will continue to play an
instrumental role in protecting civilians as well as
supporting capacity-building with respect to the rule of
law and human rights. As we proceed with UNAMID’s
withdrawal, it is important to enable the Sudan to bear
the primary responsibility for security in Darfur.
Also critical to preventing a relapse into conflict
is the promotion of socioeconomic development.
That would require sustainable financing support
for reconstruction and peacebuilding efforts. With
1.9 million people still displaced across the country and
1.2 million refugees from the region residing within its
borders, humanitarian assistance becomes a daunting
but essential task.
Indonesia is very concerned that the situation in the
Sudan continues to be compounded by the impact of
the worsening economy crisis and food insecurity. The
release of $26.5 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund a few days ago to provide life-saving
assistance to the Sudanese people could not be timelier.
However, they still need much more.
That brings me to my third point. My delegation
continues to observe very carefully the recent situation
in the Sudan. Indonesia reaffirms its principle of
non-interference and respect for Sudanese sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In that regard we welcome the
role of the African Union as the regional mechanism,
18/22

I should like to conclude by commending the
critical work of UNAMID in Darfur. Indonesia is
proud to be part of UNAMID, represented presently
by 472 peacekeepers. We reaffirm our support for our
Sudanese brothers and sisters in taking ownership
of their destiny and in their quest to find a peaceful
solution in their country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes your presence, Sir, to preside over
the deliberations today. We thank Mr. Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), and Ms. Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings.
In recent years Darfur, in the Sudan, has maintained
a stable security situation on the whole. Since the
implementation of UNAMID’s transition plan began in
the second half of last year, Darfur has continued to
remain stable. However, Darfur is still confronted with
some challenges. In view of the current situation, the
international community should focus its efforts on the
following two aspects.
First, it is imperative to continue to advance the
political and peace processes. Darfur is presently at
a key juncture, transitioning from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. The international community should
continue to advance the relevant political and peace
processes in a bid to achieve a steady and smooth
transition. The parties to this issue should continue their
restraint, avoid the use of force and jointly safeguard
the peace and stability of Darfur. Some opposition
and armed groups should abandon military solutions
in earnest, actively participate in the peace process
and resolve their tensions and differences politically
through dialogue and consultations.
19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8513

Secondly, it is necessary to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance and economic support. The
humanitarian situation in Darfur is still challenging.
The foundation for economic and social development is
still weak. Those factors will affect the long-term peace
and stability of Darfur. The international community
should continue to honour its commitment by actively
providing humanitarian assistance and economic
support. The current focus should be on helping with
the return and the settlement of Sudanese internally
displaced persons, building and improving local
infrastructure and improving agricultural development.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Your presence among us here this morning,
Mr. Minister, underscores the importance of this meeting
and that which your country places in its current role
as President of the Security Council for April. I also
express my gratitude to Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo for
updating us not only on the current situation in Darfur,
but also with regard to the country and the events that
the Sudan is experiencing. We also thank Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
her informative briefing.

China welcomes the necessary support from
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant bodies
for the reconstruction and development of the Sudan.
China commends UNAMID’s contribution to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur and
supports its continued activities, in accordance with the
mandate to ensure the implementation of the priorities
that have been given to it. China hopes the Secretariat
and the African Union will keep in close contact and
conduct full and objective assessments of issues such as
the implementation of UNAMID’s transition plan and
Darfur’s transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
so as to provide timely and feasible suggestions to the
Security Council.

We are very concerned about the violence that is
negatively affecting the people in Darfur, especially
those in the internally displaced persons camps in the
aftermath of the overthrow of General Al-Bashir. With
regard to the current political situation, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following current political developments in Khartoum
following the removal of General Omer Al-Bashir, the
resignation of the Head of the Transitional Military
Council, Awad Mohamed Ahmed Bin Auf, and the
appointment of his replacement, General Abdel
Fattah Al-Burhan Abdelrahman, which we believe to
be actions taken for the benefit of the people and in
response to their demands. In that regard, my country
reminds the Transitional Military Council of its role
in safeguarding the security of citizens and listening
closely to their demands to ensure the stability of
the country. Moreover, we welcome the negotiations
under way between the Transitional Military Council
and the political parties on how to guide the Sudan
towards establishing a civilian Government. We
hope that the visit by the members of the Transitional
Military Council to the African Union in Addis
Ababa and the visit to Khartoum by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission will contribute to a
complete normalization of the situation in the country.
Accordingly, we take note of and support the call of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
the Transitional Military Council urging it to transfer
power to a civilian Government.

The Sudan is an important country in Africa and
in the Arab region. Maintaining stability there not
only serves the long-term and fundamental interests of
the Sudanese people but also contributes to the peace
and the security of the wider region and of Africa as a
whole. China follows closely the developments in the
Sudan. The Transitional Military Council has engaged
with parties in the Sudan to carry out dialogue and
listen to their aspirations. China welcomes and supports
that development and hopes the relevant parties in the
Sudan can build consensus and jointly advance the
process of political transition and safeguard stability,
order and development in the Sudan. The international
community should respect the decisions made by the
Sudanese people themselves and adhere to the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Along with the wider international community,
China stands ready to jointly play a constructive role in
promoting stability and development in the Sudan and
in Darfur.

We regret the slow progress in the political process
based on Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. In that
regard, increased support needs to be provided for the
political process, led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Equatorial Guinea continues
to believe that, in order to resolve land disputes
leading to violence, mediation and reconciliation

19-1133319/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts are needed to prevent and end such conflicts.
We commend the efforts of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in its
weapons collection campaign. Its full implementation
is of the utmost importance not only for preserving the
current peaceful situation in Darfur but also in view
of restoring lasting peace to that area, especially given
that this important programme is now being carried out
in the area of Jebel Marra.
Equatorial Guinea requests that, given the current
political situation in the Sudan, the international
community agree to confer the necessary level of
trust upon the Transitional Military Council so that
the prerequisite negotiations can be carried out among
all the political actors to establish a stable transitional
Government and lead to the holding of peaceful and
inclusive elections in the Sudan.
I warmly congratulate the Mr. Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative of the African Union and
the Secretary-General for Darfur, and the entire
UNAMID team and urge them to continue their work
to improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I conclude
by expressing my hope that the situation in the Sudan
will be normalized as soon as possible with the actions
that the Transitional Military Council is taking, which
are likely to have a positive impact on the situation
in Darfur and end the violence that Mr. Mamabolo
mentioned earlier.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over
this morning’s meeting. I would also like to express
my thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2019/305). I also thank Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their valuable briefings.
We have reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Darfur, which stresses that
the security situation throughout Darfur is improving,
with the one exception of the area under the control
of Abdul Wahid Mohamed Nour in Jebel Marra. His
troops are attacking the armed forces and civilians in
neighbouring towns. In turn, the military and security
forces confront those attacks to protect civilians.

20/22

17/04/2019

In the past period, Central Darfur state has
focused on issues related to strengthening security and
stability through the weapons collection campaign and
the restoration of State authority. That was done by
increasing police troops in order to ensure the voluntary
return of internally displaced persons and the success
of the harvest season. We hope that will positively
affect the security situation and living conditions
throughout Darfur states, which are improving daily
towards achieving stability and development. We
hope that those initiatives will enjoy the support of the
international community.
Some parts of the report before the Council have
been overtaken by time following the changes that took
place since the glorious revolution of December 2018.
In that regard, let me reiterate what I said to the Council
last week (see S/PV.8509) with regard to the Sudan’s
commitment to respecting all regional and international
agreements, treaties and conventions, including those
signed with the United Nations involving the deployment
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). I also reaffirm the Sudan’s
commitment to facilitate the work of the mission and
humanitarian organizations working in the Sudan, in
general, and Darfur in particular. In addition, I reiterate
that the Sudan looks forward to cooperating with the
Secretariat and the Security Council to implement
UNAMID’s exit strategy pursuant to resolution 2429
(2018) and according to the agreed time frame set forth
in the resolution, namely, June 2020.
Moreover, we expect our agreed plans to transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur to be
implemented, and we also look forward to the dialogue on
the report of UNAMID concerning its strategic review.
We hope that the recommendations of the report will be
in line with the objectives set forth for UNAMID’s exit
in 2020. We also hope that the report will be in keeping
with our aspirations for peacebuilding and sustained
peace in Darfur, as well as for UNAMID’s exit. That
would represent an example of success and a model that
truly embodies the meaning of partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations in the context of
peacekeeping and establishing peace in Africa.
We commend the intense efforts geared towards
concluding the peace process, and, once again, we
welcome peacebuilding, which means development and
an end to the conflict, in conjunction with the major
developments in my country following the glorious
December revolution.

19-11333

17/04/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

My country’s delegation would like to thank
UNAMID for everything that it has been able to
accomplish in a number of areas and for the sacrifices
of its peacekeepers in recent years. In that regard, we
thank the countries that have contributed military,
police or civilian personnel. We reiterate that the Sudan
is ready to cooperate with all regional and international
partners in all the different aspects of UNAMID until
it exits my country.
In conclusion, I wish to comment on the remarks
made by some members of Security Council. I clearly
state that what has been happening in the Sudan since
December 2018 is an internal matter, according to the
Charter of the United Nations. We do not believe that
there is any justification for the Security Council to
discuss this matter, especially because the exceptional
situation that the Sudan is currently experiencing
requires great caution so that stakeholders can conclude
their consultations on reaching a peaceful, smooth and
democratic transition of power. The same applies to the
Secretariat, which must adhere to its mandate in the
preparation of its reports.
We are keen to not take any step that might have
negative repercussions on the current situation. We are
also confident that the members of the Council share the
same concern. Those present and the entire world have
seen that the Sudanese revolution is a peaceful one that
seeks to bring about a change that the Sudanese people
desire. If the revolution, which has lasted for months, is
able to meet its aspirations, then the Sudanese people
will also be able to reach theirs and conclude their
peaceful and civilized revolution in a manner that is
appropriate to the circumstances and challenges of
our country.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo to
respond to the questions posed by the representatives of
the United Kingdom and South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo: The question from the
representative of the United Kingdom was on the
response of the formed police units to the incident in
Kalma. I want to start by saying that we have three
formed police units stationed in Kalma. The units are
from Pakistan and are supported by Bangladesh and
Burkina Faso. We must first understand the nature of
the conflict. It was really mostly between supporters
of Abdul Wahid and those that are perceived not to be
supporting Abdul Wahid. Upon receiving information,

S/PV. 8513

we immediately arrived there and gave first aid to the
injured, transferred the six injured to a hospital and
collected the bodies. We engaged with the community
leaders and made sure to create a buffer zone between
the groups that were fighting. Then began negotiations
by way of mediating between the community leaders of
the two groups to defuse the situation.
The other question, put forth by the representative
of South Africa, was on whether we are proposing a
revised timetable for the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I wish to say that we are acting in
accordance with resolution 2429 (2018), the term of
which ends in June 2019. Resolution 2429 (2018) is
intended to follow the exit strategy of UNAMID, which
says that by June 2020 UNAMID should be out of
Darfur. If we look at June 2019, we are just a couple
of months from that final destination and our plans
have already been made. We are therefore acting in
accordance with the decisions that have been taken and
agreed upon by the Security Council in terms of our
exit strategy.
The Security Council also took a decision that
we should have a strategic review to inform the new
mandate that is to follow, beginning July 2019 until June
2020. The Security Council will have the opportunity
in the near future to review that report. Experts did
come, but the strategic assessment team came before
we had what we are now experiencing in terms of
disturbances, which have created quite a lot of concern.
In my statement, I indicated that we cannot pretend that
nothing has happened on the ground, and we are also
concerned about that.
The fact is that we have actually given two weeks
for the handover of the camps that were meant to be
handed over, some of which we would have handed over
already by now. We decided that with the dissolution of
the State structure that it was not possible to go ahead
with the handover of those sectors, and that perhaps we
ought to give a period of two weeks to see what happens.
We have in the meantime engaged with the authorities
and we will have a meeting so as to understand who
our interlocutors from the Government side will be so
that we can continue. We have been informed that as of
tomorrow, it will be possible to have this meeting with
a view, hopefully, to being able to comply with the June
2019 time line of resolution 2429 (2018).

19-1133321/22

S/PV.8513

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In terms of going forward from July, that decision
will fall to the Security Council to make when it
analyses the report of the strategic assessment, which I
am sure it will have soon. I am sure that the assessment
will take everything into account, including the current
situation that we are witnessing in the Sudan.

22/22

17/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller to make some
additional comments.
Ms. Mueller: I always stand ready to respond to
questions from the Security Council. I did not hear any,
so I have no further comments.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-11333
