146

General Auembl7-Tw-t7-ninth Ses■ion

Noting that the United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the lntemational Sale of
Goods was held at United Nations Headquarters from
20 May to 14 June 1974 and that the Conference
adopted, on 12 June 1974, a Convention on the Limitation Period in the Intemational Sale of Goods, 111
Noting f urther that the Convention was opened for
signature by ali States on 14 June 1974 and will remain
open until 31 December 1975, in accordance with its
provisions, at United Nations Headquarters, and was
also opened for accession in accordance with its provisions,
Reaffirming the conviction, expressed in the foregoing resolutions, that the harmonization and unification
of national rules governing prescription (limitation)
in the international sale of goods would contribute to
the removal of obstacles to the development of world
trade,
Invites ali States which have not yet done so to
consider the possibility of signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention on the Limitation Period in the
lntemational Sale of Goods.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3318 (XXIX). Dttlaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and
Armed Conftict

The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council contained in its resolution
1861 (LVI) of 16 May 1974,
Expressing its deep concern over the sufferings of
women and children belonging to the civilian population who in periods of emergency and armed conflict in
the struggle for peace, self-determination, national liberation and independence are too often the victims of
inhuman acts and consequently suffer serious harm,
A ware of the suffering of women and children in
many arcas of the world, especially in those arcas
subject to suppression, aggression, colonialism, racism,
alien domination and foreign subjugation,
Deeply concerned by the fact that, despite · general
and unequivocal condemnation, colonialism, racism and
alíen and foreign domination continue to subject many
peoples under their yoke, cruelly suppressing the national liberation movements and inflícting heavy losses
and incalculable sufferings on the populations under
their domination, including women and children,
Deploring the fact that .grave attacks are still being
made on fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the
human person and that colonial and racist foreign domination Powers continue to violate international humanitarian law,
Recalling the relevant prov1s1ons contained in the
instruments of international humanitarian law relative
to the protection of women and children in time of
peace and war,
Recalling, among other important documents, its
resolutions 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2597
15 See Ofjicial Records of the United Nations Co11ference on
Prescription ( Limitation) in the Jntemational Sale o/ Goods
(United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.74.V.8), document
A/CONF.63/IS.

(XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and 2674 (XXV) and
2675 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, on respect for
human rights and on basic principies for the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, as well
as Economic and Social Council resolution l515
(XLVIII) of 28 May 1970 in which the Council requested the General Assembly to consider the possi·
bility of drafting a declaration on the protection of
women and children in emergency or wartime,
Conscious of its responsibility for the destiny of the
rising generation and for the destiny of mothers, who
play an important role in society, in the family and
particularly in the upbringing of children,
Bearing in mind the need to provide special protection of women and children belonging to the civilian
population,
Solemnly proclaims this Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict and calls for the strict observance of the Declaration by ali Member States:
1. Attacks and bombings on the civilian population, inflicting incalculable suffering, especially on
women and children, who are the most vulnerable
members of the population, shall be prohibited, and
such acts shall be condemned.
2. Toe use of chemical and bacteriological weapons in the course of military operations constitutes
one of the most flagrant violations of the Geneva
Protocol of 1925, 16 the Geneva Conventions of
1949 17 and the principies of intemational humanitarian law and inflicts heavy losses on civilian populations, including defenceless women and children,
and shall be severely condemned.
3. Ali States shall abide fully by their obligations
under the Geneva Protocol of 1925 and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, as well as other instruments of
international law relative to respect for human rights
in armed conflicts, which offer important guarantees
for the protection of women and children.
4. Ali efforts shall be made by States involved
in armed conflicts, military operations in foreign territories or military operations in territories still under colonial domination to spare women and children
from the ravages of war. Ali the necessary steps shall
be taken to ensure the prohibition of measures such
as persecution, torture, punitive measures, degrading treatment and violence, particularly against that
part of the civilian population that consists of women
and children.
5. Ali forms of repression and cruel and inhuman
treatment of women and children, including impris·
onment, torture, shooting, mass arrests, collective
punishment, destruction of dwellings and forcible
eviction, committed by belligerents in the course of
military operations or in occupied territories shall
be considered criminal.
6. Women and children belonging to the civilian
population and finding themselves in circumstances
of emergency and armed conflict in the struggle for
peace, self-determination, national liberation and independence, or who live in occupied territories, shall
not be deprived of shelter, food, medica! aid or other
inalienable rights, in accordance with the provisions
16 League

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,

p. 65.
11 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

Reeolu1ion1 adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 18 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 18 the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child 19 or other instruments of international law.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3319 (XXIX). Respect for human rights in armed
confticts

The Oeneral A.ssembly,
Conscious that a better application of existing humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts and the
development of further' rules remains an urgent task in
order to reduce the suffering brought about by ali such
conflicts,
Recalling the successive resolutions adopted in the
preceding years by the United Nations relating to human rights in armed confticts· and the debates on this
subject,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General 2º on the
first session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, held at
Geneva from 20 February to 29 March 19~4. and on
the Conference of Government Experts on Weapons
That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or Have Indiscriminate Effects, convoked by the International Committee of the Red Cross at Lucerne from 24 September
to 18 October 1974,
W elcoming the decision by the Diploma tic Confer·
ence to invite national liberation movements recognized
by the regional intergovernmental organizations concerned to participate in its work,
Welcoming the work of the first session of the Diplomatic Conference and the work of the Conference of
Government Experts,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking the second session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of lnternational Humanitarian Law Applicable
in Armed Conflicts in 1975 and to the lnternational
Committee of the Red Cross for its readiness to convoke in 1975 another Conference of Government Experts on Weapons That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or Have lndiscriminate Effects;
2. Urges ali participants in the Diplomatic Conference to do their utmost to reach agreement on additional rules which may help to alleviate the suffering
brought about by armed confticts and to respect and
to protect non-combatants and civilian objects in such
confticts;
3. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to ac·
knowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the humanitarian instruments and to observe the international humanitarian rules which are applicable, in
particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 21
18 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), anncx.
11 Resolution 1386 (XIV).
20 A/9669

and Add. l.

11 Carnegie Endowmcnt for lntcrnational

Pcacc, Tire Hague
Conv~ntions and Declarations 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press, 191.S).

147

the Geneva Protocol of 1925~~ and the Geneva Conventions of 1949;~ª
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on relevant
developments concerning human rights in armed confticts, in particular on the proceedings and results of
the 1975 session of the Diplomatic Conference;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the ítem entitled .. Respect for human rights in armed conflicts" and emphasizes the need
to allocate adequate time during that session to consider the results of both sessions of the Diplomatic
Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of
International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed
Confticts.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3320 (XXIX). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 24
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV)
of l 7 December 1970, 28 I 9 (XXVI) of 15 December
1•971, 3033 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3107
(XXVlll) of 12 December 1973, in which it urged
the Government of the host country to make certain
that the measures taken to ensure the protection and
security of permanent missions to the United Nations
and their personnel were adequate to enable those missions to perform properly the functions entrusted to
them by their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Government of
the·host country with respect to the United Nations and
the missions accredited to it, their personnel and their
correspondence under the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 211 the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations 26 and general intemational law,
Recalling the duty of ,missions accredited to the
United Nations and their personnel to respect the laws
and regulations of the host country,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, including the host country, as well as to the Secretary-General,
N oting the recommendations of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, contained in paragraph 88 of its report,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,
1. Expresses its deep concern at incidents which
have taken place at sorne missions accredited to the
United Nations and which have involved the personnel
of these missions;
22 Lcaguc of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
23 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7.S, Nos. 970-973.
2• Oflicia/ Records o/ the General .As.umbly, Twenty-mlllh
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/9626).
i5 Resolution 169 (II).
2s Resolution 22 A (1).

----~------ - - - - - - - - -
