S/2007/753

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to an exchange of letters between my predecessor and the
President of the Security Council in November 2001 (S/2001/1128 and
S/2001/1129) relating to the establishment of the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA). I also wish to refer to an exchange of letters between my
predecessor and the President of the Security Council in October 2004 (S/2004/797
and S/2004/858) relating to the extension of the mandate of UNOWA for three
years, from 1 January 2005 to 31 December 2007, subject to a mid-term review. In
that connection, it would be recalled that on 18 May 2007, I transmitted to the
Council a mid-term review of the activities and performance of UNOWA prepared
by an independent consultant from September 2006 to November 2006 (S/2007/294,
annex).
The importance of the work of UNOWA has been acknowledged on several
occasions, including in the Security Council presidential statement adopted on
25 February 2005 (S/PRST/2005/9), following the Council’s debate on the progress
report of the Secretary-General on ways to combat subregional problems in West
Africa (S/2005/86). The Council noted with appreciation the enhanced cooperation
among the various United Nations political and peacekeeping missions in the
subregion, and encouraged UNOWA to promote an integrated and joint subregional
approach to conflict prevention. Furthermore, in its presidential statement of
9 August 2006 (S/PRST/2006/38), the Council emphasized the regional dimension
of peace and security in West Africa, and encouraged the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the United Nations missions in the region
to continue their efforts in coordinating United Nations activities to ensure their
improved cohesion and maximum efficiency. On 13 March 2007, I submitted to the
Security Council, at its request, a report on cross-border issues in West Africa
(S/2007/143), with recommendations for enhancing United Nations interinstitutional cooperation in the region on these issues.
UNOWA has continued to increase awareness of and to facilitate concerted and
integrated action on key subregional challenges, which the Security Council and the
Secretariat consider to be among the root causes of instability in West Africa. The
Office has helped formulate recommendations and strategies on how best to address
those issues, notably through national and cross-border collaboration among
United Nations entities in the subregion, including United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions as well as governmental and non-governmental actors.

07-65656 (E) 261207

*0765656*

S/2007/753

Concerning collaboration among United Nations peace missions in the
subregion, as recommended by the Security Council in its presidential statement of
25 May 2004 (S/PRST/2004/17) and underscored in my predecessor’s report of
2 March 2005 on inter-mission cooperation (S/2005/135), my Special
Representative for West Africa continues to convene quarterly meetings between the
heads of the various political and peacekeeping missions in West Africa. Those
meetings have been instrumental for the sharing of information and perspectives on
political developments in the respective mission areas and their regional impact on
peace, security and stability. In addition, UNOWA continues to facilitate intermission cooperation at the military level through regular meetings of United Nations
force commanders and military advisers, as well as at the expert level regular
meetings of officers in charge of human rights, humanitarian, gender issues and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Furthermore, UNOWA seeks to
enhance synergy and complementarity with United Nations missions in the sharing
of assets, notably with a view to maximizing the use of United Nations resources. In
this context, the Office shares air assets with other United Nations operations and
agencies in the subregion and collaborates with United Nations specialized agencies
on integrated cross-border strategies and joint activities, often with the involvement
of civil society organizations, as appropriate.
During its current mandate, UNOWA has continued to strengthen its
cooperation with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), as
defined in a joint workplan covering good offices and participation in joint highlevel missions (most recently during the January 2007 developments in Guinea);
regular meetings between the focal points of both institutions; working group
meetings; activities in the field; and cooperation through the UNOWA/ECOWAS/
European Union troika framework and the International Contact Groups for the
Mano River Basin and on Guinea-Bissau. In the context of its work on integrated
strategies for border areas, the Office contributed to the implementation of the
ECOWAS initiative on borders as zones of peace and has helped raise awareness on
the following four security challenges in West Africa, and the related international
response: irregular migration; security threats and illicit trafficking and piracy; the
use and effectiveness of sanctions; and the consequences of rapid urbanization.
As highlighted in the recent report on the mid-term review of the work of
UNOWA (S/2007/294), efforts aimed at promoting an integrated subregional
approach to the complex peace and security challenges facing West Africa require
long-term sustained interaction between regional States and institutions and their
international partners, including the United Nations system. Much progress has been
made but even more remains to be done to build on the momentum and to make the
progress irreversible.
In light of the foregoing, I would like to recommend that the mandate of
UNOWA, whose functions and activities would be revised as reflected in the
document annexed hereto, be extended for a further period of three years, from
1 January 2008 to 31 December 2010, subject to a mid-term review to be conducted
in 2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

07-65656

S/2007/753

Annex
Mandate and functions of the United Nations Office for
West Africa from January 2008 to December 2010
I.

Mandate
The United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) is entrusted with the
overall mandate of enhancing the contribution of the United Nations towards the
achievement of peace and security priorities in West Africa.

II.

Objectives, functions and activities
In the performance of its mandate, UNOWA will pursue the following
objectives and fulfil the functions and related activities as noted below:
Objective 1
Enhance capability within West Africa towards a harmonized subregional
approach to peace and security
Function 1.1
Facilitate systematic and regular linkages in the work of the United Nations in
the subregion for defining and harmonizing national and subregional policies and
strategies, with due regard to specific mandates of United Nations organizations, as
well as peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding support offices.
Activities
• Facilitate inter-mission and inter-agency cooperation among United Nations
missions in the subregion at the political level (for example, holding quarterly
meetings of the heads of peace missions in West Africa); at the military level
(regular meetings of United Nations force commanders and military advisers
assigned in the subregion); and at the expert level (regular meetings of officers
in charge of human rights, humanitarian, security sector reform, economic
governance and gender issues).
• Hold regular consultations of heads of United Nations regional agencies for
West Africa to develop common strategies.
• Establish and conduct activities of subregional working groups aiming to
foster greater interaction among the various planning and response tools being
used by the United Nations system.
• Identify and raise awareness on emerging threats to peace and security
(i.e. drug trafficking, human trafficking, irregular migration, unattended socioeconomic tensions and the impact of natural disasters on the livelihood of
people). Particular attention will be given to the Sahelian band and fragile
States.
• Identify positive trends and promote activities in consultation with and
participation of the private sector, including civil society organizations, to
raise awareness of subregional issues and United Nations approaches.

07-65656

3

S/2007/753

• Reinforce cooperation on cross-cutting issues, including the rule of law,
economic issues, human rights and gender issues aimed at mainstreaming them
in the deliberations/recommendations of joint initiatives with Governments,
civil society, the academic and private sectors, and other partners in the region.
• Make use of UNOWA’s leverage, political and strategic network to rally
international support to subregional efforts and national commitments to tackle
cross-cutting threats to human security and subregional peace.
Function 1.2
Liaise with and assist, as appropriate, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Mano River Union and other key partners in their
promotion of peace and stability in the subregion.
Activities
• Implement and update the joint programme of work developed by UNOWA
and the ECOWAS Commission to address selected areas relating to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
• Assist the ECOWAS Commission in the implementation of its comprehensive
Strategic Conflict Prevention Framework, as well as the ECOWAS Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Security.
• Implement subregional action plans, strategies and recommendations
formulated with/by ECOWAS and other key partners, including the civil
society and the private sector.
• Promote awareness of the need to address the protection of children, youth,
and women during crises as priority issues in West Africa.
• Strengthen cooperation with the International Contact Group for the Mano
River Basin.
• Strengthen cooperation with international partners, including the European
Union (within the agreed framework of ECOWAS/European Union/UNOWA
cooperation) and the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as regional partners
such as civil society organizations and the private sector.
Function 1.3
Perform good offices role in countries of the subregion on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding efforts.
Activities
• Identify situations that could generate tension and fuel local, national or crossborder conflicts.
• Carry out good offices functions and special assignments in countries of the
subregion, on behalf of the Secretary-General.

4

07-65656

S/2007/753

• Facilitate the development of an integrated subregional early warning and
monitoring system among the United Nations entities and other regional
partners active on peace operations in West Africa.
• Promote an integrated subregional approach by supporting and partnering with
ECOWAS and other subregional partners in their conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts.
Objective 2
Enhance efforts towards addressing cross-border issues, including good
governance practices and measures; mainstreaming security sector reform into
development strategies; formulating a meaningful, effective and integrated
subregional approach that encompasses priorities and concerns related to
humanitarian, human rights and gender issues; curbing corruption, youth
unemployment, rapid urbanization, transitional justice and cross-border illicit
activities
Function 2.1
Promote good governance practices and confidence-building measures,
including curbing corruption and improving electoral processes.
Activities
• Undertake regular consultations and contribute to the deepening of civic
education aimed at strengthening democratic, transparent and accountable
governance in the States of the subregion.
• Assist ECOWAS and its member States in their efforts to improve electoral
processes through a more robust election-monitoring capacity.
• Follow up on implementation of a subregional approach to the greater
involvement of women in peace and security issues, within the framework of
the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).
• Facilitate the identification of practical ways of curbing or minimizing
emerging or potential tensions in specific border areas of West Africa,
including through the formulation of integrated border strategies. Assist
ECOWAS in the implementation of its initiative on borders as zones of peace.
Function 2.2
Integrated approach to security sector reform as part of economic development
strategies.
Activities
• Undertake broad consultations with Governments, and, in particular, security
institutions, civil society and development partners on gender, poverty
alleviation, human rights and humanitarian mainstreaming in security sector
reforms.
• Promote capacity-building of armed and security forces in civic, human rights,
humanitarian and gender approaches as part of security sector reforms.

07-65656

5

S/2007/753

Function 2.3
Develop and promote better knowledge and awareness of subregional
problems confronting West Africa.
Activities
• Undertake studies, organize forums and seminars and help develop practical
and concerted strategies for addressing current and emerging issues, including
the subregional dimensions of youth unemployment, fast growing
urbanization, security sector reform, transitional justice, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, drug and human trafficking, piracy and terrorist
threats.
• Prepare periodic updates on the subregional impact of conflict situations on
sustainable peace and development.
• Develop targeted public information strategies on subregional issues in West
Africa, with a focus on human rights and economic governance and their
impact on peace and security. These activities would continue to be organized
in cooperation with the relevant United Nations entities and partners in the
subregion, including key civil society organizations and the private sector.
Function 2.4
Strengthen cooperation with the ECOWAS Commission and with
representatives of ECOWAS member States at ECOWAS headquarters in Abuja,
focusing on governance and development issues.
Activities
• Assist ECOWAS in the implementation of its new Strategic Vision for
Regional Development, adopted at the ECOWAS Heads of State Summit in
Abuja on 15 June 2007; as well as its Protocol on the Free Movement of
Persons and on the Right of Residence and Establishment.
• Assist ECOWAS in the implementation of its Protocol on Democracy and
Good Governance, including through regular working group sessions as well
as joint programmes and activities.
• Increase the participation of the public sector, civil society (including
non-governmental organizations, women’s groups, community leaders and
traditional elders), the academic community and the private sector in
ECOWAS-UNOWA joint initiatives and activities addressing governance
issues and challenges.
Objective 3
Carry out additional tasks assigned by the Secretary-General and the
Security Council
Function 3.1
Facilitate the implementation of the International Court of Justice ruling of
10 October 2002 on the land and maritime boundary dispute between Cameroon and
Nigeria.

6

07-65656

S/2007/753

Activities
• Assist the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission in the implementation of
activities related to its mandate, including the demarcation of the land
boundary between the two countries; the civilian observation following the
peaceful and orderly transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area, along the land
boundary and in the Bakassi peninsula.
• Assist the follow-up committee in monitoring the implementation of the
Greentree Agreement (12 June 2006) on the withdrawal and transfer of
authority in the Bakassi peninsula.
• Assist the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission in addressing issues related
to the needs of the affected populations in border areas and in the Bakassi
peninsula.
• Assist the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission to make recommendations
on confidence-building measures, such as the development of projects to
promote joint economic ventures and cross-border cooperation, and the
revitalization of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.

07-65656

7
