S/PV.8756

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8756th meeting

Thursday, 10 September 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Djani
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Farrey
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Attacks against schools as a grave violation of children’s rights
Letter dated 1 September 2020 from the Permanent Representative of the Niger
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/881)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-23385 (E)
*2023385*

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict
(spoke in English)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Attacks against schools as a grave violation of
children’s rights
Letter dated 1 September 2020 from
the Permanent Representative of Niger
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/881)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director, United Nations Children’s Fund; Ms. Marika
Tsolakis, Global Coalition to Protect Education from
Attacks; Hadiza; and Ms. Rimana Youssouf Assane
Mayaki, Youth Parliament of the Niger.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/881, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 September 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2020/8.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba de Potgieter (spoke in French): I
thank the Niger for organizing this open debate. I also
welcome our young briefers. This debate is timely
and relevant.
2/21

10/09/2020

Yesterday we celebrated the first International Day
to Protect Education from Attack. In 2011, resolution
1998 (2011) called to ensure that schools are protected
and expanded the listing criteria of the annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
to include attacks on schools and attacks on, and
threats to, education personnel. In 2014, in resolution
2143 (2014), the Council recognized that the military
use of schools is critically affecting children’s access
to education but decided not to expand listing criteria,
calling instead for Member States to take “concrete
measures” to deter the military use of schools. Some
Member States took up that challenge and launched the
Safe Schools Declaration in 2015, which today boasts
105 signatories, demonstrating that where there is
a will, there is a way. Such progress is welcome but,
unfortunately, it is not enough.
I am concerned that this violation does not decrease
over the years. On the contrary, there seems to be an
emerging tactic of war, particularly in the Sahel, where
schools are targeted precisely because they are schools,
and even more if they cater to girls.
In the past two years in Mali, for example, teachers
were threatened and killed, education facilities
demolished and learning material burned, leading
to the closure of over 1,260 schools, even before the
coronavirus disease. Similarly, the past 12 months have
seen a rise in attacks against schools and protected
personnel in Burkina Faso, including the burning of
schools and the kidnapping of teachers, forcing 2,500
schools to shut down, depriving hundreds of thousands
of children of education. In other parts of the world,
such as Asia and Latin America, we are also seeing
an increase in attacks on education in indigenous
communities. While some conflict-affected States, such
as the Philippines, Myanmar and the Central African
Republic, have adopted legislation that protects schools
from attack and criminalizes the six grave violations,
they are still at the early stages of implementation and
more needs to be done to speed delivery.
The present pandemic has made things worse.
Closed schools and crumbling economies generate
push-and-pull factors that favour the recruitment, use,
sexual exploitation and child marriage. Lockdowns have
restrained and diminished children’s access to essential
services. Empty schools may be an incentive for parties
to conflict to loot or use schools for military purposes.
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

Cycles of violence against schools affect students,
teachers, parents and communities alike. Parents are
fearful of sending children to school, teachers leave
schools due to insecurity and children are denied an
education, which is the single-most important tool
they need to overcome despair and build a future. This
must stop.
Schools must remain safe havens where girls and
boys can obtain education, without discrimination
and without fear. Even at times of war and pandemic,
we must do our utmost to ensure that all children,
including those undergoing reintegration processes,
receive quality education. Education is not a choice, but
a right. Attacks against schools and their military use
is an attack on education, producing negative effects
on children and societies in multiple ways. I therefore
urge all parties to conflict to better protect students and
education personnel and to respect the civilian nature
of school infrastructure. And I remind Governments
that they have a duty to protect education, even at times
of war and pandemics.
It is to be hoped that these measures and initiatives,
including this open debate, will increase the momentum
for action to improve the protection of schools and end
attacks on education. Let us act now
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Gamba de Potgieter for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.
Ms. Fore: On behalf of everyone at UNICEF, we
welcome the adoption of this important presidential
statement (S/PRST/2020/8) to protect education from
attack. We thank Permanent Representative Abdou
Abarry for making this issue a priority during the
Niger’s presidency of the Security Council.
The coronavirus disease has disrupted learning
for over 1 billion children worldwide. But at the same
time, we must remember those who have no education
waiting for them, including many of the 75 million
children who live in countries in conflict.
Today’s armed conflicts are increasingly protracted
and complex in cause, consequence and character. They
are also increasingly violent and marked by an alarming
contempt for international humanitarian law by parties
to conflict — State and non-State alike. This week, as
schools around the world prepare to open their doors in
the midst of the pandemic, we have an opportunity to

S/PV. 8756

once again shine a light on those places where going to
school can be dangerous and even deadly.
Last year alone saw 494 verified attacks on schools,
and there have been more than 13,000 since monitoring
and reporting began. These attacks are seemingly
designed with one purpose in mind: to rob children,
communities and countries of any semblance of safety,
hope or optimism for the future.
One-fifth of last year’s verified attacks took place
in West and Central Africa, including in the Sahel
region. And year over year the number is rising. In
Burkina Faso, 55 schools were attacked in just the last
year and a half. Conflict-related insecurity, combined
with the pandemic, resulted in the closure of over 2,500
schools as of August. This leaves nearly 350,000 girls
and boys without an education. In the Niger, over 340
schools have been closed owing to insecurity — more
than a three-fold increase since the start of 2020.
It is important to remember that the Sahel is already
home to a disproportionate share of the world’s children
who need humanitarian protection and assistance.
About one in four who need support live in 10 countries
in West and Central Africa, including the Sahel.
But the denial of education is just part of the challenge
faced by these children. Out-of-school children — and
children living in conflict generally — face a world
of danger. They are at a higher risk of recruitment by
armed forces or groups, gender-based violence, child
marriage and early pregnancy, abuse and trafficking.
And numbers cannot capture the heartbreaking cost
to the spirits of these young people when their schools
are attacked.
For one moment, look through the eyes of
Mohammed, a 12-year-old. Mohammed was forced to
flee Banki in north-east Nigeria, because his school
was attacked and set on fire. He explains:
“I was at school when I heard shouting, and we ran. A
classmate of mine opened the gate. They destroyed
everything we worked on in our books, and they
burned them. One of my teachers was killed.”
Mohammed has seen things that no child should ever
see. His experience reminds us that protecting schools
from attack and providing education in the midst of
emergencies is more than a humanitarian need — it is
a moral obligation.

20-233853/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

To children and communities alike, in the 30 years
since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, it is clearly a moral obligation that we are
failing to meet, because the reality is that our words
about protecting schools from attack — our policies,
pronouncements and normative frameworks, and even
our laws — do not reflect the situation on the ground
for students, for teachers, for schools.
Along with our humanitarian partners, UNICEF’s
teams on the ground are doing all that they can to
respond to the needs of out-of-school children — from
providing essential learning materials, such as school
kits and textbooks in Burkina Faso, the Niger and
Mauritania; to supplying tents for temporary classrooms;
to re-building learning spaces and training teachers;
to providing counselling and psychosocial support to
children who have witnessed the worst of humankind;
to working with governments across the Sahel to
provide distance-learning opportunities, including
through the use of radio, television and online tools.
Around the world, UNICEF is using the pandemic as
an opportunity to accelerate the development and use
of these tools worldwide — tools that can provide
an excellent alternative to traditional classrooms for
children living under conflict.

10/09/2020

obligations and commitments to protect education
from attack; and to end impunity for those who violate
international law — both parties to conflict and
individual perpetrators — whether at the national level
or through international tribunals. Let us match words
with consequences.
I call on members to demand that all States endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration — as Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines did yesterday, becoming the 105th state
to do so — and to take steps to fully live up to their
commitments. There is no excuse. We must protect
education from attack and end the military use of
schools now.
And finally, I call on members to follow the lead
of Niger and encourage future Council Presidents to
make education under attack a regular thematic topic
for the Council’s deliberations — not just around the
International Day to Protect Education from Attack,
but on a sustained basis during the year.
The security of countries and our world is directly
tied to the education and protection of the children
within these countries. Peace and prosperity — in the
short and long terms — cannot be separated from a
child’s ability to learn and build a future for themselves.

To support all of this work, we call on our generous
donor Governments to commit to multi-year, flexible
funding to help communities rebuild education systems
over the long term. This area of work is critically
underfunded in the Sahel — with a UNICEF funding
gap of 66 per cent across seven countries in the region.
This is one of the biggest funding gaps for education
globally — a gap that must be urgently closed before
countries lose an entire generation of young minds.

Finally, we urge the Council to continue making
this issue a priority, and give Mohammed — and every
child living through the horror of conflict — a chance
to build their future and contribute to the lasting peace
that we all seek.

But we must also recognize that this work — as
vital as it is — treats only the symptom, not the disease
of attacks on education. Treating the disease means
going beyond what we have done so far. Otherwise, how
can we — who have the power to change this — look
a child like Mohammed in the eye and tell him we are
doing everything we can to make life better for him and
his classmates and teachers?

Ms. Tsolakis: I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter,
Executive Director Fore, the civil-society briefers and
Council members.

In short, we need the Council’s help to treat the
disease itself. I call on members to lend their voice
and influence to condemn all attacks on schools and
students alike — whether through resolutions or
presidential statements, such as the one we are uniting
behind today; to take concrete measures to fulfil
4/21

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Fore
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tsolakis.

I am honoured to address the Council today on
behalf of the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack. We commend the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/8 and the other actions that
Member States have taken to protect schools and
universities in armed conflict.
Just yesterday, the United Nations observed the
first International Day to Protect Education from
Attack, and 105 States, including the majority of the
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

members of the Council, have now endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration.
But despite those advances, violent attacks on
education are occurring at an alarming rate in conflicts
around the world. Research by our coalition identified
at least 11,000 incidents of attacks on education globally
over the past five years. In at least 34 countries around
the world, schools have been used for military purposes
by both State forces and non-State armed groups.
The Sahel region is an area of critical concern.
In Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, armed groups
increasingly threaten, abduct and kill teachers, and
burn or bomb schools. Both military and armed groups
have used dozens of schools as execution sites or bases.
In 2020, we have already documented nearly 100
incidents of attacks in the region. Those attacks have
ripple effects. Teachers flee or stop working. Classes
are suspended. And, fearing that they may be next,
schools in surrounding areas also shutter, affecting the
learning of hundreds of thousands of students.
A teacher in Burkina Faso whose home was burned
down after he was assaulted by an armed group stated,
“I teach, but I cannot forget”. Victims suffer lasting
psychological and economic impacts yet seldom receive
the vital support that they need.
When schools in the region shut due to the
coronavirus disease, armed groups used force to keep
them closed. In Mali, 27 attacks on schools and nearly
500 threats against schools or teachers were reported
in June 2020 alone, when classes resumed. In Burkina
Faso, 13 schools were attacked in the last weeks of July
in a single district.
However, the monitoring and reporting of such
attacks, and accountability for them, remain challenging
in the Sahel. United Nations staff and other partners
face security and physical barriers to documenting
violations. In Mali, the United Nations verified
55 attacks on schools in 2019, yet only a small number
of those could be attributed to a particular perpetrator.
We also know that women and girls are often
deliberately targeted in attacks on education and suffer
distinct and lasting consequences; however, limited
gender-disaggregated data hinders effective gendersensitive prevention and response.
Many States that have endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration are finding ways to prevent and respond

S/PV. 8756

to attacks on education and reduce the use of schools
for military purposes, as are some non-State armed
groups. For example, working with the national
Government and using the Declaration, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali secured the evacuation of two primary
schools occupied by armed groups in 2019. In the
12 countries that endorsed the Declaration in 2015 and
had experienced military use, incidents of use by armed
forces and groups have declined.
The Security Council should continue to lead the
agenda on ending attacks on education and holding the
perpetrators of such violations accountable.
We urge the Council to take the following steps:
endorse and implement the Safe Schools Declaration
in a gender-responsive manner and refrain from using
schools and universities for military purposes; support
United Nations country teams to safely engage with
parties to conflict, including signing action plans to
end and prevent attacks on schools; ensure that United
Nations peace operations and special political missions
have a child-protection mandate and the backing
necessary to effectively monitor and report on attacks
on education and the military use of schools, including
through more consistent disaggregation of data related
to attacks on education; and address the protection of
students, teachers, schools and universities through
the Council’s protection-of-civilians and youth, peace
and security agendas, and more systematically address
sexual violence at, or on the way to or from, school
through its sexual violence in conflict agenda.
The Council can make tangible improvements to
the safety and security of schools and universities in
the Sahel and around the world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Tsolakis for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Hadiza.
Hadiza (spoke in French): Allow me to thank the
Government of the Niger for initiating this meeting
between children and decision-makers. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the United
Nations in New York and the country office of Save the
Children in the Niger for its commitment to children.

20-233855/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

My name is Hadiza. I am a student. In 2019, I
received a prize for excellence in literature, known as
“Miss Literature”.
I am strongly committed to the fight for access
to education for children in conflict-affected zones.
I believe that when education is targeted, it becomes
impossible to ensure safe education for all children.
That is all the more difficult for those who already lived
in difficult situations prior to conflicts.
I was born in a region affected by crisis with the
lowest the school enrolment rate in the country. It is
in that very region where we now see conflict in the
Niger. I am particularly moved by the situation of the
thousands of children torn from their school desks
and endlessly displaced, sometimes without their
parents. Some of them children are facing their fifth or
sixth displacement.
Beyond the abuses committed, the coronavirus
disease pandemic has further complicated the lives of
children. This complication is seen in the stress that
has produced different reactions: increased anxiety,
withdrawal, agitation and suffering from nocturnal
incontinence. This situation has become even more
difficult with school closures and physical distancing,
which does not allow children to freely enjoy their
time together.
I have witnessed various examples of difficulties
that children are facing. I remember the village on
the banks of the Komadougou river, where my father
created a school. The village was very hostile to the
school. However, through awareness-raising meetings
that he organized in the community, my father taught
me that education is the most effective weapon for
changing the world.
In 2006, all of the children that he taught rose
to a higher class. Unfortunately, with the heightened
insecurity, the village was attacked, pillaged and
burned, and the schools were also attacked. The majority
of these children were taken away and integrated into
armed groups.
You, Mr. President, will agree with me that when
a school is attacked and children are obliged to flee
their villages, everything is unjustly affected. For me,
defending the right to education of all children in crisis
situations is to defend the rights of adults to survival.
As they say where I am from, in Hausa, “Children are
the hope of tomorrow.”
6/21

10/09/2020

What is most deplorable is that it is these same
children, whose futures are hijacked, who return by night
to slit their parents’ throats and kidnap their brothers
and sisters, sometimes for ransom and sometimes for
sexual purposes. I recall a 12-year-old child named Adi,
who was very intelligent and full of hope for his studies.
He was abducted by his uncle, a member of an armed
group, and we have not seen him since then. However,
we will never forget his commitment and his dreams
of succeeding at school. All these acts were committed
because the perpetrators did not want local children to
attend Western schools.
I will never tire of talking about the continuous
difficulties facing us. On 6 February 2015, when
I was just 13 years old, the town where I was living
was attacked and all of our schools were closed. I also
remember a 9-year-old girl named Fatima, an internally
displaced person, whose father had his throat cut
before her very eyes. Imagine all of the trauma she
has experienced; her mother, too, continues to suffer
unjustly as a result of her husband’s death. This situation
of vulnerability means that Fatima has no feeling of
control or belonging. Would any of those present here
wish to see their children suffer in that way? No, they
would not, so something must be done.
In the light of the scale of the conflict in the
Sahel, it is necessary to implement a strategy that
would ensure that children, particularly girls, can go
to school. It is for all of those reasons that I would,
first, ask the Security Council to ensure the protection
of schools from attacks by parties to conflict around
the world and safeguard the rights and duties of
children; secondly, I would ask United Nations entities
to mobilize international cooperation to fight the
increased threat of attacks against schools by parties
to armed conflict and to step up international efforts
towards the prevention of violence against children,
particularly by mobilizing young people and children
and combating the use of technology by parties to a
conflict; and, thirdly, I would ask the Government of
the Niger to create distance-learning classes so that
all Nigerien children, especially those who are out
of school, can have access to quality education, to
provide those children with information-technology
resources adapted to the situation — solar computers,
solar lamps, solar radios and so on — and to reaffirm
its commitment to protecting education from violence
and conflict and preventing schools from being used for
military purposes.
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I thank Hadiza
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mayaki.
Ms. Mayaki (spoke in French): My name is
Rimana, and I am in my last year of school. I hope that I
will pass my exams and start at a prestigious university
next year. I had no problems in my time at school. My
path was laid out for me, and that was because I grew
up in Niamey. But what if I had grown up in Diffa or
in Tillaberi, like Nura or Omar? Imagine an 8-year-old
child sitting in a classroom who suddenly hears gunfire.
In a panic, he flees and is hit by a stray bullet.
Yes, like many other countries, the Niger has
not been spared by armed conflict. Terrorist groups
have progressively carried out appalling attacks and
undermined our development efforts in fields as vital
as health care, security and, above all, education. Like
Nelson Mandela, they understood that education is the
most powerful weapon we have to change the world.
It is very easy to destroy this weapon. At least 350
public schools have been closed in the Tillaberi region,
as reported by Nigerien public radio on 19 February.
In Diffa, a local representative told Voice of Africa
that schools had been burned down and teachers had
received death threats.
In 2015 alone, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs situation report dated 2 November
reported that more than 12,000 schoolchildren were
deprived of education in Diffa. What can the situation
be like today? The terrorists do not want children to
learn and become open to the world, with heightened
awareness and tolerance of diversity. The violence has
several causes: poverty, unemployment and erroneous
religious ideologies. But if we look more closely, above
all it is because the terrorists did not benefit from an
education that enabled them to conceive of the fact that
humankind has many mindsets and personalities and
that words can have a positive impact. Because they did
not learn that, they prefer to instigate a climate of terror
that would force parents to marry off their daughters
for fear of exposing them to insecurity at school. That
could also be said to be the cause of illiteracy for an
entire generation, who, without expertise of any sort,
will be unable to compete in the job market.
In addition to being deprived of schooling, what will
happen to a generation whose childhood was marked
by the noise of gunfire and the sight of the corpses of
their loved ones? Receiving an education is not a crime.

S/PV. 8756

Neither is living. On the contrary, these are rights
established in articles 28 and 6 of the international
Convention of the Rights of the Child, on the right to
education and life, respectively. Investigations must be
carried out, and the guilty must be prosecuted. As for
the victims, since their memory cannot be erased, they
must be provided psychological and financial assistance.
I hope that my words made sense and have shown
how much we owe it to ourselves to act. Know that the
issues of armed conflict and schooling are at the heart
of the concerns of the Parliament over which I preside.
I have in mind the efforts made by my colleagues in
Diffa and Tillabéri, the visits to administrative and
local elected leaders and to other bodies, such as the
High Authority For Peacebuilding, in order to ensure
that talks move forward, to raise awareness of violent
extremism among youth and even to create their own
non-governmental organization to those ends.
In addition, during our previous session, we hosted
the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice, to whom
we voiced our indignation directly. For two hours, we
were able to share our views and our recommendations.
I hope that, in the near future, Nura of Diffa will
be able to live in a safe environment and receive a
quality education.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mayaki for her briefing.
I shall now like to make a statement in my capacity
as the representative of the Niger on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1).
I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore, for their complementary
presentations, which provide us with good material for
today’s discussion. I note that this meeting takes place
within the framework of the commemoration of the first
International Day to Protect Education from Attack.
What could be more normal, on this occasion, than to
listen to the voices of the victims of this phenomenon
that we denounce, who, from the depths of their distress,
tell us that it is time for us to act.
Hadiza and Rimana, two young girls from the Niger,
whose poignant testimonies we have just followed,
remind us how urgent it is to listen to the Secretary-

20-233857/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

General’s call for a ceasefire and the African Union’s
call to silence the guns in Africa for peace to prevail,
create the conditions to protect schools from attacks
and to promote quality education for all children,
particularly children affected by conflict and violence.
I tell Hadiza and Rimana that they can rest assured
that we have listened to them and that their messages
give us additional reasons to act. The information that
Ms. Marika Tsolakis, from the Global Coalition to
Protect Education from Attacks, just shared with us
allows us to assess the impact of attacks on schools,
this savagery of our time, on children’s education,
especially for young girls.
When access to education is taken away from a
child in a conflict situation, it is a tragedy that also takes
away what most children want and are entitled to — an
opportunity to learn and develop their imagination
in a safe and healthy environment. All too often, in
situations of armed conflict, schools and associated
people, who are entitled to protection, are subject to
attacks and threats of attack. That is why it is essential
that we assess the progress made since the adoption
of resolution 1998 (2011) and subsequent related
resolutions, and renew our commitment to provide an
adequate learning environment for all children.
The A3+1 recognizes the important new
developments in protecting schools worldwide from
attacks and threats of attacks. In that connection, the
signing of an action plan to deter attacks on schools
between an armed group in the Central African
Republic and the Office of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict is worth noting. Such
actions should be replicated in other conflict situations
to promote the main objective of protecting schools and
people operating in those environments.
We commend efforts made in Mali, for example,
where the Government has effectively implemented the
commitments made in the Safe Schools Declaration,
as well as in Burkina Faso, with the provision of
distance education — because of the coronavirus
disease pandemic — to children affected by the
conflict, in collaboration with UNICEF, UNESCO and
regional bodies.
As the world strives to adapt education to the difficult
context of the global pandemic, greater emphasis must
be placed on the need to provide quality education to
children, including those in vulnerable situations, such
as internally displaced persons, refugees, children
8/21

10/09/2020

with disabilities and children removed from conflict in
reintegration programmes.
We are equally concerned about the particular
vulnerabilities of girls in conflict contexts, compounded
by social burdens, all of which have a serious impact on
their education. In many parts of the world, girls are
much less likely to return to school after school closures
or the destruction of school infrastructure. In countries
affected by conflict, girls are half as likely to be enrolled
in school as those living in countries at peace. They are
also more likely to experience sexual and gender-based
violence on their way to school. Particular attention
should be paid to the issue of violence and trauma
suffered by girls in conflict situations, with a view to
better defining the means and other strategies to be put
in place to help them.
In the absence of rapid and comprehensive action,
the reduction in access to education due to conflict,
insecurity and the coronavirus disease will have
disastrous consequences. The presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2020/8), at the initiative of the
Niger and the Kingdom of Belgium, specifically focuses
on the targeting of schools within the broader framework
of the protection of children in armed conflict and calls
for bold efforts to address the harmful effects of such
attacks, including child labour, the forced recruitment
of children by armed groups and early marriage.
Girls like Rimana, from whom we heard today, tell
us that there are other ways to do things, for example,
in the Sahel region or the Lake Chad basin, where
armed terrorist groups specifically target schools.
We all remember the tragedy of the girls of Chibok,
Nigeria, ripped away from their schooling and from the
affection of their families by fanatics from the terrorist
group Boko Haram.
Between April 2017 and December 2019, Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger saw a six-fold increase in the
number of schools closed due to violence. In the first
seven months of this year alone, more than 90 incidents
of attacks on education occurred in the central Sahel. In
some parts of the region, the insecurity situation has led
to a disturbing pattern of school closures; in December
2019, more than 3,300 schools were reported closed due
to insecurity, disrupting the education of more than
650,000 children in the three countries. In 35 conflictaffected countries around the world, the education of
75 million children and adolescents is being disrupted
by this situation.
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

Schools have become the target of armed terrorist
groups, particularly in the Sahel, because, as centres of
knowledge, they are a crucible of knowledge. Schools
shed light, whereas the ideology of violence carried
by terrorist groups is nourished by ignorance and
obscurantism. Educated children are the spearhead of
a responsible society; they are the pillars on which a
strong nation is built.
States must therefore commit themselves to adopting
legislation and policies focused on the protection
of children and which are gender-sensitive and in
conformity with international humanitarian law, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. They must also commit to greater respect
for the civilian character of schools. To be effective,
such protection mechanisms should involve, in addition
to States themselves, all other partners in education,
should be based on monitoring and communication, and
raise awareness about the unacceptability of attacks on
schools. If such a system is to work efficiently, there is
also an urgent need to increase resources that can create
the conditions for teachers and students to engage in
appropriate online and blended-learning modalities so
that no child is left behind.
The maintenance of reliable statistics on
schools that have been destroyed will enable a better
understanding of the extent of the phenomenon and
allow for rehabilitation and reconstruction operations,
with the support of UNICEF and other relevant
United Nations entities. These rehabilitation and
reconstruction operations are, in our view, the best
way to strengthen the role of schools as a vector for
promoting and consolidating peace, because, as we said
earlier, it is through education that we combat not only
obscurantism and fanaticism, but also terrorism.
Before I conclude, I am pleased to announce that
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has just endorsed the
Declaration on Safe Schools, joining the 104 countries
that have already signed it.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Yesterday we celebrated the first International Day
to Protect Education from Attack, thanks to the

S/PV. 8756

initiative and unwavering commitment of Qatar and its
Permanent Representative, whom I thank, and with the
full support of the Niger in its capacity as President of
the Security Council.
The International Day serves above all as a wake-up
call. Last year — as the briefers explained today — the
United Nations recorded nearly 500 attacks on schools
in various conflict zones. Since 2010, the number of
serious violations verified by the United Nations has
tripled. In the Sahel, the number of schools closed as
a result of violence has increased six-fold since 2017,
which has had a particularly strong impact on girls.
Hundreds of thousands of girls and young women are at
risk of never going back to school and even of becoming
victims of assault, forced marriage, exploitation and
sexual violence. Entire generations are being robbed of
their hopes and entire communities are being robbed of
their future.
Just recently, we were all shocked by the violent
attacks targeting students preparing for their exams in
two provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
a country that President Abarry knows well. Students
were killed, others were raped and hundreds have
had their exam dates postponed due to violence and
insecurity. This is alarming to us, which is why I would
like to congratulate President Abarry on taking the
initiative to convene today’s meeting. It is also why we
fully support the presidential statement that Belgium
co-facilitated and which was adopted today under the
Niger’s effective presidency (S/PRST/2020/8).
It is our collective duty to protect the right to quality
education for all. In this context, I would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council to four points: the
fight against impunity, our role as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the Security
Council’s mandate on children in armed conflict, and
the training of peacekeeping personnel.
First, the fight against impunity is a cornerstone
for Belgium. We therefore welcome the fact that
the presidential statement condemns the lack of
accountability for violations committed and calls
on Member States to ensure the investigation and
prosecution of those responsible for attacks in violation
of international humanitarian law. In accordance with
Council resolutions, the full range of justice mechanisms
must be used, including national, international or
mixed criminal courts and tribunals and, of course,
transitional justice mechanisms.

20-233859/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, my goal as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as Council
members know, is to adopt conclusions on each of the
14 situations of armed conflict in which parties are
committing grave violations against children. We are,
of course, working closely with Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
whose commitment and dynamism I commend. The
increased frequency of reports boosts the relevance
of the conclusions that we adopt on the basis of those
reports. In this way, we can keep the pressure on parties
in order to improve efforts aimed at preventing grave
violations against children and protecting children in
armed conflict.
Thirdly, as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Belgium is striving to uphold the
main thrust of the mandate given to us by the Security
Council with regard to children in situations of armed
conflict and, in particular, the integrity and impartiality
of the mechanism for listing parties that engage in
violations of the rights of the child. This mechanism
gives the United Nations the opportunity to work with
listed parties to prevent grave violations and improve
the situation of children. It remains a valuable, powerful
and results-oriented tool. Highlighting violations of
children’s rights and denouncing their perpetrators are
indeed indispensable preliminary actions.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. The mechanism
deserves our continued support to ensure the systematic
collection of information on the six grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict. In the
same vein, we welcome the fact that today’s presidential
statement calls on the Secretary-General continue
monitoring and reporting on the use of schools by the
military in violation of international humanitarian law.
This brings me to my last point. Last February,
we adopted a presidential statement calling for the
use of the practical guidance for mediators to better
protect children in situations of armed conflict
(S/PRST/2020/3). In view of the Secretary-General’s
call for a comprehensive ceasefire in response to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, it is more relevant than
ever that child protection issues, including attacks on
schools, be at the centre of mediation efforts as well
as at the centre of training for peacekeeping personnel.
10/21

10/09/2020

Finally, we call on all States to join the 2015 Safe
Schools Declaration and congratulate Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines on doing so.
We call on all States to also ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
to endorse the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers and the Paris Commitments.
I would like to conclude with the words of our young
partners — the young Faisal, who asked us yesterday
during the celebration of the International Day for the
Protection of Education against Attacks if we can really
build back better when the most important tool for this
purpose is constantly under attack. I would like to
welcome our two young briefers today from the Niger,
Ms. Rimana Mayaki and Ms. Hadiza, who explained
to us the concrete role that young people in the Niger
play to enhance the safety of schools. They are both
models for young people of the South and the North.
“Education is the most powerful weapon to change the
world,” Rimana told us, and I would like to end with
that quotation.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): We thank all the briefers
for sharing their views today. We particularly value the
direct experiences shared by Ms. Mayaki.
We also express our gratitude to the Niger for
drawing the Security Council’s attention to this
topic, including its excellent work, with Belgium, in
finding an agreement on the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2020/8) adopted by the Council. We strongly
support the statement and hope that it mobilizes further
efforts to protect schools by the Council, Member
States, the United Nations system and international and
regional organizations, as well as civil society.
Estonia strongly condemns all violations of
international law, including attacks against schools.
We are alarmed by attacks on schools and hospitals
in the Syrian Arab Republic, the occupied Palestinian
territory, Afghanistan and Somalia. We share the deep
concern about the sharp increase in the number of
schools forced to close, including due to insecurity,
with almost 650,000 children affected in the Sahel
since 2017. We call on parties to armed conflict to
immediately cease attacks and threats of attacks
against schools and other educational facilities, as well
as on students, teachers and other persons entitled to
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

protection. I want to particularly highlight the following
points in that regard.
We need to continue to improve the monitoring
and reporting of attacks on education, including
by disaggregating data by gender. We also need to
strengthen accountability for these attacks. In addition
to the national level, the United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanism plays a key role in detecting
attacks against schools and related personnel, as well
as engaging with parties to address and prevent them.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/525) serves as
a tool for early warning and the basis for engagement
with parties, but also as a step towards ensuring
accountability for grave violations against children.
The mechanism needs sufficient human and financial
resources. We continue to strongly support ensuring
continued dedicated child protection capacity in United
Nations missions.
In the broader context, we welcome all initiatives
at the national, regional and international levels that
aim to strengthen the protection of children in armed
conflict, including from attacks against schools.
Estonia has endorsed the Paris Principles and the Paris
Commitments, as well as the Vancouver Principles, and
joined the group of over 100 countries endorsing the
Safe Schools Declaration earlier this year.
There is a need for the better protection of women
and girls. Girls attending, or on their way to, school are
often targeted because of their gender, and they face
specific consequences of attacks, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence, such as forced marriage,
pregnancy as well as the subsequent stigmatization,
further undermining their access to education.
With specific attention needed for children in
vulnerable situations, Estonia continues to support
access to education and psychosocial services to
refugee children in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and East
Africa, as well as internally displaced persons in
eastern Ukraine. Access to safe, quality education for
children affected by armed conflict has an important
role in their reintegration and in breaking the cycle of
recruitment and violence.
The number of verified attacks against schools
remains high and continues to increase. As the
evidence shows, the attacks have not decreased in the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, while
the vulnerability of schools and students has been
compounded by it.

S/PV. 8756

School closures heighten the risk of child
recruitment, sexual violence, child and forced marriage
and child labour. We underline the importance of
reopening schools where it is possible, safe and secure,
in dialogue with all parties, communities and children.
We agree with you, Mr. President, and all speakers
today that there are clear steps that we can, and should,
take to protect schools, students and teachers. Grave
violations against children are unacceptable. But it is
also one of the most effective ways by which we can
address sources fuelling conflict and violence and
ensure peace and security in the long term.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to extend our
gratitude to Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their invaluable briefings. We
also thank the other briefers for their in-depth remarks.
We commend the Niger for organizing this very timely
and important debate today. We also commend the
Niger and Belgium for their hard work in the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and for the
preparation and negotiation of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2020/8) adopted today.
Children are our future and the next generation of
hope, peace and development of each nation and the
world. Yet an increasing number of children today are
still suffering from impacts of armed conflicts on a
daily basis, with limited or no access to education and
other essential services.
As shown in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/525), in 2019 more than 25,000 grave
violations against children were verified, 494 of which
were attacks made on schools. We are deeply concerned
over the increasing acts of violence against children,
notably attacks against schools and the use of schools
for military purposes. We remain further concerned, as
these situations have been further exacerbated due to the
global outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We join other Member States in strongly condemning
attacks on objects protected under international law,
especially schools. We call on all parties concerned to
put an end to such practices.
The protection of children in armed conflicts is
the crucial work of the Security Council within the
framework of its mandate in maintaining international
peace and security. More important, it is the primary

20-2338511/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

role and responsibility of each Member State to enhance
protective measures for children.
In that regard, we emphasize the role of education
as an important means of preventing armed conflict and
addressing violations against children in conflict areas.
Every child deserves an opportunity to attend schools
so as to be equipped with knowledge about their rights
and ways to ensure those rights.
It is imperative that we continue to make concerted
efforts to enhance concrete measures to immediately
address attacks against schools, rebuild school facilities
and ensure access to education for children in conflictaffected situations. Schools must be a safe space in
conflict zones to shelter children. We must not allow
schools to become targets of attacks, or be used for
military purposes.
While immediate action is urgently needed, it is
also vital that we address the root causes of attacks
against schools in a comprehensive manner, focusing
on conflict prevention, mediation and the creation of
an environment that promotes and protects children’s
rights in situations of armed conflict.
As we just discussed a few days ago, the coronavirus
disease pandemic has further complicated our joint
efforts to address conflicts and humanitarian issues.
In that regard, it is also important to maintain and
galvanize political will and resources to protect children
and schools. In doing so, we call on parties to armed
conflict to fully respect and abide by international
law, including international humanitarian law. In
that connection, we would like to highlight the key
international frameworks on the protection of children
and education, including the Safe School Declaration
and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. We call on countries that have not done
so to consider joining these frameworks. In this vein,
I would like to join our colleague from Belgium in
congratulating Saint Vincent and Grenadines on recently
joining the Declaration and the Optional Protocol.
For its part, Viet Nam reaffirms its strong
commitment to the protection of children and their
essential education. We welcome the adoption today
of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/8, which once
again reaffirms our commitment towards safeguarding
and protecting children in armed conflict. We look
forward to working actively with the international
community in this endeavour.
12/21

10/09/2020

Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
We very much thank the Niger’s efforts to focus today’s
discussion on such an important topic. We thank as well
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba
de Potgieter, Executive Director Fore, Ms. Marika
Tsolakis, Ms. Rimana Youssouf Assane Mayaki and
Hadiza for their insightful and compelling remarks.
The United States remains fully committed to
supporting the United Nations critical work to address
the effects of conflict on children. There is no issue
more important than those affecting the next generation
of leaders and citizens in the world. It is only when
we support every child in reaching their fullest
potential that we will create a safer and more secure
world. Our support also extends to the protection of
families, teachers and schools whenever possible, so
that children can retain safe and equitable access to
quality education.
As Rimana highlighted earlier, schools should
provide a safe space free from the threat of violence.
When protected, schools also serve as a hub for other
life-saving and life-sustaining services. Furthermore,
safe access to education is critical to breaking the
cycles of poverty and social grievance that underpin
countries’ vulnerability to violent extremism and future
conflict. Therefore, we cannot approach the pursuit of
peace and international security without considering
the consequences of failures to uphold the laws that
protect children and schools.
The irony, of course, is that terrorists often
deliberately target or use schools because schools
are critical to building resilient communities and
also represent Government institutions. This lack of
respect for the civilian character of schools can place
them at heightened risk of attack. In some cases,
malign actors use education to perpetuate prejudice,
intolerance and distorted views of history or of others
in their community. Meanwhile, armed groups also
target schools and routes to schools to abduct children
and youth, often for the purpose of recruiting them as
soldiers or into forced marriage, sexual slavery or other
horrific activities.
In that regard, I want to highlight that women and
girls are disproportionately affected by sexual violence
and early and forced marriage amid conflict, and tend
to be deliberately targeted by groups that oppose gender
equality in education. The threat of rape, sexual assault
and abduction on their way to school, or because they
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

want to seek an education, severely constrains women’s
and girls’ mobility and, along with other harmful
gender norms, often compels them to stay home.
We note that the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict has made progress on
numerous conclusions documents, including those
recently finalized on Iraq (S/AC.51/2016/2), Colombia
(S/AC.51/2020/5) and Somalia (S/AC.51/2017/2). We
very much appreciate Belgium’s work in this area.
This important work goes on as we continue to discuss
the Sudan. We also appreciate Special Representative
Gamba’s ongoing commitment to preparing the reports,
including important details on abuses and violations
against children. As we know, however, our work is far
from over.
In the Central Sahel, for example, attacks on
children continue to increase; close to 5 million children
are in need of humanitarian assistance. The surge of
violence across Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger is
having a devastating impact on children’s survival,
education, protection and development. Hundreds of
children in the region, as we heard just this morning,
have been killed, maimed or forcibly separated from
their families, while thousands of school closures
have affected almost 650,000 children. The violence
prompting these closures must stop immediately, its
perpetrators must be brought to justice and children’s
access to education must be restored.
These tragedies in the Sahel serve to illuminate
the fact that armed conflict impacts children in ways
beyond affecting their immediate safety. These children
require holistic interventions that support their ability
to contribute to peaceful societies, including the
provision of equal access to education, age-appropriate
vocational training, and job opportunities for both
boys and girls. They also need familiar, safe and
nurturing routines — particularly within families and
in supportive school environments — to heal, build
resilience and cope with stress and trauma.
That is why the United States Government prioritizes
not only life-saving child protection programming
but also efforts that support children’s longer-term
recovery, including through education. To demonstrate
the United States Government’s commitment to the
children, families and communities in the Sahel in this
regard, we recently provided $2.3 million to extend
Education Cannot Wait, Burkina Faso’s first emergency

S/PV. 8756

response programme, to sustain education services in
conflict-affected communities.
We will continue to invest in preventative,
responsive and gender-sensitive programming to protect
children from violence, including in their schools. The
Trump Administration remains as committed as ever
to empowering children by promoting their access to
essential social services, including education, and
increasing their participation in processes that affect
their lives and shape their future.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the briefers
for their important observations and recommendations.
Rimana Youssouf Assane Mayaki’s testimony attests to
the importance of protecting schools from attacks and
her courage impels us to act.
We are grateful to the Niger for hosting this timely
debate, in particular since we just commemorated the
International Day to Protect Education from Attack
yesterday. We also thank the Niger for its efforts with
regard to presidential statement S/PRST/2020/8, which
was adopted today.
In conflict-affected countries, armed forces and
armed groups continue to violate international law and
attack schools and use them for military purposes. This
impacts the future of entire generations of children and
dashes any hope of returning to normal life.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) states
that there were 494 verified attacks on schools in
2019, primarily in the Syrian Arab Republic, Palestine,
Afghanistan and Somalia. It also indicates that the
Sahel region has sometimes experienced the spillover
effect of armed groups’ activities affecting other
countries, including cross-border attacks on schools.
The impact of these attacks, along with the coronavirus
disease pandemic, is devastating for students, but also
for teachers and communities in general.
As a result, there has been a dramatic decline in
school attendance, leaving untold numbers of children
without education, facing psychological trauma and
serious injury and, all too often, costing them their
lives. Without access to education, an entire generation
living in conflict will grow up without the skills to
support their countries’ economies and political and
social development, thus exacerbating the cycle in
which children remain trapped.

20-2338513/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

We condemn all attacks on schools and their use
for military purposes. We call on all parties to conflict
to put an immediate end to that practice. The Safe
Schools Declaration has been a positive channel for
increased commitments to protecting children in armed
conflict and their right to education. For example,
the Governments of Burkina Faso, Mali — and your
country, Mr. President, the Niger — and others in the
region have endorsed the Declaration, joining 105 other
States around the world, including the Dominican
Republic. I take this opportunity to congratulate Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines on having also endorsed
the Declaration yesterday.
However, increased international attention to the
Sahel region and the security situation there is vital.
We encourage those Member States that have not done
so to support the Safe Schools Declaration in order
make that agenda universal and foster increased action
in that regard.
Attacks on education must be systematically
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
In that respect, support for and cooperation with
international criminal-accountability mechanisms such
as the International Criminal Court are key. Another
important measure is the training of national defence
and security forces in international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Education must continue during armed conflict and
be a channel for the promotion of peace, and provide
physical and psychosocial support to students. To that
end, States must cooperate with schools and university
communities, civil society, community members and
other relevant stakeholders to develop early-warning
systems, risk-reduction strategies and comprehensive
safety and security plans.
In that connection, while responding to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, States must ensure that
the reopening of schools is in line with the Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict.
Female students and teachers living in conflictaffected countries are often targeted during attacks,
experiencing terrible acts of violence within schools
but also on the way to school. These include rape,
sexual slavery and abduction. This puts at risk the
critical education needed to address gender inequalities
and discrimination. Without access by girls to
education, women’s participation in decision-making
14/21

10/09/2020

and leadership in politics and in conflict prevention are
greatly affected.
Today’s debate further highlights the urgent need to
ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping missions
have a monitoring and reporting mechanism and can
appoint senior child-protection and child-rights experts
in peace missions.
Finally, as Malala would say, “Let us pick up
our books and our pens; they are our most powerful
weapons. One child, one teacher, one book and one pen
can change the world”.
Children’s right to education must be guaranteed
and remain a priority during conflict so as to ensure a
safe and peaceful future.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of the Niger for having taken the initiative
to convene this important meeting. We would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore; and the other briefers
for their Contributions to today’s discussions.
The succession of never-ending armed conflicts and
the alarming information that we receive periodically
about civilian casualties, including children, are proof
of the relevance of the topic of today’s meeting.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
its flagship resolution 1612 (2005), through which the
members of the Security Council unanimously showed
their determination to protect the most vulnerable
people in any armed conflict, that is, the children.
In resolution 1998 (2011), the Council stressed in
particular that it is unacceptable to attack the most
important civilian objects: schools and hospitals.
Since then, the situation of children who, by accident
and against their will, find themselves in situations of
armed conflict is subject to continuous monitoring
by the Security Council and its specialized Working
Group. We hope that the presidential statement adopted
today (S/2020/PRST/8) will enable us to strengthen the
protection of children and respect for international law,
particularly international humanitarian law.
We are in full agreement with the efforts of States
to protect civilian objects, including schools, from
unlawful armed attacks. We are heartened to see that
existing norms of international humanitarian law
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

provide us with an answer to the question of which
buildings are civilian objects and which are military,
and under which circumstances. It is important that
this statement be unequivocal on that account. It is
necessary to respect universal norms of international
humanitarian law and work on the basis of generally
accepted international legal tools.
The Safe Schools Declaration is a political
initiative by a small group of countries and does
not yet enjoy universal support. Unfortunately, the
presidential statement does not reflect one of the most
relevant aspects of the agenda on children, that is, their
repatriation from conflict zones. Recently the Russian
Federation evacuated another group of Russian children
from the Syrian conflict zone. We call on all Member
States to step up their efforts to repatriate children who
find themselves in conflict zones. Children should not
suffer because of the unlawful terrorist activities of
their parents and guardians.
How a State treats its children shows how civilized
that State is. Syria, including with the support of the
Russian Federation, has weathered the fight against
international terrorism and against those who hatched
the plan to destroy the Syrian State. Throughout the war,
housing, hospitals and schools have greatly suffered, and
the task now is to rebuild those facilities. Given the start
of the school year, we should pay particular attention
to rebuilding schools and ensuring that children have
access to education. To that end, we need the necessary
school equipment, which has been regularly sent to
Syria as part of Russian humanitarian aid.
Russia shares the concerns on security in the
Sahel. In that region, terrorist activity and inter-ethnic
and intercommunal conflict are increasing, as is drug
trafficking and organized crime. Armed groups openly
resort to barbaric methods of warfare, deliberately
targeting civilian objects, including schools. It is
children who suffer from this situation. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has rendered the situation in the
region even more complex, heightening the distress of
the population, including children.
In that connection, we reaffirm our full support
to all of those who are fighting a tough battle against
terrorism in the region. We are certain that even given
the limitations resulting from the epidemic, African
States and public institutions will be able to successfully
overcome the challenges before them. The work done
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the

S/PV. 8756

Sahel and cooperation with the African Union and
other regional organizations should make this possible.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I wish to begin by welcoming your commitment,
Mr. President, to the protection of children and schools
as a priority of your presidency. We are also pleased
to see the adoption today of presidential statement
S/PRST/2020/8 on this very important topic, facilitated
by the Niger and Belgium.
I thank today’s briefers for their words and their
actions. I also warmly congratulate, in particular, our
young activists from the Niger for their testimony
and their action on the ground. Through them, I pay
tribute to the work of all the actors on the ground
committed to child protection and education, especially
in the extremely challenging context of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. I also commend UNESCO’s critical
action on this issue, in conjunction with the other
United Nations actors.
We have just commemorated the first International
Day to Protect Education from Attack. This day and this
debate remind us of a chilling reality, which many here
have spoken about today. Attacks on schools persisted
in 2019 and are continuing this year. The latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) has identified
nearly 1,000 attacks on schools and hospitals, in full
violation of international law. In the Sahel region,
several thousand children have dropped out of school.
The right to education for girls and adolescent girls, in
particular, is under threat. Naturally, the coronavirus
disease pandemic amplifies those difficulties.
The closure of schools makes children, especially
girls, more vulnerable to early labour and early and
forced marriage.
In that context, the Security Council must remain
mobilized, through its Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and through its actions as a whole.
In that regard, I reiterate the crucial implementation
of resolution 2532 (2020), endorsing the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire. I also commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Envoys
and, of course, Special Representative Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter — whose work I welcome — to ensure
that the issue of child protection continues to be raised
directly with parties to conflicts.
For its part, France will continue to play an
active role. We will continue to call for the universal
endorsement of the Paris Commitments, which make

20-2338515/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

schooling a priority in the fight against the recruitment
and exploitation of children. We also call for the
endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, whose
fifth anniversary we commemorate. In that regard,
I commend the remarkable and critical work of the
Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack.
These documents are important and complementary
commitments to the ratification of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and all its protocols.
France has also made education a priority of
its external action. It has significantly increased
its bilateral aid in this area and actively supports
UNESCO, in particular in strengthening the resilience
of young people in the face of violent extremism in the
Sahel. In addition, in 2018, France recommitted to the
Global Partnership for Education with a contribution
of €200 million for the 2018-2020 cycle. It will actively
participate in the campaign to mobilize resources for the
partnership’s replenishment conference scheduled for
the summer of 2021. Since girls in particular are victims
of violence and inequality, France is also supporting
the implementation of protective environments for girls
in schools through the Priority for Equality initiative,
which operates in the Sahel countries.
These issues remain at the heart of our commitment
in the Sahel.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): This week, many of us
here brought our kids back to school after the summer
break. Teachers here in New York have made every
effort to ensure a safe space in which they can feel
protected. It is a scandal and a tragedy that many
children in conflict-ridden parts of the world are going
through very different experiences.
Today’s briefers bear witness to one of the most
serious violations of children’s rights — attacks
on schools. I thank Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Henrietta Fore, Marika Tsolakis and, in particular, our
young briefers Rimana and Hadiza for their bravery in
standing before the Council and recounting their stories
of perseverance and courage.
In 2011, Germany put forward resolution 1998
(2011), which set in place important standards and
provisions for the protection of schools and hospitals.
In spite of progress that has been made since then, we
see that attacks and threats of attacks against schools
are on the rise. The initiative of the Niger and Belgium
is therefore key. It is also important to update resolution
1998 (2011) with today’s presidential statement
16/21

10/09/2020

S/PRST/2020/8. It is important that we recognize
the ongoing threat for children — especially girls, as
many have mentioned today — arising from attacks
on schools and that we prescribe relevant additional
operative measures.
Let me say a few words on the role of schools. They
are far more than places of education; they are safe
spaces in which children can learn and play, places for
friendships and social encounters and places of critical
thinking and creativity. They are the places that are key
to creative inclusive societies.
It is therefore all the more deplorable that for many
children around the world, schools have become places
of horror and grief, like in Syria, as German Foreign
Minister Heiko Maas said in the Council in February
(see S/PV.8734), where the regime and Russia have
been bombing civilian infrastructure, such as schools
and hospitals. That must end now. The Niger is another
worrisome example. There too, attacks on schools have
created a lot of harm and human tragedy.
Germany is also concerned about attacks on other
educational facilities, such as universities.· Some
attacks deliberately target girls’ schools and result in
the most heinous crimes: human trafficking, sexual
and gender-based violence and abuse. Also, girls suffer
disproportionately, even in instances where attacks
on education do not target them specifically. The Safe
Schools Declaration is crucial. We encourage all those
who have not yet done so to endorse the Declaration
and, more importantly, to implement it.
Because of the threat of the coronavirus disease,
millions of children worldwide remain out of school.
In situations of conflict, that is of particular concern;
children are deprived of their basic education. They are
also often stripped of any access to health services and
regular food supply, as those functions and services
are frequently provided through schools. We note with
grave concern that children with disabilities might
encounter heightened obstacles to returning to school
once they are out. The Secretary-General has called on
all Member States to adopt what he called “aggressive
back to school strategies” and to prioritize the reopening
of schools. Germany fully supports that call, which is
of particular importance in situations of conflict.
Let me say a word on the annual report and listings.
Attacks on schools and hospitals are a trigger for listing
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

conflict. The presidential statement that we have
adopted today contains several concrete measures to
enhance monitoring and reporting, for example, on the
regional and subregional dynamics of armed conflict
on children. The attacks and abductions carried out
by Boko Haram are a visible example of violations of
children’s rights that have to be monitored, prevented
and prosecuted cross-regionally.
We are also concerned about other violations, such
as sexual and gender-based violence, some conducted
by State actors, such as in Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Germany’s view, it is
imperative that the findings of the Secretary-General’s
report consistently reflect the listing in the annexes. It
is a question of credibility.
My last point is that, in our view, it is more
important than ever that the Working Group, now in
its fifteenth year, continues to closely monitor the
situation of children in the conflicts on the agenda of
the Security Council. Belgium has led the way. We
welcome the new interactive dialogues with peace
operations and UNICEF and hope that such formats are
being continued.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that schools must
be safe spaces — zones of peace — and parties to
conflict need to understand that killing children,
raping children and destroying schools and hospitals
will never be a winning military strategy. It is a crime
against humanity and a crime against our future, and it
needs to stop.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the Niger for organizing today’s meeting
and thanks Executive Director Fore and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba
de Potgieter for their briefings. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of civil society. I
would like to thank Rimana in particular for her briefing;
her story is very moving and thought-provoking.
In May, the General Assembly adopted resolution
74/275, proclaiming 9 September as the International
Day to Protect Education from Attack. Yesterday,
we jointly participated in the first celebration of the
International Day. The initiative of the Niger, as
President of the Security Council this month, to hold a
debate on attacks against schools as a grave violation of
children’s rights is of special significance.

S/PV. 8756

More than 20 years have elapsed since the Council
first considered the issue of children and armed
conflict (see S/PV.4037). It is regrettable that a quarter
of the children in the world are still living in countries
affected by violent conflicts. For them, education could
have been an opportunity to change their destiny and
break the vicious cycle of violent conflict. However,
in the past five years, attacks on educational facilities
have killed or injured more than 20,000 students and
educators. Ruthless wars and cruel terrorist activities
have deprived children of their innocence and right
to education and, worse still, have undermined the
potential of social progress and development.
Schools cannot fall victim to violent conflict. The
international community must act to create a safe space
for every child to realize his or her dream. In this regard,
I would like to emphasize the following four points.
First, school should be a place of peace, free from
the transgression of armed conflict. Attacks on schools
constitute one of the six grave violations against
children’s rights. The prohibition against attacks on
schools, as provided for in international humanitarian
law, is a redline that cannot be crossed. The civilian
character of schools must be respected. Any attacks on
schools, students and teaching staff as well as the use
of schools for military purposes must be condemned
in the strongest terms and be stopped immediately.
China welcomes the presidential statement just adopted
by the Council (S/PRST/2020/8) and encourages the
Secretary-General and the relevant United Nations
agencies to continue, in accordance with their
mandates, to strengthen the monitoring and reporting
of such attacks in conflict situations.
Secondly, we should increase investment in
education to prevent schools from becoming a weak
link vulnerable to violent attacks. Education is an
important means of peacebuilding, as it helps countries
in conflict realize their vision of peace as they embark
on a path of sustainable development. All countries
should prioritize the development of education and
increase investment in educational resources, including
building and strengthening school infrastructure and
expanding the resiliency of school premises against
risks and shocks. At the same time, we should combine
legal and administrative means to prevent schools from
becoming targets of armed attacks. The international
community and the relevant United Nations agencies
should, on the basis of full respect for the ownership of
the countries concerned, actively help these countries

20-2338517/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

strengthen capacity-building and resolve, inter alia,
practical difficulties in financing and technology.
Thirdly, education cannot wait. The learning
opportunities for children in conflict should be
guaranteed. Education should not be subject to forced
interruption because schools are destroyed by war,
given that being away from schools may expose children
to more threats of violence. It is urgent to restore and
rebuild school buildings to create favourable conditions
for children to return to school. Digital technology and
remote learning have the potential to open up more
learning opportunities for children affected by conflict
and minimize the negative impact of school closures.
The international community should help countries in
conflict bridge the digital divide so that remote learning
benefits every child. Relevant United Nations agencies
should strengthen coordination to form synergy in
expanding digital education in conflict areas.
Fourthly, we must keep children away from
gunfire and effectively take responsibility for the
next generation. Only by preventing and resolving
conflicts can we protect children from being harmed
by armed conflicts. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has exacerbated the plight of children in conflict
areas. All parties should therefore continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to children in conflict, take
measures to alleviate the impacts of unilateral sanctions
on children and make the greatest effort to ensure their
health and safety.
China calls on all parties to conflict to heed the call
of Secretary-General Guterres for a global ceasefire
and to promote, through consultation and negotiations,
the process of peace and reconciliation. The Council
should earnestly fulfil its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, strive to
settle disputes and conflicts through mediation, and
create a peaceful and stable environment for children
to grow.
Education is the foundation of a long-term plan.
China has always made the development of education
a strategic priority. At the same time, it attaches great
importance to providing educational assistance to other
developing countries. In the past five years, China
has helped build 123 schools and vocational training
centres for fellow developing countries. In Bujumbura,
the capital of Burundi, a vocational school that
China helped to build can accommodate 500 students
studying mechanical automation, agricultural-produce
18/21

10/09/2020

food processing, and other disciplines. In the town of
Al-Majadel, in south-eastern Lebanon, Ali, an 11-yearold boy, drew a picture for Chinese peacekeepers after
learning that they were there to help build a square and
renovate classrooms in his school. The two peace doves
in the picture carry the flags of China and Lebanon,
respectively. Clearly, Ali deeply longs for and cherishes
the opportunity to learn.
Children in conflict have already experienced
too much undeserved pain and suffering, yet so long
as there is education, there is hope. Let us join hands
and try our utmost to guarantee each and every child
the right to education and protect his or her safety and
healthy growth. Therein lies the meaning of all our
work, which is also the basic premise for building a
better future.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would also like to thank
the Niger for organizing today’s important debate.
We would also like to thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive and eye-opening presentations.
As Indonesia has repeatedly underscored, children
are not soldiers. They are our future. Therefore, their
rights must be ensured to enable them to become our
future agents of peace. Access to quality education is
a right for children that gives them the foundation to
contribute to peace and security.
However, observations today show that conflict
is obstructing children’s right to education. Schools,
which have traditionally been safe places, are targeted.
In 2019, almost 500 schools were under attack. Children
are also often attacked while on their way to or from
school. Teachers and educators have also been targeted,
as mentioned by Ms. Virginia Gamba and Ms. Henrietta
Fore. Indonesia therefore remains deeply concerned
over the resulting alarming number of children
denied access to quality education and the increasing
attacks on schools, including in the Sahel region. The
presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) adopted today
clearly demonstrates our solid and firm support for the
protection of children and schools. We thank the Niger
and Belgium for initiating the statement. Against that
backdrop, allow me to highlight three pertinent points
on this matter.
First, with regard to strengthening national
capacities on child protection, national Governments
have the primary role to protect all children and provide
their educational needs. By strengthening national
capacities, including education budget facilities,
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

Governments would be able to develop specific
provisions that protect children’s rights, specifically
their right to education. National legislation and legal
frameworks would be geared towards the protection of
children and their education. Child protection should
also ensure that there is no discrimination in education.
Girls should have the same rights as boys in education,
as well as in all walks of life.
Indonesia is committed to ensuring the accessibility
of education at all levels and for all students. Today, we
have the fourth largest education system in the world,
covering approximately 646,000 schools, 3 million
teachers and 60 million students. Over decades, there
has also been a significant improvement in school
enrolment at all levels in Indonesia. Our current
priority is to improve the quality and learning outcomes
of education. We do not stop there. We also share our
experience with many countries and assist in rebuilding
schools in our neighbouring countries.
Secondly, regarding the importance of promoting
a multi-stakeholder approach, the national efforts of
Governments and the continued support of United
Nations agencies, regional organizations and civil
society organizations are equally important in
restoring safe access to schools. We commend the
work of UNICEF. We also commend the support of
peacekeeping missions, which continuously work hand
in hand to rehabilitate, repair and replace schools that
have been subject to attacks. They also need to find
innovative ways to provide education in conflict areas.
Indonesian peacekeepers have contributed to
promoting education through teaching activities and
educational videotapes and books. Our peacekeepers in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as well
as in many United Nations agencies, have also engaged
with children through civil-military cooperation and
the use of smart cars as a tool for mobile learning.
As we discuss this important issue, it becomes
more pertinent to once again promote community
engagement and training for peacekeepers related to
the issue of child protection.
Thirdly, protecting schools has been a dire
challenge in armed conflict. It is even worse during the
coronavirus disease pandemic. While many schools are
opening in many countries, including here, after months
of the pandemic, schools in conflict areas are closed
indefinitely. For them, education becomes a luxury,
and less a priority, due to the economic difficulties and

S/PV. 8756

security concerns as a side effect of the pandemic. They
do not have the luxury of having a virtual or digital
education, as in many developed countries; hence our
job to ensure concrete action and support for children
in armed conflict.
Children affected by conflict now face heightened
vulnerabilities because of the pandemic. Restrictions to
mitigate its spread become a challenge for educational
activities and response to violations against children.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2020/881,
annex) for today’s debate, we strongly support the
preservation of and respect for the civilian character
of schools, including during the pandemic. Any attack
should be condemned.
Indonesia also reaffirms the call for a global
ceasefire that may become a critical moment to rebuild
schools in conflict situations. That is needed for
development to proceed and prosper. We also appeal to
all stakeholders and donors to enhance the contribution
and assistance to countries in need to ensure that
children can have their education.
This year also marks 20 years since the adoption of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. The Protocol strongly condemns direct attacks
on objects that have a significant presence of children,
particularly schools. The issue at hand is not really
the access to education but the safety and security to
be educated. Children are not soldiers. They are our
future. Their place is in school to study and reach their
full potential.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): I would first like
to thank the Niger for organizing this debate to discuss
such an important issue and to mark the first-ever
International Day to Protect Education from Attack
yesterday. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba, Executive Director Fore and
Mr. Tsolakis for their contributions to this discussion.
We extend our sincerest gratitude to Rimana for sharing
her personal experiences and efforts to promote girls’
education. Her testimony attests to the importance
of children’s participation in discussions concerning
peace and security issues that concern them. We very
much hope that we still have the opportunity to hear
from Hadiza, and we very much support her work to
promote education.

20-2338519/21

S/PV.8756

Children and armed conflict

Education is a human right. It plays a vital role
in building stable communities founded on mutual
respect, greater understanding and equal opportunity.
Yet increasing numbers of attacks against educational
facilities gravely undermine that right.
We are deeply concerned by the global increase in
attacks and threats of attack on educational facilities,
including in Burkina Faso and Mali. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to include Burkina Faso
and Cameroon in next year’s annual report on children
and armed conflict. We call on all parties to conflict
to respect and protect access to basic human rights,
including quality education, and put in place measures
to end and prevent attacks on educational facilities.
We know attacks on educational facilities
disproportionately impact girls and are often intended
to impede girls’ access to education. This is particularly
troubling, as ensuring access to quality education for
women and girls at all levels, including in situations of
armed conflict, is key to eliminating gender inequality
and discrimination. Girls already face significant
challenges in the Sahel region and globally, including
high levels of child marriage, sexual violence and
harassment, and attacks and threats of attack make
them even more vulnerable to violations. Mass school
closures globally because of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic have also exacerbated these
challenges, particularly for girls, whose access to
education is even lower in crises.
This is why the United Kingdom calls for
12 years of quality education for all girls by 2030. The
United Kingdom is harnessing the full breadth of its
efforts — diplomatic, humanitarian, development and
military — to protect education from attack. We are
providing $117 million to Education Cannot Wait, the
global fund for education in emergencies, $6.5 million
of which we announced this year as an additional uplift
to support COVID-19 specific emergency education
in fragile contexts. Our commitment includes up to
$39 million specifically earmarked for the Sahel and
neighbouring countries, helping up to 100,000 children,
50 per cent of whom are girls, receive the quality
education that they deserve.
The United Kingdom has also endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration and accompanying Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict. These instruments
recognize the power of safe, inclusive, quality
20/21

10/09/2020

education, from childhood to adulthood, to establish
routine and purpose in chaos, supporting post-conflict
reconstruction, reintegration and peace. More than 100
Member States have recognized this and endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration as a key tool for protecting
education in conflict. I would like to join others in
congratulating Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on
endorsing it yesterday.
We know that some Member States are concerned
that the Declaration and Guidelines are inconsistent with
or go beyond existing law. We conducted a full review
and concluded that the Guidelines complement existing
international humanitarian and human rights law,
reflecting the best operational practice that the United
Kingdom already follows and facilitating compliance
by providing clear, flexible and practical guidance.
We applaud the tremendous efforts of the Niger and
Belgium to ensure that reference to the Declaration has
been included in presidential statement S/PRST/2020/8,
adopted today, in spite of opposition. We strongly urge
Member States that have not done so already to endorse
the Declaration and commit to avoiding military use
of educational facilities. We offer our full support and
assistance to those who take these critical steps.
Finally, armed forces are essential to protecting
students, teachers and educational facilities in conflict
zones. The United Kingdom Armed Forces is one of
the first in the world to have a dedicated policy on
human security, integrating into military planning and
operations the Safe Schools Declaration and Guidelines
and relevant Security Council resolutions. We strongly
urge Member States to integrate guidance on military
use of educational facilities into military planning
and operations.
Protecting education from attack is a strong
investment in our collective global future. It is time we
took it seriously.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have asked for the floor again in connection
with the statement made by the representative of
Germany, in which he said that Russia and the Syrian
regime continue their bombing. I would like to ask his
purpose in making such accusations. Because he has
not been working at the United Nations very long, he
20-23385

10/09/2020

Children and armed conflict

may not know that, here in the Security Council, we
must comply with the norms of diplomatic politeness
and etiquette. We do not call the Government of a
sovereign State a “regime”, at least not here.
With regard to the accusations, the United Nations
is often subject to attempted abuse and manipulation
aimed at promoting narrow political interests. The
representative of Germany probably knows that, facing
certain pressures, the United Nations established the
so-called Board of Inquiry to investigate a series of
incidents that have occurred in north-western Syria,
but the Board has actually refuted the accusations
of strikes by the Russian Armed Forces on civilian
objects, including schools. We held a special press
conference on this topic at the United Nations on
16 September 2019, at which we provided evidence. We
also circulated as an official document of the Security
Council the materials resulting from this investigation
by the Russian Ministry of Defence that clearly and
firmly refuted these accusations.
Unfortunately, it has become a regular practice
to trust unverified, clearly false data. We call such
information fake. I presume that the representative of
Germany has a big problem with information sources.

S/PV. 8756

We are very well aware why he so painstakingly
conceals them. I assure the Council that Russia
will continue to comply with its obligations under
international humanitarian law. The representative of
Germany has highlighted on several occasions that the
Russian Air Force is using effective systems to verify
its targets, which rules out the possibility of striking
civilian facilities.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Germany has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I would just like to say
two short things.
First of all, I am encouraged to hear from our
Russian colleague that Russia is taking the legal
obligations under which we all stand seriously. As is
often the case in life, the proof of the pudding is in
the eating.
Secondly, with regard to my remarks on Syria, I
should like to say that I have nothing to add and nothing
to take away from what I said.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

20-2338521/21
