so

~encral Allembly-Twenty-third Senion

9. Invites the Secretary-General and the United
Nations organs and specialized agencies concerned to
take action, as appropriate, on the resolutions and
recommendations of the Conference ;
10. Further invites the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on
the measures .taken and the progress achieved in the
implementation of the recommendations of the Conference by Member States, the United Nations organs,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations concerned;
11. Decides to keep under review to the extent possible the resolutions of the Conference in connexion with
related agenda items.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2443 (XXID). Reepect for and implementation of
human rights in occupied territories
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 1949,30
Mindful of the principle embodied in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights regarding the right of
everyone to return to his own country, and recalling
Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June
1967, General Assembly resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of
4 July 1967 and 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
Commission on Human Rights resolution 6 (XXIV)
of 27 February 196831 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1336 (XLIV) of 31 May 1968, in which
those United Nations orians called upon the Government of Israel, inter alia, to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the area of military
operations since the outbreak of hostilities,
Recalling the telegram dispatched by the Commission
on Human Rights on 8 March 1968, calling upon the
Government of Israel to desist forthwith from acts of
aestroying homes of the Arab civilian population in
areas occupied by Israel,82
Recalling also Security Council resolution 259 ( 1968)
of 27 September 1968, in which the Council expressed
its concern for the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the Arab territories under military
occupation by Israel, and deplored the delay in the
implementation of Council resolution 237 ( 1967),
Noting resolution I on respect for and implementation of human rights in occupied territories, adopted
by the International Conference on Human Rights on
7 May 1968,33 in which the Conference, inter alia:
(a) Expressed its grave concern at the violation of
human rights in Arab territories occupied by Israel,
( b) Drew the attention of the Government of Israel
to the grave consequences resulting from the disregard
of fundamental freedoms and human rights in occupied
territories,
ao United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.
81 See Official ReconJ.s of the Economic and Social Council,
Fort31-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chapter

XVIII.

82 Ibid., para. 400.
88 See Final Act of the foten1ationat Conference on Human

Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 5.

( c) Called upon the Government of Israel to desist
forthwith from acts of destroying homes of the Arab
civilian population inhabiting areas occupied by Israel
and to respect and implement the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19493 4 in occupied territories,
( d) Affirmed the inalienable rights of all inhabitants
who have lef~ their homes as a result of the outbreak
of hostilities in the Middle East to return home, resume
their normal life, recover their property and homes, and
rejoin their families according to the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
1. Decides to establish a Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, composed of three Member States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Special Committee ;
3. Requests the Government of Israel to receive
the Special Committee, co-operate with it and facilitate
its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever
the need arises thereafter;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the necessary facilities for
the performance of its task.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2444 (XXIll). Reepect for human right• In armed
conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the necessity of applying basic humanitarian principles in all armed conflicts,
Taking note of resolution XXIII on human rights
in armed conflicts, adopted on 12 May 1968 by the
International Conference on Human Rights,85
Affirming that the provisions of that resolution need
to be implemented effectively as soon as possible,
1. Affirms resolution XXVIII of the XX.th International Conference of the Red Cross held at Vienna
in 1965, which laid down, inter alia, the following principles for observance by all governmental and other
authorities responsible for action in armed conflicts :
(a) That the right of the parties to a conflict to
adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited;
( b) That it is prohibited to launch attacks against the
civilian populations as such ;
( c) That distinction must be made at all times between persons taking part in the hostilities and members of the civilian population to the effect that the
latter be spared as much as possible ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other appropriate international organizations, to
study:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in all armed conflicts;
H United Nations, Treat31 Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

°"

BG See Final Act of the International Confermce
H..,.
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.

Re10Jutiou1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

( b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians, prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts and the
prohibition and limitation of the use of certain methods
and means of warfare ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all other
necessary steps to give effect to the provisions of the
present resolution and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the steps he has
taken;
4. Further requests ::\Iember States to extend all
possible assistance to the Secretary-General in the preparation of the study requested in paragraph 2 above;
5. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Hague Conventions of 1899
and 1907,30 the Geneva Protocal of 1925 37 and the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. 38
1748th plenary 111ecting,
19 December 1968.

2445 (XXIII). Teaching in schools of the
purposes and principles of tile Charter of
the United Nations and the structure and
activities of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies, with particular reference to human rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Year for Human
Rights should be.the occasion for new efforts to improve
the standard of knowledge about the United Nations
and, in particular, about its efforts in the field of human
rights,
Recalling its resolutions 137 (II) of 17 November
1947 and 1511 (XV) of 12 December 1960 concerning
the teaching in schools of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the structure
and activities of the Organization and the specialized
agencies,
Considering that such teaching is not yet sufficiently
widespread, in particular in primary and secondary
schools, despite the efforts of 1Iember States and of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Convinced that in order to achieve the desired results
such teaching must start at an early stage of education,
Conscious of the fact that young people cannot receive training which meets the requirements of a world
increasingly characterized by the interdependence of
peoples if educators do not themselves receive special
instruction in international organization,
1. Requests States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to take steps,
as appropriate and according to the scholastic system
of each State, to introduce or encourage:
(a) The regular study of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies and of the principles proclaimed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in
other declarations on human rights, in the training of
teaching staff for primary and secondary schools;

SI

~ b) Progressive instruction on the subject in question in the curricula of primary and secondary schools,
inviting teachers to seize the opportunities, provided by
teaching, of drawing the attention of their pupils to the
increasing role of the United Nations system in peaceful co-operation among nations and in joint efforts
to promote social justice and economic and social progress in the world ;
2. Fti, ther requests States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to draw the
attention of the competent authorities in private scholastic institutions to the present resolution and to invite
them to make the necessary efforts for the achievement
of the aims envisaged in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue and to encourage the study of appropriate ways and means
of promoting the achievement of the .aims envisaged
in the present resolution ;
4. Further requests the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the other
specialized agencies concerned and th,: United Nations
Development Programme to provide assistance to Member States, particularly those which are developing
countries, with a view to enabling them to achieve the
objectives envisaged in paragraph 1 above.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

Co1wffltions 011d Declaratioiis 1899-1907 (New York, Oxford

2446 (XXIII). Meaaures to achieve the rapid and
total elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of the policy
of apartheid in particular
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that during the International Year
for Human Rights large-scale violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms continue to take place,
Gra1:'ely ~once:ned about the continuing eviction and
detent10n, 1mpnsonment and murder of nationalists
and freedom fighters in southern Africa and in colonial
Territories,
Noting resolutions III, IV and VIII of 11 May 1968
of th~ International Conference on Human Rights811
pledgmi ~up~ort for mea~u~es to achieve the rapid and
total ehmmat1on of coloma!tsm and all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of apartheid in particular
and for the treatment as prisoners of war of captured
freedom fighters opposed to the policies of apartheid
and colonialism,
1. Condemns the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal for their persistent defiant stand towards the
United Nations and world opinion in respect of their
policies of apartheid and colonialism, respectively;
2. Further condemns the. policy of racial discrimination of the illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
and deplores the refusal of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nor.them
Ireland, as the administering Power, to take effective
measures to suppress this illegal regime and to ensure
human rights and fundamental freedoms to the people
of Zimbabwe ;
3. Censures the Governments of South Africa and
P<?rtu~al f?r. assi_sting and collaborat_ing with the illegal
minority regime m Southern Rhodesia;

8T League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
as United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

89 See Final Act of lht Intematiot1al Co11ferenct on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2~,
pp. 6, 7 and 9.

-

88 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,

The Hague

University Press, 1918).
