A /68/PV.86

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

86th plenary meeting

Monday, 19 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Miculescu
(Romania), Vice-President, too the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 126
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/827)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.44)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.44.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Under
agenda item 126, entitled “Interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”, I should like to introduce
draft resolution A/68/L.44. The General Assembly has
adopted a resolution under the same name biennially,
most recently as resolution 66/261, which was adopted
by consensus on 29 May 2012, at its sixty-sixth session.
The delegation of Morocco, as represented by
the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU),
Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, who is present with us here
today, has the honour of introducing draft resolution
A/68/L.44 on behalf of 48 State sponsors. The list of
sponsors will remain open with the Secretariat in this
Hall to any Member seeking to join. Morocco hopes
that the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.

The delegation of Morocco, together with the
IPU delegation, has conducted extensive discussions
on the draft resolution, in which all the necessary
information was provided on all amendments. The
draft resolution is based primarily on previous General
Assembly resolutions, with amendments based on the
report of the Secretary-General contained in A/68/827.
The amendments are aimed at enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the IPU, especially with respect to drawing up a new
agreement among the parties to strengthen institutional
relations; contributing to parliamentary work within
the framework of the post-2015 development agenda;
supporting the presence of legislators and allowing
them to participate in the major United Nations
meetings and bodies; strengthening the links between
the parliamentary hearing process and the main
United Nations processes; and encouraging the United
Nations bodies and agencies to take advantage of the
IPU’s experience in strengthening democracy and the
participation of the parliamentary institutions.
Ms. Lee (United States of America): I am honoured
to be addressing the Assembly on behalf of the United
States delegation as a United States congressional
representative to the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly. My colleagues and I recognize the close ties
that are shared between the United Nations, national
parliaments, and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
Let me thank the representative of Morocco
for introducing draft resolution A/68/L.44, entitled
“Interaction between the United Nations, national

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-40281 (E)

*1440281*

A/68/PV.86

parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, and
the draft resolution’s sponsors.
The United States Congress was a founding member
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and played an active
and prominent role for many decades. That is why I am
especially honoured and pleased that the United States
supports and joins consensus on today’s adoption of
the draft resolution. The draft resolution builds on
previously adopted resolutions and has the important
aim of promoting a stronger role for parliaments in the
debates and activities held at the United Nations and
in the implementation of international commitments at
the national level.
The core mission of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
is the promotion of parliamentary democracy, the
elaboration of standards and criteria for democratic
parliamentary practice, the protection of human rights,
the political empowerment of women and greater
transparency and accountability at the global level,
which are in line with United States interests and
priorities.
As a Member of Congress myself — I come
from California, where I represent the thirteenth
congressional district — I have participated in several
delegations and meetings of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union. Most recently, I had the pleasure of hosting
a meeting of parliamentarians at the United States
Congress during the International AIDS Conference in
July 2012. Working with the Inter-Parliamentary Union
over my congressional career, I have witnessed firsthand its important work in mobilizing parliamentary
action towards universal access to HIV care and
treatment.
I want to note the important work of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union in working towards meeting
the 2015 Millennium Development Goals and its
contributions towards the post-2015 development
agenda. Governance is a key goal for the next generation
of development goals, and the United States welcomes
the presence of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in our
shared quest to have strong governance goals.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union also helps to
strengthen parliaments and increase parliamentary
capacity around the world to ensure effective,
accountable Governments, and the United States
welcomes the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
in that regard. The United States also welcomes the
initiative of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to convene

2/12

19/05/2014

the fourth World Conference of Speakers of Parliament
at the United Nations in 2015 as a contribution to the
post-2015 process.
Finally, as the global community is ever so
challenged contending with several complex challenges
simultaneously, it is more important than ever for the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and national parliaments at
large to be involved in the work of the United Nations
to promote peace and diplomacy, uphold international
law, protect the human rights of all, support the
empowerment of women and turn the tide of global
climate change. My colleagues and I look forward to
supporting and enhancing IPU’s activities at the United
Nations.
Ms. Egoli (Italy): Italy has always had a close
association with the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU) — a bond strengthened through the presidency
of Mr. Pier Casini during his term as Speaker of the
Italian Chamber of Deputies from 2005 to 2008. We
commend in particular the democratic mission that the
IPU pursues through the strengthening of parliaments.
As the report of the Secretary-General (A/68/827)
makes clear, the IPU operates at every level to achieve
that goal, often in collaboration with the United
Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations agencies. One of the points that the draft
resolution (A/68/L.44) we are discussing today refers
to is the fourth World Conference of Speakers of
Parliament, which will take place in New York shortly
before the United Nations summit of Heads of State
and Government in September 2015. The Conference
will be a unique opportunity not only to lend political
momentum to the sustainable development goals,
but also to promote a broader reflection on the role
of national parliaments in international relations, on
the modalities for cooperation between parliaments
and national Governments, and on the need to reform
politics so that it is better able to meet the needs of
citizens. And that is a very timely debate also in my
country, if I may add.
Italy greatly appreciates the fact that the gender
dimension is present in all the activities conducted
by the IPU in the areas of support for democracy,
development and peace. The question of women’s rights
and equal opportunities is one of the pillars of the IPU’s
action, as demonstrated by the activities carried out by
the IPU to initiate reforms of election procedures and of
the composition of political parties in order to increase

14-40281

19/05/2014

the presence of women. At least one third of seats
must be occupied by women, according to the Beijing
Declaration.
Allow me to mention that Italy has made remarkable
progress in that area and is now ranked thirty-first in
the world classification maintained by the IPU, with
approximately 29 per cent of seats in Parliament held
by women. The Speaker of the Italian Parliament today,
for example, is a women — Ms. Laura Boldrini — who
is also a member of the preparatory committee of the
Speakers Conference.
Italy, together with its European partners, supports
the IPU’s call to include a democratic governance
goal in the new sustainable development goals.
The consultations that the IPU has conducted with
parliaments throughout the world have demonstrated the
international community’s strong support for that goal.
The contents and modalities of those consultations are
another shining example of the backing that national
parliaments can provide to development and, especially,
to the realization of the ideas at the focus of United
Nations debates. The IPU’s activities are all the more
important as they contribute to achieving that end.
Ms. Ortíz González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico acknowledges the significance of this meeting
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
In an international system based on the principles of the
rule of law and democratic governance, we need stronger
parliamentary participation on a global scale in order
to identify possible solutions to global problems and to
work on them. The parliamentary perspective in United
Nations consultations and decisions strengthens them
whenever it has the support of the representatives of
the people of Member States. States’ commitments that
take parliamentarians’ opinions into account are more
inclusive and therefore more likely to be observed, in
view of the fact that those same actors are responsible
for their implementation at the national level.
The work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union has
strengthened parliaments’ efforts to get involved in
global governance and has promoted transparency and
accountability in the implementation of international
commitments in various areas, such as development,
democracy, cooperation, the environment, the
strengthening of international law, security, peace and
human rights. Mexico therefore firmly believes that this
cooperation between parliamentarians, the IPU and the
United Nations should be encouraged and strengthened.

A/68/PV.86

The Government of Mexico supports cooperation
between the Inter-Parliamentary Union and UN-Women
with a view to incorporating gender perspectives at the
institutional level and to promoting fairness, pluralism
and the participation and representation of women in
parliamentary politics. We have shown our commitment
to this initiative through the recent enactment by our
Congress of an amendment to the Constitution of the
United Mexcian States, introducing a requirement
obliging the parties to ensure gender parity in
candidacies for the federal and local legislatures.
We also recognize the IPU’s efforts to increase
parliamentarians’ familiarity with the principal United
Nations instruments in the areas of disarmament
and non-proliferation. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the IPU’s participation in the second
International Conference on the Humanitarian Impact
of Nuclear Weapons, held in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, in
February. Also worthy of note was the IPU’s role in the
parliamentary forum held within the framework of the
first High-level Meeting of the Global Partnership for
Effective Development Cooperation in Mexico in April,
which emphasized the importance of parliaments to the
international agenda on development and cooperation.
Another highlight is the Inter-Parliamentary
Union’s involvement in the process of forming the
post-2015 development agenda, which is a fundamental
issue. To that end, parliaments and their members have
assumed greater responsibilities in the international
arena and are playing a more active role at the national,
regional and global levels in three areas of sustainable
development — economic, social and environmental.
Mexico’s lawmakers are supporting efforts aimed at
achieving an agenda for universal and transformative
development that is inclusive and whose fundamental
goal is dealing effectively with reducing poverty and
inequality.
Parliaments are significant players in the work
of putting together the international agenda. Their
participation in the work of the United Nations broadens
the Organization’s reach by giving its intergovernmental
arena a wider, more pluralist and qualitative vision of
cultural and political diversity.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that, in an
unprecedented step, the Government and the Congress
of Mexico have agreed on a series of transformative
reforms aimed at making Mexico a more productive
and prosperous country for the benefit of Mexican
families. The reforms we have undertaken include

14-402813/12

A/68/PV.86

policy efforts in the areas of politics and elections,
education,
telecommunications,
competitiveness,
energy, taxation and finance, aimed at creating better
conditions for addressing the challenges involved
in combating poverty and hunger, and at producing
better living conditions for implementing an ambitious
development agenda.
I would like to convey the commitment of Mexico’s
parliamentarians to continuing to actively contribute to
advancing the agenda of this Organization in order to
enrich it and make its implementation more effective.
Mrs. Jurcan (Romania): I would first like to
express our gratitude for the decision to organize
this useful debate — a commemorative one this
year — on interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). We should recall that on 30 June 1889, the
participants in the first Inter-Parliamentary Conference,
in Paris, decided to establish it as a permanent
institution. That conference’s document has been called
the founding act of the Inter-Parliamentary Conference
and thus, indirectly, of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Conceived at the time as an arbitration forum
for resolving differences between States, the IPU of
today could hardly be better characterized than by
the description of one of its founding fathers, Frédéric
Passy, when he said that “The world is made of achieved
utopias. Today’s utopia of today is tomorrow’s reality.”
It is no wonder that this French statesman and his British
counterpart, Sir William Randal Cremer, were awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1901 and 1903, respectively.
As a representative of a country that has
been a member of the IPU since 1891, almost
since its inception, I am proud to note that on its
125th anniversary the Inter-Parliamentary Union enjoys
well-deserved recognition for its remarkable contribution
to strengthening parliamentary institutions worldwide
and promoting democratic governance. It has achieved
numerous accomplishments during that journey, which
is why I must limit myself to mentioning only two.
Its initial membership of 11 countries has now
reached 164 States and 10 associate members. Its initial
focus, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, has
shifted to cover a wide range of connected topics, such
as human rights, the rule of law, the rights of women
and children, gender equality and non-proliferation
and disarmament. At this critical point in time, it is
also focused on speeding up implementation of the

4/12

19/05/2014

Millennium Development Goals and designing the
post-2015 development agenda.
I would like to convey Romania’s appreciation
for the Secretary-General’s report (A/68/827), which
represents a comprehensive review of the specific
actions and political interaction between the United
Nations, national parliaments and the IPU. As the
report notes, the IPU
“is the only parliamentary organization with a
global reach. As such, and as a Permanent Observer
to the United Nations, it is well positioned to
channel the views of parliaments and their members
directly into all major United Nations deliberative
processes [and] is also a key vehicle for supporting
the implementation of global commitments at the
country level both by strengthening the capacities
of parliaments to carry out their legislative,
oversight and representative roles and by providing
them with relevant information about United
Nations operations and decision-making processes”
(A/68/827, para. 3)
We note with satisfaction that in section IV, on
parliamentary oversight of international commitments,
the report contains a reference to the first regional
seminar for Central and Eastern Europe, jointly
organized by the Parliament of Romania and the IPU
in Bucharest in February. The event brought together
70 participants, including 40 members of Parliament
from 13 countries in the region. Recognizing the need
to intensify efforts to promote human rights and the
universal periodic review mechanism of the Human
Rights Council, speakers illustrated the difficulties
faced, particularly due to the lack of experience,
information and resources. In order to overcome those
obstacles and to fulfil the mission to protect human
rights, it was recommended that such a topic take a
central place on parliamentary agendas. The Secretary
General of the IPU concluded that
“the seminar showed that [members of Parliament]
are starting to contribute to the work of the Human
Rights Council and are keen to be more supportive”.
In the same vein, I would like to mention another
recent development related to the topic under discussion
at our debate today. Under our chairmanship-in-office,
the Parliament of Romania hosted, from 9 and 11 May,
the inaugural session of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the South-East European Cooperation Process. In
his opening remarks, the Speaker of the Chamber of

14-40281

19/05/2014

Deputies of Romania declared that what was happening
in Bucharest was a historic moment for Romania and
for the other countries in the region and that it was
well known that that part of the Balkans had always
been troubled by tensions and conflicts. He went on to
say that for the first time all 12 countries in the region
affirmed that they would go along the same path.
The most important message to convey was that
only together can we contribute to the progress of the
entire region. Only together can we promote the common
interest of strengthening stability and security in the
Balkans and provide a European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective for all countries in South-Eastern Europe.
He said that Bucharest was hosting the first Parliament
of the Balkans — a Parliamentary Assembly that
would have a deeper political commitment and greater
responsibility to individual and specific issues in our
region. A joint communiqué of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the South-East European Cooperation
Process was adopted at the end of the meeting.
I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing
our appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Morocco
for drafting the text and for successfully conducting
the negotiations on draft resolution A/68/L.44,
which we are discussing here today. Romania is a
traditional sponsor of the resolution, and I would
like to express my conviction that, this year again,
it will be adopted by consensus. The main thrust of
the document is that, in order to reach the future we
want, all stakeholders — executive and legislative
included — should continue to work together and that
there are still more measures to be taken in order to
achieve greater complementarities and synergies.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
We have read with great interest the report submitted
by the Secretary-General under item 126 of the agenda
of the sixty-eighth session, contained in document
A/68/827. The document, including its informative
annex, describes the specific activities undertaken
in the various areas in the context of cooperation
among the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). We thank the
Secretary-General for the clear presentation of the
report and its seven recommendations. There is no
further need to underscore the extremely important
role of national parliaments in their triple function
of representation, legislation and oversight in such
diverse and complex areas as governance, economic
development, social progress, understanding and

A/68/PV.86

cooperation among peoples and nations. The bicameral
Parliament of Cameroon is increasingly strengthening
its effectiveness in that approach.
The IPU, an institution that now comprises
more than 164 member States, will celebrate its
125th anniversary in June. Throughout the years, it
has demonstrated its importance, effectiveness and
contribution to the conduct of international affairs
and cooperation. We welcome the work of its outgoing
Secretary General and congratulate and encourage the
new Secretary General, Mr. Martin Chungong, our
compatriot, who takes over as the first African to lead
the institution in the 125 years of its existence. The IPU
has already greatly benefited and contributed to our
country. May that cooperation and mutual assistance
continue and strengthen.
In Africa, as the report of the Secretary-General
clearly shows, the IPU has played and continues to play
a very important role in the dialogue at the national and
international levels to strengthen peace, social cohesion
and development and to promote the rule of law. We call
on the new Secretary General to continue that work.
We are at a decisive moment in world development
following the important United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, which set out the future
we want. As a result, a number of processes are under
way to establish guidelines, set goals and mobilize
the human, financial and technical resources for their
implementation and monitoring. We share the view
of the Secretary General that the IPU should make a
significant contribution to that activity. It can do so
by raising such awareness among its members and by
gathering and sharing their opinions about the stakes
and challenges and their implications for and true impact
on the rule of law, well-being, benefits, disadvantages,
commitments and obligations for the various peoples of
the world that the IPU is meant to represent.
That is why the seven recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report, in particular
the recommendation contained in paragraph 32 (c)
on the role of national parliaments with regard to the
sustainable development goals, are very relevant. That
is also why Cameroon supports the provisions of draft
resolution A/68/L.44, which, as a sponsor, it submits
for consideration and adoption by all General Assembly
members.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): It is an honour to
speak in this plenary meeting today under agenda item

14-402815/12

A/68/PV.86

126, entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the
United Nations share a common vision of peace,
security, cooperation and development. The primary
purpose of the United Nations, as enshrined in its
Charter, is to maintain international peace and security.
Similarly, the IPU was first established to promote the
concepts of peace and international arbitration. The
IPU focuses on fostering dialogue and cooperation,
considers issues of international interest and promotes
human rights, which are also the main areas of work of
the United Nations.
Viet Nam welcomes the support to the United
Nations by the IPU and its member parliaments,
which has enhanced the United Nations stature and
effectiveness, not only in the international arena but also
at the national level. In that connection, we applaud the
IPU’s efforts in promoting the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), especially
those on women’s empowerment, reducing child
mortality and combating HIV/AIDS, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report (A/68/827). We also
commend the IPU’s continued commitment to provide
the United Nations data on women in politics in order
to track progress on MDG 3, on gender equality and
the empowerment of women, as well as its engagement
in the relevant processes to draft the post-2015
development agenda.
The National Assembly of Viet Nam is the
supreme organ of State power and represents the will
and aspirations of our citizens. Through its powers
in
constitution-making,
law-making,
oversight
and deciding important matters of the country, the
National Assembly of Viet Nam plays an important
leadership role in the country’s endeavours for peace,
stability and development. The National Assembly
has also been instrumental in the implementation of
important international commitments, especially in
the maintenance of peace and security, sustainable
development and the protection and promotion of
human rights.
As an active, constructive and responsible member
of the IPU for the past 35 years, the National Assembly
of Viet Nam has been working closely with the IPU
in realizing the Union’s aspirations, principles and
objectives and has continuously expanded friendly

6/12

19/05/2014

relations with other parliaments and peoples around the
world. It is against the backdrop of that commitment
that Viet Nam will be proud to host the one hundred and
thirty-second IPU Assembly in Hanoi in March 2015,
under the theme “Parliament and the implementation of
sustainable development goals beyond 2015”.
We strongly believe that parliaments have
a crucial role to play in the implementation of
sustainable development goals and the overall post2015 development agenda through their powers in
legislation-making, budget approval and the monitoring
of development commitments. We also believe that
the inputs from parliamentarians will be important
elements to complement the overall United Nations
process.
The complicated situations and tensions in various
parts of the world today, including the ongoing
tensions on the Eastern Sea in South-East Asia,
underline the immense and overriding importance
of preserving peace, which is a sine qua non for all
peaceful endeavours. That requires the continued and
determined promotion of, and constant attention to, the
fundamental principles of international law, including
those related to respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of States, non-threat or use of force
and the peaceful settlement of international disputes
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, which includes the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Lastly, I take this opportunity to thank the IPU for
its hard work and efforts to strengthen the important
interactions with the United Nations. I also wish to
thank the delegation of Morocco for introducing and
facilitating draft resolution A/68/L.44, which we
strongly support and are very pleased to co-sponsor.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is a sponsor of draft resolution A/68/L.44
and reiterates its commitment to achieving greater and
closer cooperation among national parliaments. We
also underscore the work they carry out in supporting
and coordinating increasingly relevant efforts with the
United Nations.
Much has taken place in the world and in the joint
work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the
United Nations on the international agenda. A great deal
has been done to strengthen the working methods of the
IPU and the interaction between the two organizations
since the signing of the agreement establishing their

14-40281

19/05/2014

cooperaton, in 1996, in order to achieve the purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and the fulfilment of
its goals in various areas of work.
Uruguay would like in particular to emphasize
the role of those joint efforts when it comes to
democratizing international relations and in seeking
efficiency in addressing the challenges facing a world
that continues to experience serious crises and must
make use of all possible actors to achieve the efforts
required by the Millennium Development Goals
and, at present, to successfully draft the post-2015
sustainable development agenda. As part of that work,
national parliaments play an undeniable role with the
United Nations in the context of national strategies to
implement the decisions agreed at the United Nations.
The draft resolution recognizes the work of
the IPU in areas such as gender equality, women’s
empowerment and combating violence against women.
It also acknowledges the close cooperation between
the IPU and the various United Nations bodies with
responsibility in those areas, such as the United Nations
Eentity for Gender and Equality and the Empowerment
of Women, the Commission on the Status of Women and
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women.
Uruguay shares the view that the IPU is a focal
point with global reach that facilitates diplomacy
and dialogue, in which all systems of the world are
represented. It therefore provides a unique platform
for monitoring trends and political views globally.
We also believe that the IPU shares the goals of the
United Nations, supports its efforts and works closely
with the Organization. In that context, the elements I
have outlined, as well as others that are part of dayto-day work of the IPU and the United Nations, justify
the call for improving the system of working methods
shared by the two organizations, including a regular
annual exchange on coordination between the United
Nations executive bodies and the members of the IPU’s
leadership, with a view to conferring greater coherence
in the work between the two organizations while
maximizing parliamentary support for the Organization
and forging a strategic partnership between them.
Similarly, given the ongoing trend in the cooperation
between the two organizations, Uruguay believes that it
is necessary to sign a new cooperation agreement that
reflects the progress and developments in the joint work
between the two organizations over the past years and

A/68/PV.86

that grants the IPU enhanced institutional status in line
with the work it carries out, to which I have referred.
Finally, Uruguay supports the decision to include
in the provisional agenda of the Assembly’s seventieth
session an item entitled “Interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”, as well as to request the
Secretary- General to submit a report on that item owing
to the unique nature of the role of national parliaments
and their support for the work of the United Nations.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina resolutely supports enhancing the interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). We therefore
welcome the efforts made by the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to achieve greater and sustained political support
for the work of the United Nations.
The United Nations and the IPU continue to show
their determination to work closely in various areas on
issues as diverse as peace and security, socioeconomic
development, human rights and the promotion of
democracy. We must encourage closer cooperation
between the two organizations, in particular to
strengthen parliamentary institutions in countries
emerging from conflict or transitioning to democracy.
That is why Argentina welcomes the draft resolution
before us (A/68/L.44), which we have sponsored. It
urges the United Nations system to develop a more
structured and integrated way of interacting and to
engage in more intensive joint work with the national
parliaments through their participation in the work of
the General Assembly, in particular with respect to
national development strategies.
The path that has led to this text of the draft
resolution and the adoption of previous resolutions
represents an effort to forge a strategic alliance between
the two organizations, which reflects the evolution of
their mutual cooperation since the original agreement
was signed in 1996. In that respect, I believe we
should consider enhancing and probably reformulating
that agreement in order to give it greater substance.
Likewise, we welcome the fact that the United Nations
system is engaging jointly with national parliaments
through the IPU in a more systematic manner, taking
into account the fact that the national parliaments have
assumed a key role in reviewing and implementing the
various international commitments that the countries
represented at the United Nations have undertaken. In

14-402817/12

A/68/PV.86

that respect, the IPU continues to provide space for the
members of national parliaments to discuss more in
depth the best way of contributing to the main United
Nations processes.
Argentina reiterates the importance of national
parliaments participating in this Organization and
fulfilling the function of representing the interests and
desires of their peoples in order to disseminate and
further democratize the knowledge of the instruments
that are used in United Nations negotiations or that have
been negotiated and to contribute to the ratification
process for such international instruments and the laws
for their implementation. All of that should contribute
to strengthening international norms and multilateral
agreements so that they are not merely rhetorical
and provide the necessary regulation of norms in our
countries. Such participation should also prioritize
agreements reached within the context of national
parliaments when such parliaments exist.
The role of national parliaments is also crucial to
achieving sustainable development goals and the post2015 development agenda, in particular with respect to
monitoring and accountability. A debate was held here
at the United Nations on that issue a few days ago. The
Secretary General of the IPU mentioned in particular
the importance of such parliaments in monitoring and
accountability in the post-2015 development agenda.
My country resolutely supports the role of parliaments
in that regard.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
for the efforts of the Permanent Mission of Morocco
to the United Nations in its role as facilitator of the
negotiations on the draft resolution before the General
Assembly. We hope that the draft resolution will be
adopted by consensus, as in previous years.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation
of Chile welcomes the convening of this debate and
the report of the Secretary-General (A/68/827) on
the interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
We also recognize the work of the IPU President,
Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, and take this opportunity to also
thank its Secretary General, Mr. Anders Johnsson, who
will complete his term in a few weeks. We wish every
success to his successor, Mr. Martin Chungong.
The joint action required by the current
international system to address the many challenges it
faces also requires the involvement of a variety of actors

8/12

19/05/2014

in international processes. As a permanent observer
to the United Nations, the IPU has a key role to play
in representing parliaments and parliamentarians in
those international processes. As noted in the report of
the Secretary-General, parliaments are the main link
between the Governments represented at the United
Nations and the citizens they represent. We therefore
encourage the United Nations and the IPU to continue
to work together on the various challenges — peace
and security, economic and social development, climate
change, international law, human rights and gender
issues, democracy and good governance.
Chile appreciates that draft resolution A/68/L.44
addresses issues that we believe to be important,
in particular the need for a greater contribution
by parliaments at the national level and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union at the global level in the
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda
and the contribution of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
to the work of the Human Rights Council. We also
welcome the possibility of holding joint events for the
United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union in
tandem with the main conferences and processes of
the United Nations. We also appreciate that the gender
perspective continues to be enhanced in the cooperation
between both organizations.
Chile’s interest in strengthening parliamentary
diplomacy has been manifest in its promotion of
parliamentarians’ participation in national delegations
in bilateral official visits and various international
processes. Here at Headquarters, that has been
evident in recent years in the participation by Chilean
parliamentarians in the annual parliamentary hearing
at the United Nations, in meetings organized by the
IPU and UN-Women in the context of the Commission
on the Status Women, and their participation as
representatives in relevant negotiations, such as those
that led to the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty. In
addition, Chilean parliamentarians have participated
in meetings of States parties to the bodies created
pursuant to human rights treaties and other events in
the United Nations system.
I would like to conclude by saying that we are
pleased to sponsor the draft resolution before the
Assembly today. We hope that it will be adopted by
consensus and that it will make a concrete contribution
to further strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

14-40281

19/05/2014

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I welcome draft resolution A/68/L.44,
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
My country fully supports and will sponsor the draft
resolution, and believes that a relatively important step
forward has been taken in terms of the cooperation
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which began back in
1996. We fully agree with the statements made by the
representatives of Argentina and Chile to the effect
that the draft resolution outlines a more structured
cooperation between the Inter-Parliamentary Union
and the United Nations.
In today’s world, it is essential that we improve
interaction and cooperation between national
parliaments, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the
United Nations. The challenges are completely global
and the responses to them must therefore be global,
too. Spain has demonstrated its support for that
interaction many times and perhaps most particularly
in the statement made by the Spanish delegation at the
130th meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, held
in Geneva last year. We also recall the fundamental
participation in and commitment of the members of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union to multilateralism, support
for democracy and the defence of human rights. Proof
of that is the eight Nobel Peace Prize recipients who
distinguished themselves in this important area,
including two of the Inter-Parliamentary Union’s
founders, Frédéric Passy and William Randal Cremer.
Almost all speakers who preceded me emphasized
the importance of achieving greater interaction
between national parliaments, the United Nations and
the citizenry. The United Nations should have even
closer ties to national parliaments, and parliaments to
their citizens, so asto ensure that the decisions made at
the United Nations, whether in the Security Council,
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council, end up on the agendas of national parliaments.
It is those national parliaments that ultimately have to
enact and improve the decisions made here. If we can
solidify this interaction between national parliaments
and the United Nations, and if parliamentarians are
aware beforehand of what is being done in the United
Nations and its bodies, we can make multilateralism
more effective. I would specifically cite the post-2015
development agenda in that respect. Right now, I believe,
the United Nations is establishing the major outlines of
the post-2015 development agenda, and it is essential

A/68/PV.86

that national parliaments, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the United Nations work together to foster the
interaction that is reflected in today’s draft resolution.
This year marks the 125th anniversary of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, and is therefore a suitable
moment for renewing the commitment to cooperation
between the United Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and national parliaments. “Realizing the future
we want for all”, the report submitted to the SecretaryGeneral by the United Nations System Task Team on the
Post-2015 Development Agenda, emphasized the fact
that participation, accountability and the rule of law
make for a solid foundation for establishing inclusive
paths to development.
I would like to conclude by affirming our support
not only through our sponsorship of today’s draft
resolution, but also by acknowledging the splendid
work done by the Permanent Mission of Morocco in
putting it together.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
is pleased to be a sponsor of draft resolution A/68/L.44,
which is before us today. We believe that together with
the United Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU) is critical to the implementation of multilateral
agreements and reforms of global governance, since
our current challenges are unprecedented in number
and size. They transcend national borders and require
multidimensional and multi-level action and synergies.
International relations in a globalized world are complex
and interconnected, and thus compel Governments and
parliamentarians to take on greater responsibilities and
duties. We would therefore like to discuss some of the
major steps needed to achieve that dynamic partnership.
I am very pleased that parliamentarians in the Republic
of Kazakhstan are also active in these efforts.
The IPU and the United Nations can mutually
strengthen their global roles by keeping national
parliaments connected to topical international issues
and abreast of United Nations decisions and resolutions.
Parliaments are the builders of political will and
the architects of future global policies through their
functions of enacting national legislation, ensuring
the implementation of international commitments and
providing the legal foundations for and allocation of
resources.
The IPU and national parliaments have addressed
many issues that are on the agenda of the United Nations.
The United Nations also has much to learn also from

14-402819/12

A/68/PV.86

parliaments and outstanding parliamentarians, many of
whom are frequently our guests. We can facilitate the
inclusion of a substantive parliamentary component in
major international processes, especially when it comes
to accelerating work on those Millennium Development
Goal targets that have not yet been reached and on the
post-2015 development agenda. With its parliament’s
participation, each country can formulate a development
strategy that results in a decision with the potential to
become law.
The entire United Nations system could gain
from the development of a parliamentary dimension
in the work of its agencies, funds and programmes,
with country teams on the ground working closely
with national and even local parliaments on national
development strategies and aid effectiveness.
International law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian and human rights
law, and the rule of law at the national level, represents
the other side of the same coin, and it is a country’s
parliament that enables its society to benefit from all
of them. These processes can be facilitated by events
in which the United Nations and the IPU participate
jointly.
The IPU and parliaments can make a unique
contribution to the work of the Human Rights Council
and its universal periodic review, and to special organs of
the United Nations, providing input for national reports
and receiving findings for consideration and action,
thus ensuring enhanced outcomes. Parliaments can also
provide the legal and fiscal environment so necessary
for implementing United Nations programmes. We also
believe that parliamentarians in developing countries,
too, need not merely be beneficiaries of capacitybuilding or development aid but can themselves become
strong players in the process of democratic governance
through country-level dialogues.
The IPU and national parliaments can help develop
democracy, fight impunity and work on many issues
connected to the work of the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council and its subsidiary
organs. Parliamentarians, like religious leaders, can
also be instrumental in promoting peace and tolerance
among all cultures and religions. My country and its
President, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, as an initiator
of the Congress of World and Traditional Religions,
continue to welcome support on behalf of our
parliamentarians for implementing that noble initiative.

10/12

19/05/2014

In closing, my delegation urges that the draft
resolution before the Assembly today be supported
unanimously. I reiterate Kazakhstan’s readiness to
strengthen the robust interaction between the United
Nations and parliamentary processes in order to achieve
our common global objectives.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, I now
give the floor to the President of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, Mr. Abdelwahad Radi.
Mr. Radi (Inter-Parliamentary Union) (spoke
in French): I am honoured to speak here today on
strengthening interaction among the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU), over which I have the pleasure and honour to
preside.
With a membership of 164 national parliaments,
the IPU is today the only truly global organization of
parliaments. The IPU, which will soon be celebrating
its one hundred and twenty-fifth anniversary, is also
the oldest multilateral organization. It was established
in 1889 to seek peace and democracy as a way to avoid
war. It was therefore a precursor of the United Nations,
which emerged in the aftermath of the Second World
War. We therefore undoubtedly share common ideals
and goals.
The relationship between our two organizations
was formally cemented in 1996 with the signing of a
cooperation agreement. Since then, I am pleased to say
that the United Nations and the IPU have developed a
mutually beneficial relationship that, I have no doubt,
will only grow stronger.
We live in a world today where peace, democracy
and development have never been so close, and yet
they continue to elude so many. The United Nations
itself is being challenged by developments beyond its
control. New forums, networks and social media are
making governance a more complex endeavour than
ever before, at both national and global levels. While
crucial issues such as nuclear disarmament are still
unresolved, other larger threats have emerged, not least
of which is climate change.
Nevertheless, faced with all those upheavals, one
thing is clear: the United Nations must remain at the
centre of global governance. For that to be possible,
national parliaments must first play an enhanced role
in ensuring that what is decided in this Hall is useful to

14-40281

19/05/2014

citizens as a whole and reflects their views and deepest
aspirations and, secondly, ensure that those decisions
are carried out at the national level. That is the purpose
of the relationship between our two organizations.
The draft resolution (A/68/L.44) that is before
us today and the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/827) reflect that flourishing relationship. They
demonstrate tangible progress in our relationship in
just two years in virtually all areas, but also the need
for much more to be done.
I want to take this opportunity to thank all of those
who spoke today in support of our common cause. I
would like to give a few examples of how our work
together can make a difference for citizens, particularly
as we approach 2015, when a new global agenda for
development will be adopted.
In closely monitoring the United Nations-led
process, the IPU has brought the global debate on the
future development agenda to parliaments. From those
discussions, we have developed strong positions on the
need for a new development model centred on human
well-being, and not on all-out economic growth; on
the critical need to aim for democratic governance as
an element of overall development, and not just as an
aspect of sustainable development; and, finally, on the
need for a comprehensive goal on gender equality and
women’s empowerment. Each of those elements is a key
to help open the door to more opportunities, greater
freedom and human rights for all. We have made our
case before the Open-ended Working Group of the
Economic and Social Council and in other discussions
that took place here in New York. We also call on our
members to engage directly with the Governments of
their respective countries.
Do not misunderstand me: it is not the intention of
the IPU to tell the United Nations what to do. Far from
it. Our goal is simply to make sure that parliaments are
fully aware of what is at stake here before decisions
are taken, and that they can discuss the issues among
themselves and with their Government representatives
so that, when the time comes, our countries can take
full ownership of the choices that were made.
Furthermore, once a decision is made, on the post2015 development agenda or any decision, it must be
implemented. In that regard too the role of parliaments
is essential. After all, they are the ones that hold
Governments accountable for the commitments they
have undertaken at the United Nations, and they adopt

A/68/PV.86

the necessary legislation to make them a reality, namely,
through the budget process.
Accountability is not self-evident, especially to
those who are held to account and who tend to show
some resistance. Yet it is the only way to ensure that
commitments are honoured. It is the role of parliaments
to strictly monitor Government action, and we should
support them in that role. The IPU is doing its best to
strengthen the capacities of parliaments around the
world, and, of course, the United Nations is doing
that too, particularly through the United Nations
Development Programme.
But the needs of parliaments far outweigh our
ability to assist them. We will need a much more
concerted effort by the donor community and other
partners to unleash parliaments’ full potential and to
enable them to perform their legislative and oversight
roles everywhere. The United Nations can support
that effort by asking its country teams to work more
closely with parliaments — for example, by ensuring
parliaments are involved in national review processes
and post-conflict political dialogues.
Thanks to the increasingly widespread practice
at the United Nations of carrying out national
reviews — such as those done by the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights
Council and, soon, the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development — it is now possible for
parliaments to contribute to making accountability
at the national level a reality at the global level. The
practice of having parliaments discuss the reports
that Governments present at the United Nations, and
of allowing parliamentarians to participate in the
actual reviews and then to report back thereon to
their colleagues and to facilitate the monitoring and
implementation of the recommendations that emerge
from those reviews, may well become one of best
ways to involve parliaments in the work of the United
Nations.
To facilitate the work ahead and advance our
relationship, the IPU has taken two important
initiatives, both of which are reflected in today’s draft
resolution. The first initiative, which is institutional in
nature, is the establishment of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs
as a central coordinating body to help mainstream the
United Nations agenda through the IPU and its member
parliaments. That unique structure should help to

14-4028111/12

A/68/PV.86

19/05/2014

provide a critical perspective on global issues and to
facilitate their discussion within national parliaments.

“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.

The second initiative is the convening of the fourth
World Conference of Speakers of Parliament, which, as
the draft resolution mentions, will take place in New
York next year just before the United Nations summit
that will mark the start of a new era for sustainable
development.

I shall give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

The Conference of Speakers will provide a golden
opportunity to stimulate the political will for the new
global agenda and, more generally, for our respective
members — Governments and parliaments — to unite
towards achieving our common objectives in a spirit of
partnership and mutual respect. It would be useful for
the Conference to be acknowledged in the modalities
resolution for the United Nations summit.
This statement is very likely my last before the
General Assembly as President of the IPU. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to warmly thank
the Permanent Mission of my country, Morocco, for the
immense support that it has given us over the past three
years. I also wish to again thank the sponsors of the
draft resolution and all those who have worked behind
the scenes, namely, United Nations and IPU staff, my
colleagues around the world and everyone who, in their
own way, whether on a small or large scale, strives for
the good of us all.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.44, entitled

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/68/L.44:
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, China, Cyprus, El Salvador, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lichtenstein, Montenegro, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of
Moldova, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Thailand, Uganda,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.44?
Draft resolution A/68/L.44 was adopted (resolution
68/272).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

12/12

14-40281
