asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6886

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6886th meeting
Wednesday, 12 December 2012, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kapoor
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Portas
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Torsella

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-64450 (E)

*1264450*

S/PV.6886

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Paulo Portas, Minister of State and Foreign Affairs
of Portugal, and His Excellency Mr. Pavan Kapoor,
Joint Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs of
India, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the matter of inter-mission cooperation. I
personally thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative of
addressing the subject.
First, allow me to emphasize that there is no
official, agreed definition of inter-mission cooperation.
Historically, the concept has taken various forms in
various scenarios due to many reasons. In fact, its
practical modalities have been defined on a case-bycase basis.
In today’s briefing, I plan to focus primarily on
those cases of inter-mission cooperation that have
involved the temporary transfer or sharing of personnel
or equipment that has been made available by Member
States among two or more missions that are often
located in close proximity to one another. It seems to
me that this is one example of inter-mission cooperation
that has generated particular interest in the Council,
especially in recent months. My colleague, UnderSecretary-General Ameerah Haq, will address those
aspects that relate to mission support.
That form of cooperation is one of the tools
at the disposal of the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing
countries
to
support
the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. It is not

2

at all a new tool — far from it. Some colleagues will
recall that the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina provided 39 uniformed personnel and
police to support the launch of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in 1999.
Thirteen years later, several missions also provided
military observers to the launch of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
in the spring of 2012. In both cases, the provision of
uniformed personnel happened with the consent of the
capitals concerned.
It is therefore not exactly a new tool, but it is
obvious that this kind of cooperation has become
increasingly attractive over the past few years. I believe
that four factors in particular have contributed to this
development.
First, there is the recurring lack of certain critical
items of equipment, the so-called “critical enablers”
and “force multipliers” — for example, military
transport helicopters. This lack has sometimes resulted
in missions being unable to implement their mandates,
in particular in times of heightened activity, such as
during elections or security crises. The tensions that
have arisen as a result have led missions to resort to
temporarily transferring such equipment from one
mission to another, or to two or more missions sharing
or jointly owning such equipment or personnel.
The second factor is the repeated appeal by the
General Assembly and the Security Council for the
enhancement of synergies among missions deployed in
geographical proximity to each other.
The third factor is the economic crisis, which has
led us to be even more rigorous in the way that we use
our resources. The economic climate has thus pushed
us to examine more closely inter-mission cooperation
as a tool for a more rational use of resources, which
are, we must admit, increasingly rare, be they financial
resources or specialized equipment.
The fourth, and final, factor is the fact that
inter-mission cooperation is, by definition, a flexible
tool.
(spoke in English)
Most members would be are aware of recent
examples of such inter-mission cooperation. They
include, but are not limited to, the following cases.
In January 2006, an infantry company was
temporarily transferred from the United Nations
12-64450

S/PV.6886

Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) following violent
disturbances in Abidjan.
In late 2010 and early 2011, three infantry
companies and military aviation assets were redeployed
in the opposite direction, from UNMIL to UNOCI, in
connection with the elections in Côte d’Ivoire and, later,
in connection with the ensuing post-electoral crisis.
In October 2011, one infantry company and one
formed police unit were transferred temporarily from
UNOCI to UNMIL in connection with the elections in
Liberia. Additional personnel and assets were put on
standby.
A year ago, in December 2011, two infantry
companies and one formed police unit were transferred
from UNMIL to UNOCI in connection with the
legislative elections in Côte d’Ivoire.
In January 2012, two military utility helicopters
were transferred from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to partially fill the helicopter
gap during a period of heightened demand on the
Mission owing to the crisis that was then unfolding in
Jonglei.
Last Friday, colleagues from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support briefed a Security Council working
group in some detail on those and other examples of
inter-mission cooperation. Allow me, therefore, to
not dwell on details, but rather try to outline some of
the lessons learned. I hope they will contribute to a
discussion on the way forward.
First, whenever personnel and assets contributed
by Member States are involved, inter-mission
cooperation requires the consent of the troop- and
police-contributing countries, of the host Government
and, generally, of the Security Council. Needless to say,
delays in obtaining consent can weaken or sometimes
cancel out altogether the desired impact of temporary
reinforcements. For example, in 2006, owing to delays
in receiving formal consent from a troop-contributing
country, by the time the temporary reinforcements
from UNMIL to UNOCI had arrived in Côte d’Ivoire,
the situation in Abidjan had already begun to stabilize.
Secondly, inter-mission cooperation has been
used as a temporary measure — a quick, temporary

12-64450

fix — to either fill critical gaps or provide for a surge
at times when missions were already under extreme
stress, including during the start-up phase. Uniformed
personnel and assets were transferred between UNOCI
and UNMIL in connection with the holding of elections
by the host country — a period when there is typically
a surge in the security and logistical demands on
missions. Similarly, military utility helicopters were
transferred from MONUSCO to UNMISS when the
latter was facing a crisis in Jonglei state. That transfer
was not to provide a surge, but to partially fill a critical
gap that UNMISS already had in the field of such assets.
Incidentally, I am pleased to report that a first group
of three military utility helicopters, contributed by the
Government of Rwanda, are expected to be deployed to
UNMISS by the end of this year.
Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation can occur
in connection with either scheduled, predictable
events, such as elections, referendums and censuses,
or unscheduled, unforeseen events, such as security
crises and natural disasters. For scheduled events,
inter-mission cooperation, where appropriate, can be
planned for well in advance. Preparations can be made
ahead of time, and the necessary consent secured in good
time. For unforeseen events, however, it is more difficult
to plan ahead and obtain the up-front, contingency
commitment from troop- and police-contributors, the
host Government and, when required, the Council. It
is partly a coincidence that, when the post-electoral
crisis erupted in Côte d’Ivoire in late 2010 — and
obviously that was an unscheduled event — elements
of inter-mission cooperation were already in place in
connection with a event that was scheduled, namely, the
presidential elections in that country.
Fourthly, inter-mission cooperation should be a
tool not of choice, but of necessity, especially when it
is used to fill critical gaps. It should be implemented
on a temporary basis only. Inter-mission cooperation
cannot and should not be used as a substitute for
providing missions with the required military and
police capabilities on a dedicated basis. When filling
capability gaps, inter-mission cooperation tends simply
to move the gap from one mission to the other. In that
context, the transfer of helicopters from MONUSCO
to UNMISS, which was possible in January, would be
hard to conceive at present, when MONUSCO needs all
its capabilities owing to the crisis in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

3

S/PV.6886

Time and space are key considerations when
responding to a crisis. It is about the ability to deploy the
right resources to the right place, at the right time and
with the right capabilities. To face situations of activity
surge, missions keep reserves. The redeployment of
units from one mission to another usually occurs over
and above existing reserves to relieve missions at times
of severe distress. Inter-mission cooperation, in other
words, fills gaps, if only temporarily and on a relatively
limited scale.
As I mentioned earlier, this type of cooperation is
at times a tool not of choice, but of necessity. In an ideal
world, the tool of choice for strategic, over-the-horizon
reserves would be the standing up of highly capable,
self-contained and dedicated units, which would
maintain high readiness to deploy to any peacekeeping
crisis theatre at short notice. We can but dream,
however. Such arrangements are unavailable at present.
In
any
case,
consent
of
troopand
police-contributing countries, host Governments and
the Security Council are and will remain key enabling
principles for inter-mission cooperation. We must
also preserve the flexible and versatile character of
inter-mission cooperation to ensure its continuing
relevance. Peacekeeping operations and the Secretariat
must plan ahead and, whenever possible, anticipate
their needs in terms of inter-mission cooperation, and
they must prepare accordingly.
(spoke in French)
All of the foregoing are lessons learned.
(spoke in English)
Inter-mission cooperation is increasingly in
demand. Instances of such cooperation are becoming
increasingly frequent. It behooves us to learn from past
difficulties and build on successes to ensure that we
tap into the full potential of inter-mission cooperation
in support of our missions. In that regard, we should
explore the possibility of discussing the setting up of a
light, flexible framework for inter-mission cooperation
that would allow the Secretariat, the Security Council
and the troop- and police-contributing countries to plan
for inter-mission cooperation on a contingency basis.
The President (spoke
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I now give the floor to Ms. Haq.

4

I

thank

Ms. Haq: Allow me to express my appreciation for
this opportunity to address the Council on the subject
of inter-mission cooperation. I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the role you are playing as the Chair
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
In my remarks to the Security Council today, I will
focus on inter-mission cooperation from the perspective
of mission support. Inter-mission cooperation in that
context is all about ensuring that troops, civilian
personnel, and military and other assets can be
redeployed to another mission at short notice, sustained
while in a temporary site due to a mission start-up or
crisis, and ultimately returned to their original location
and intended use.
Troops that need to be redeployed must also be
provided with adequate shelter. For every contingent
we send unexpectedly from one mission to another,
its life-sustaining requirements must be met. And
for every helicopter or fixed wing aircraft effectively
shared between missions, logistical support in terms
of fuel and maintenance must be anticipated and made
available.
The past year has provided stark testimony to the
diversity of mandates that characterize peacekeeping
missions today. Troops and civilian personnel are
being deployed in situations where time is truly of the
essence. The interval between the approval of a Security
Council mandate and the establishment of the mission
is increasingly seen as having strategic importance.
In that light, delays in establishing a field presence
can have a negative effect on the mission’s chances to
successfully implement its mandate.
In that context, in Syria earlier this year the
establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) provided useful lessons
in terms of the potential for inter-mission cooperation
to play a critical role in expediting mission start-up.
For one, neighbouring missions can play a useful role
in providing personnel and assets to ensure timely
mission start-up. Support from other missions in the
Middle East, including from the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), was critical
for the rapid build-up of UNSMIS, which reached
operational effectiveness within one month of mandate
approval. The handling of procurement and banking
services and managing the freight forwarding activities
of UNSMIS were possible only because of assistance
provided by those two missions.
12-64450

S/PV.6886

Care was taken to ensure that inter-mission
cooperation in support of UNSMIS had minimal
impact on the capacity of UNIFIL and UNDOF to
implement their own mandates. Events in Syria have
since tragically eclipsed the timely roll-out of UNSMIS,
but the start-up would not have been possible without a
rapid infusion of support from nearby missions.
With regard to crisis response, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has
referred to inter-mission cooperation as a temporary
“tool of necessity, not of choice”. I share the view that
such cooperation should never be seen as anything
more than a stop-gap. It is certainly not meant to serve
as the source of long-term solutions.
At the same time, it is also true that inter-mission
cooperation works best as a short-term reaction to crisis
when arrangements are already in place that allow for
flexibility and inter-mission exchange. For example,
many commercially contracted aircraft in support of
United Nations peacekeeping operations today have a
contractual provision that allows them to be used for
inter-mission support when needed. That is part of
the Department of Field Support’s fleet optimization
efforts that are designed to consolidate and conserve
resources for greater operational efficiency.

Representative of the Secretary-General, deployed 34
staff members, covering such areas as security, finance
and stress counselling. In fact, civilian personnel from
virtually every field mission arrived to fill critical
staffing shortfalls after the Haiti earthquake.
These examples of successful inter-mission
cooperation underscore the primary objective of mission
support writ large. The aim is to achieve successful
mandate implementation through the provision of
support to military, police and civilian personnel in the
field. Inter-mission cooperation should, in that context,
be seen as a means to address the short-term needs
of our troops and colleagues in the field. Sometimes
that requires overcoming natural obstacles, such as
disasters or inhospitable terrain. Collaboration among
missions in the Sudan has allowed critical support to
reach troops despite long-entrenched customs and visarelated obstacles.
The needs of UNISFA, which I observed last month
when I visited, are still acute. But progress in meeting
them is under way due to inter-mission cooperation with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and UNMISS. For example,
drawing from available assets, UNAMID has provided
heavy engineering vehicles to UNISFA on loan for
the construction of much-needed and long-overdue
accommodation for the Ethiopian troops in Abyei.

In response to the Haiti earthquake in 2010,
for example, heavy cargo aircraft based in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) ended up providing logistics support
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Last January, in response to the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire,
MONUSCO aircraft once again helped transport 300
tons of rations for the troops of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as 100,000 litres
of additional fuel from the United Nations Mission in
Liberia. Over the past year, the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) has used air assets
of the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) to support rations delivery.

Decades of experience in peacekeeping have
created as yet untapped potential to improve the quality
of mission support while simultaneously reaping
efficiency gains and savings. The goal of responding to
the exigencies of peacekeeping operations in a timely
way, with high-quality support and in a cost-effective
manner, lies at the heart of the global field support
strategy. Its basic premise is that peacekeeping should
be seen not as a series of independent missions but as
a global enterprise with which the United Nations can
leverage its presence and bring about efficiency gains
and synergies for the benefit of missions and their
personnel.

That flexibility in the use of air assets during crisis
is reflected in the exchange of civilian personnel as well.
After the disaster in Haiti struck, a special recruiting
team was deployed from the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad to expedite
the arrival in Haiti of qualified personnel who could
get to the task of helping the injured, moving essential
supplies and restoring stability. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, where I was Special

Two core elements of the global field support
strategy — the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe
and the Global Service Centre at Brindisi — attest to
the importance of putting in place the institutional
architecture that allows inter-mission cooperating to
succeed. Both are important components of a global
network of assets and expertise that can be drawn from
when necessary in order to fulfill critical mission startup and sustainment needs.

12-64450

5

S/PV.6886

I would like to thank you once again, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council on the subject of
inter-mission cooperation. Supporting the peacekeeping
troops and civilian personnel who confront tremendous
risk in our shared pursuit of the vision manifested in the
United Nations Charter is the ultimate objective of our
deliberations. We can never lose sight of the centrality
of their wellbeing, a fate that is shaped by the decisions
and support of this august forum.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Haq
for her briefing.
Mr. Portas (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate. I also wish to thank UnderSecretaries- General Hervé Ladsous and Ameerah Haq
for their comprehensive statements.
Allow me also to congratulate you and your
country, Sir, on your very efficient stewardship of
the Council during this month. Morocco and Portugal
share not only centuries of history and strong and
confident neighbourly relations, but also an identical
commitment to making our world a more peaceful,
secure and prosperous one.
It was in that aim that Portugal presented its
candidacy to a non-permanent seat on the Council,
and it was our sincere commitment to the values of the
United Nations and to the fulfilment of the objectives
of its Charter that won the confidence of a significant
number of its member States. Pursuing those values and
reaching those objectives were and are our only aim
and agenda as members of the Council.
Now, as our mandate draws to its end, I trust that we
have lived up to the confidence placed in us two years
ago. We have done our utmost in the Council to help
settle disputes, promote democracy and human rights;
uphold the protection of civilians, especially women and
children; contribute to collective peacekeeping; actively
engage in peacebuilding efforts; promote dialogue,
reconciliation and religious and cultural tolerance; and
defend freedom, equality and justice for all. The past
two years have been particularly intense, and many of
the decisions taken here have been far-reaching indeed.
Let me mention the Council’s decisive contribution to
the establishment of democratic transitions in Libya
and Yemen.
Unfortunately, concerning Syria, we must recognize
that the Council has been unable to make an effective
contribution to the cessation of violence in that country
or to help meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
6

people. Likewise, a comprehensive peace between Israel
and Palestine based on the two-State solution continues
to be stalled. We hope that the recognition of Palestine
as a non-member observer State of the United Nations
will help to relaunch credible negotiations between the
parties in order that a comprehensive agreement may be
reached between them.
In Africa, although we have had to face a renewed
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
new challenges in Mali and the Sahel, the Council
played an important role in stabilizing the situation in
Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. The Council’s
active support to South Sudan also contributed to the
State-building efforts of its people and its ultimate
accession to the United Nations.
Finally, in the Far East, Timor-Leste became a
success story for its people and for the United Nations
with respect to active peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Portugal is particularly proud to have participated
actively in that endeavour.
Allow me to offer a sincere word of thanks and
appreciation to all our colleagues in the Council, with
whom we have worked closely during these past two
years, and our sincere congratulations and best wishes
to all those that will be joining the Council.
In the light of the tasks ahead and of the old and
new challenges facing the world, it is essential for the
Council to fully uphold its role as the main international
body entrusted with preserving the peace and to act in
a prompt, efficient and credible way in meeting those
challenges.
Our debate today concerns exactly those new
challenges and ways to improve our efficiency and
capacity to address them. It has to do with how the
United Nations can better use the instruments available
to it to act in a more expeditious and efficient way and
to more effectively address some of the new challenges
that confront us.
Peacekeeping is today a flagship activity of
the United Nations and has to a large extent become
the most visible symbol of the United Nations
presence in different regions. We currently have 16
peacekeeping operations and a number of special
political missions. That amounts to more than 100,000
women and men — military, police and civilian
personnel — carrying out the tasks mandated by the
Council. They serve our common objectives, often
in harsh and dangerous conditions. Very often, they
12-64450

S/PV.6886

represent the only hope for people who are suffering
and threatened with violence. All those who serve the
United Nations in the field deserve to be commended,
constantly supported, respected and protected.
Everyone knows how deeply Portugal is committed
to peacekeeping. Over the past decades, 23,000
Portuguese peacekeepers have participated in several
United Nations missions, as well as in European
Union and NATO operations. They have been rightly
commended for their professionalism and their outreach
to local populations. Like others, we believe that the
growing complexity and diversity of mandated tasks
demand an increasingly integrated and coordinated
approach to peacekeeping operations.
On the other hand, many of the problems that
missions must face have an increasingly regional
dimension that demands regional approaches and
regional answers if our collective action is to have any
chance of success. That is the case, for example, in the
West Africa region, where inter-mission cooperation
has already proved its usefulness, as was the case
with the cooperation between the Missions in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire. Inter-mission cooperation will
certainly be particularly relevant when we discuss an
integrated strategy for the Sahel. Indeed, the complex
crisis in Mali, and its dangerous impact on the whole
region, calls for a concerted effort on the part of the
international community, with the United Nations in a
leading role.
That is obviously also the case where drug
trafficking, terrorism and other forms of international
crime are concerned. In order to fight them effectively,
it is critical to share intelligence, pool resources and
closely coordinate action among missions. Similarly,
due to the growing capacities of international criminal
organizations, we must be particularly careful to
ensure that success in fighting international crime
in one country does not amount to transferring that
threat to its next-door neighbour. A regional approach
is therefore paramount. We know from experience
the particularly perverse role that international
criminal organizations play in effectively undermining
legitimate Governments, disrupting democratic
electoral processes and promoting to power their
protected clients through violent means, as has been the
case in Guinea-Bissau, unhappily. In order to prevent
such phenomena from becoming widespread, close
inter-mission cooperation can be particularly useful

12-64450

in detecting signs of such threats at an early stage and
allowing the Security Council to act preventively.
But the case for close cooperation and sharing
experiences and best practices can also be made in
other areas, since many problems’ root causes are very
similar in neighbouring countries and often have a
cross-border impact. For instance, the fight against the
scourge of the Lord’s Resistance Army is inconceivable
without a regional strategy involving the missions
in the area of the Great Lakes, the Sudan and South
Sudan, in close collaboration with all the Governments
concerned.
Such cooperation between missions has also been
decisive in launching new operations, as happened
recently with the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which benefited from
the contributions of other missions in the region.
Indeed, closer cooperation between missions in terms
of fulfilling surge needs, dealing with capacity gaps
and helping in fast mission start-ups is a concept that
deserves further development, with a view to applying
it more often. Naturally, such inter-mission cooperation
can proceed only if troop- and police-contributing
countries fully share in and agree to such developments.
Portugal believes that this type of cooperation could
also be usefully expanded to other areas, such as
peacebuilding, through a comprehensive approach that
would benefit from regional synergies.
In conclusion, inter-mission cooperation is a
concept that deserves our increased attention. It should
be strengthened and expanded. Obviously, there is
no one-size-fits-all solution, and each mission is an
individual case. But as we have seen, there are important
opportunities and reasons to enhance cooperation and
coordination among them, maximizing the available
resources. We need that discussion, based on the
important lessons learned from recent experiences, in
order to explore the opportunities and challenges that
this concept brings to the implementation of United
Nations missions’ mandates and, beyond them, to make
our world more peaceful and secure.
It has been an honour to serve with the Council for
the past two years. Sooner rather than later, I think, we
will be back.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Our delegation
welcomes the Minister of Portugal’s personal
contribution to our work.

7

S/PV.6886

Mr. Kapoor (India): At the outset let me thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Morocco, for
organizing today’s briefing on peacekeeping operations,
a subject of great interest to my country. My thanks are
also due to Under-Secretaries-General Hervé Ladsous
and Ameerah Haq for their detailed briefings.
Today’s debate reflects the enduring relevance of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in fulfilling the
Organization’s obligations under the Charter towards
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Peacekeeping has not only withstood the test of time
for more than six decades now; it has in fact expanded
its mandate and reach. India has partnered with the
United Nations in peacekeeping operations since its
very inception, in the 1950s. More than 100,000 Indian
soldiers have served with distinction in more than 40
peacekeeping missions. Even today, India is one of the
largest contributors to such missions, and we remain
committed to this global enterprise.
The nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the past few decades, and so has the mandate of
peacekeeping missions. It is no longer restricted to
keeping peace between warring parties, but includes
peace- and nation-building tasks. Unfortunately,
resource allocation has failed to keep pace with the
mandate expansion, and peacekeeping missions are
called on to do more and more with less and less. It
is therefore not surprising that the past few years have
been operationally challenging for peacekeeping. An
unusually large number of peacekeepers have lost their
lives in the service of peace mandates, and the missions
are overstretched, due to shortages of personnel and
equipment. Our briefers have mentioned some of these
challenges.
During our two years on the Security Council, we
have seen continued efforts to expand the mandates of
peacekeeping missions without any concrete measures
to bridge the resource gap that should be a real cause for
concern to us. The concept of inter-mission cooperation
is promoted not to increase the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions, but to cut down the resources
available to individual missions. The cross-borrowing
of equipment between missions in recent times is part
of that trend.
My delegation agrees that if several missions are
deployed in a region, cooperation among neighbouring
missions, including through exchanges of information,
coordinated strategies on cross-border illicit trafficking
of weapons, drugs and combatants, integrated approaches
8

to disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation, and
so forth, can enhance their effectiveness. Similarly, the
adoption of regional and subregional strategies can help
in delivering humanitarian aid.
As the Council has already been doing,
resource-management strategies with a cross-border
perspective in crisis situations can be continued.
Managing weapons collected from demobilized
combatants could also be better conducted in regional
settings. Such measures, however, should be crafted
in consultation with mission leaderships and host
countries; they cannot be imposed from Headquarters.
However, inter-mission cooperation that is overly
focused on resources will diminish its usefulness.
Headquarters-driven sharing of critical mission assets
will also compromise the ability of field commanders to
deliver on their mandates. Moreover, the implementation
of inter-mission cooperation faces substantial legal,
political, and financial challenges. First, obtaining the
collective consent of host nations in a disturbed area
is a challenging prospect, with implications for the
overall peace process. Secondly, the transfer of troops
and equipment across missions would need to address
financial issues, since budgetary allocations are
mission-specific. Thirdly, such transfers would involve
legal complexities pertaining to immunity, privileges
and safeguards. Fourthly, troop-contributing countries
will have to calibrate their positions on a case-by-case
basis. Amending the memorandum of understanding
templates may not resolve that matter to the satisfaction
of one and all.
In conclusion, as a long-standing troop contributor,
India is ever ready to shoulder peacekeeping initiatives.
We support the potential of inter-mission cooperation
as a mechanism to enhance information exchange and
integrated strategies in a regional context.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We extend our
appreciation to the delegation of Morocco for
convening this meeting. We also wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for conducting the work of the Security
Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
in an exemplary manner. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, as well as Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for their respective
briefings on inter-mission cooperation in peacekeeping
operations. We appreciate the observations that they
have made.

12-64450

S/PV.6886

As a troop-contributing country, South Africa
values open and frank exchanges of views on matters
that impact our troops, as well as on the efficacy of the
peacekeeping missions themselves. This discussion is
therefore most welcome. Allow us to briefly share our
views specifically on inter-mission cooperation.
Among the possible range of benefits that
inter-mission cooperation brings to peacekeeping
missions, it provides a useful tool for helping to restore
stability in those peacekeeping missions that encounter
unforeseen or unexpected challenges. Under such
circumstances, inter-mission cooperation becomes
a responsive tool but should not become an end in
itself. Consequently, in the planning and conception
phase, inter-mission cooperation must necessarily be
time-bound.
If a mission is deficient in any way other than for
the reason that the situation is deteriorating on the
ground, inter-mission cooperation will not serve as a
substitute for addressing mission capacities. Mandates
for peacekeeping missions must therefore be realistic
and achievable at inception. That would also ensure
that missions are adequately resourced in order to fully
implement their mandates. Inter-mission cooperation is
therefore a temporary or stop-gap measure to be drawn
on at critical or substantive phases of peacekeeping
missions.
Inter-mission cooperation can also serve as
appropriate support and enabler for predictable
situations, such as bolstering support to election
processes, sharing information across borders,
enhancing situational awareness and for the purpose of
training exercises. In such instances, it would be possible
to determine standard operating procedures in order to
effectively implement inter-mission cooperation.
It is also possible to have a similar standard operating
procedure for situations that involve unpredictable needs
to enhance mission capacities during crises. Triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the troop-contributing countries would be but one
example of such a standard operating procedure when
implementing inter-mission cooperation. That ensures
that the relocation of strategic and other assets meets
the concerns of all, especially the troop-contributing
countries, and that all stakeholders contribute to a viable
operation in the field. Inter-mission cooperation must
always adhere to the key principles of peacekeeping,
that is, first, the consent of the host State; secondly,
impartiality; and thirdly, the non-use of force except
12-64450

in defence of the mandate. Information sharing
regarding situational awareness in the coordination
of joint operations in missions that share borders is a
valued addition that support the work of peacekeeping
missions. Additionally, inter-mission cooperation
for missions in geographic proximity have the added
advantage of allowing for joint training programmes,
sharing emergency evacuation plans and assets, and
joint planning meetings, among other things.
Finally, while inter-mission cooperation has
traditionally involved United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we would also encourage a similar approach
in strengthening hybrid and African Union-led
peacekeeping missions.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on a very important dimension of United Nations
peacekeeping. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
and Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for their very useful briefings.
The management and success of United Nations
peacekeeping hinge on partnerships. Partnership
entails cooperation among Member States on broader
policy framework issues and among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) on mandates and operations. Strong
partnerships ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations. Similarly, partnership and cooperation
between missions operating in geographic proximity
are important for addressing emergent needs and shortterm goals. In many instances, such exchanges have
proved decisive in addressing a crisis situation.
As a troop-contributing country, Pakistan supports
the sharing of human and material resources between
neighbouring missions on a case-by-case basis. We
have not shied away from committing our personnel
and equipment to move from one mission to another.
In 2010, when the situation in Côte d’Ivoire
deteriorated, Pakistani troops from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) proceeded to assist the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
Our internal processes for authorizing that movement
were completed expeditiously. We did not delay the
transfer of Pakistani troops, despite serious logistical
and operational issues. Later events proved that
reinforcement from UNMIL was critical to the success

9

S/PV.6886

of UNOCI operations during the crisis from 2010 to
2011.
I would highlight the following five salient aspects
of our perspective on inter-mission cooperation. First,
inter-mission cooperation is an ad-hoc arrangement to
make up for deficiencies in troop strength and critical
assets in the wake of a crisis. The stop-gap nature of
inter-mission cooperation cannot be overemphasized.
The force requirements of every mission are
carefully planned, and no mission works with surplus
resources. Any transfer of resources should not
compromise the donor mission’s operational capacity
and safety. Strong linkages between mission efficacy,
force requirements and inter-mission cooperation
should be paid due attention.
Secondly, an important aspect of inter-mission
cooperation is the operational and administrative
control of the assets being transferred. Questions with
regard to operational control of the assets transferred
and related administrative issues should be answered
adequately. Each mission has its own dynamics that
underpin, among other things, the calculation of the costs
of contingent-owned equipment. Moving to a different
mission entails a change in dynamics, which warrants
the application of different financial modalities. One
way of going around those complexities may be to
consider providing some extra allowances to make
up for the hardship and related problems. Similarly,
the formulation of standard operating procedures and
related drills of inter-mission cooperation is essential.
Progress on standard operating procedures is still
awaited.
Thirdly, missions differ in their nature from one
another owing to their particular mandate’s area of
operations, politics, demography and trouble spots.
There is no concept of a universal peacekeeper.
Moreover, specific training is administered to troops
as per their mission requirements, which may differ
from mission to mission. From the perspective of
TCCs, within domestic regulations it is procedurally
impossible to seek approval to provide forces to two or
three missions. Adequate time should therefore be given
to the TCCs to secure the approval of their respective
capitals for the requisite transfers. We highlight that
point despite having completed our local procedures
expeditiously for UNOCI.
Fourthly, inter-mission cooperation is a contingencybased exercise. For the most part, it involves infantry

10

units and certain enabling assets, such as helicopters.
Due caution is advisable with regard to the transfer of
special forces, engineering units and hospitals from
one mission to another. If such an exchange is planned,
we should come up with more permanent solutions.
Finally, inter-mission cooperation does not obviate
the need for a constant exchange of information and
intelligence between neighbouring missions. We
positively view the idea of biannual and triannual
meetings between such missions so that the commands
and senior leadership of the neighbouring missions are
well versed in the challenges that they face.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
inter-mission cooperation should be an exception,
not a norm. Such cooperation should be executed on
a case-by-case basis to address emerging situations.
Long-term remedial measures require permanent
solutions based on due processes. Inter-mission
cooperation should work around those processes and
regulations, not against them.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this briefing. I am also grateful
for the comprehensive presentations on peacekeeping
operations and inter-mission cooperation provided
by Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
The situations where there are peacekeeping
operations are complex and diverse in nature. While
operations must be designed in such a way as to ensure
coherence between the established mandates and the
resources allocated, at times circumstances arise that
exacerbate existing tensions and that present such
operations with unexpected constraints in appropriately
implementing their mandate.
In the current situations, inter-mission cooperation
is a tool that, in the short term, facilitates the exchange
or joint use of resources between peacekeeping
operations and that provides flexibility and timely
support at times when critical gaps are identified.
As part of a coordinated and coherent strategy in
response to shortages or difficulties on the ground, it is
important to be able to temporarily turn to inter-mission
cooperation, taking into account financial and staff
limitations and authorization with regard to assets and
services.

12-64450

S/PV.6886

However, in order to ensure effective operational
interaction, cooperation in areas such as exchanging
information and experience gained must be sustained
and coordinated, taking into account the needs identified
by the countries concerned or by the missions in the
region. Effective cooperation between missions must
therefore be part of the planning and implementation
of mandates so as to improve the understanding of
the situation on the ground, in particular when facing
common challenges in areas with a regional dimension.
Activities such as the regular exchange of detailed
reports on the military situation, establishing joint
analysis centres and convening regular meetings
between missions are important in developing
integrated subregional strategies to promote regional
peace and security.
Inter-mission cooperation should take into
account financial and staff constraints and should
be implemented without undermining the original
mandate of each mission. In order to ensure smooth
implementation and positive outcomes, a coherent
planning strategy must be developed that depends on
the coordinated participation of the United Nations
system, with contributing countries approving the use
of troops and equipment and with the political will of
the Governments of the host countries.
An example of inter-mission cooperation is the
stabilization of the border area between Côte d’Ivoire
and Liberia, where the United Nations bodies present
there enhanced their cooperation. We welcome the
increased deployment of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire’s uniformed troops along the border
with Liberia. We also acknowledge the significance
of the measures announced by the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, such as the increase in joint patrols
and aerial reconnaissance missions. Those deployed
missions should continue to enhance cooperation,
information exchange, coordination and joint efforts so
as to improve security in the border area.
Institutional coordination and coherence are the
bases for ensuring a credible presence and optimal
results. In that regard, the coordination processes among
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office must be strengthened
still further, if possible. In addition, joint processes
among Special Representatives, representatives, Force
Commanders, United Nations offices and country
teams must also be continued.
12-64450

We also encourage troop- and police-contributing
countries to consider using staff and equipment in
neighbouring missions or cross-border operations,
which should be set up in joint agreements with the
United Nations.
The continuing exchange of logistical resources,
experienced staff and transport, as well as establishing
mechanisms such as joint working groups or
coordination and storage bases, are cooperation
activities that should be carefully considered in order to
ascertain the capacity available and its possible impact
on each specific region.
In conclusion, allow me to point out that in
addressing this topic, the Security Council can help to
improve the coordination of activities and the efficient
use of the logistical and administrative resources
available to the various missions so as to control crises
and stabilize complex situations more effectively.
We underscore the need to carry out an analysis,
from the time of drawing up mandates, of possible
temporary and unforeseen needs that missions may
face. We must continue to promote cooperation between
United Nations missions in order to strengthen political
consistency and to improve the effectiveness of United
Nations operations at the regional level. In that way, we
will improve the capacity to provide an agile response
without affecting the efficiency of each mission and the
fulfilment of their respective mandates.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this timely briefing to promote an exchange of views
on cooperation between United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We are also grateful for the concept paper
that was circulated for this meeting. We note the
presentations of Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
As we have affirmed on other occasions,
Guatemala attaches great importance to United Nations
peacekeeping operations as an indispensable instrument
for international peace and security. That also explains
our desire and resolve to contribute to peacekeeping
operations in Africa, the Middle East and Haiti. That
participation has given us the opportunity to see how
United Nations peacekeeping efforts have evolved both
conceptually and in terms of operations. Given the
increasing number of complex operations launched in
recent years, the Organization faces a growing need for

11

S/PV.6886

resources and has therefore had to face an unprecedented
number of challenges. For my delegation, it is clear that
any response to those challenges will require, among
other things, the participation of the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
One of those challenges is how best to improve
cooperation between missions. While such cooperation
has been carried out on an ad hoc basis for some time,
there are still misgivings regarding the timeliness,
requirements that must be met, the impact on the
two or more participating missions, and its proper
implementation. This means that, in spite of the
apparent progress and general acceptance of the need
for closer cooperation between missions, the progress
that has been made in this area is still modest.
In that regard, in line with the latest report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/66/19), we encourage the Secretariat to explore,
in consultation with troop-contributing countries,
all opportunities for and obstacles to inter-mission
cooperation and to present them for consideration by
the Council.
Against the current backdrop, it cannot be denied that
there is a need for greater inter-mission cooperation. It is
needed as a result, first, of the budget realities in a world
facing serious financial constraints, and, secondly, of
the changing nature of peacekeeping operations, which
are increasingly required to addressing trans-boundary
conflicts. Furthermore, inter-mission cooperation
must also take into account the preparatory measures
that must be taken beforehand with regard to the legal
and financial implications that such cooperation may
have for troop-contributing countries. In that regard,
we believe that standardizing or adopting agreements
could be an option worth considering as long as any
agreement on cooperation is the outcome of an exercise
that takes the interests of all States involved into due
account.
At the same time, we believe that due attention
must be paid to all regional factors in the planning and
implementation of mission mandates in order to ensure
effective inter-mission cooperation.
It is essential to recall the lessons that can
be drawn from past experience with regard to
inter-mission cooperation. The information provided
must be comprehensive and balance so as to ensure that
interested Member States are able to take decisions that
are based on specific data. In that context, information

12

exchange is of particular relevance in those cases where
two or more peacekeeping missions are located in the
same region or may even share borders.
Finally, we believe that the Security Council
must play a leading role in promoting inter-mission
cooperation. In any case, that role must be played
with caution, respecting the individual mandates of
each mission and the memorandums of understanding
signed between the troop-contributing countries and
the United Nations regarding the operation in question.
Guatemala reiterates its support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and stands ready to
participate in a creative and constructive manner in
future discussions on this matter.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Moroccan presidency for the initiative
to convene the this meeting to discuss the question of
inter-mission cooperation. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Ladsous and Haq for their
respective briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important way of maintaining international peace and
security. At present, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are facing a situation of increasing demand
while resources are being put under increasingly heavy
strain. The sudden outbreak of issues in hotspots and
their interconnectedness have made the situation ever
more challenging for United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations, especially those that enjoy geographical
proximity and whose mandates are connected in some
way, have, as called for by the situation on the ground,
cooperated in order to achieve complementarity in
the use of resources. Such cooperation has enhanced
flexibility in peacekeeping operations and achieved
certain positive results. However, at the same time,
inter-mission cooperation is also facing some specific
issues with regard to establishing mechanisms and
operating procedures. In that connection, I wish to
make the following four points.
First, China is in favour of international cooperation
according to the situation on the ground and as
required by a specific operation. However, specific
authorization should be obtained for such cooperation
from the Council beforehand, and it should abide by
the fundamental principles governing peacekeeping

12-64450

S/PV.6886

operations, especially that of the consent of the host
country.
Secondly, in order to strengthen inter-mission
cooperation, it is important first and foremost
to ensure that the individual mandates are being
effectively implemented. The Secretariat, in preparing
for inter-mission cooperation, should first conduct a
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the ground
and carry out reasonable conceptual and planning
activities. The purpose of inter-mission cooperation
is to more effectively implement Council mandates.
It is therefore necessary to avoid a situation where
the capacity of an individual peacekeeping mission is
negatively affected as a result of such cooperation.
Thirdly, it is important to ensure that each
peacekeeping operation receives adequate financial
support and, at the same time, efforts should be made
to achieve the optimal use of resources through proper
cooperation among different missions.
China is in favour of the efforts by the Department
for Field Support to continue to implement global field
support strategy and to consolidate resources among
different missions in a timely and effective manner
so as to make optimal use of the limited resources for
peacekeeping.
Fourthly, in the course of inter-mission cooperation,
the Secretariat should strengthen integrated coordination
so as to ensure that there is a seamless connection and
transfer among the various parties and between the
various steps. It is equally important to seek the views
of troop-contributing countries in a timely manner and
to strengthen contacts and communication with them.
With regard to specific developments of inter-mission
cooperation, the Secretariat should keep the Council
informed in a timely manner.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having given us the opportunity
today to debate the important question of inter-mission
cooperation in peacekeeping operations.
I thank you, Sir, for the concept paper that you kindly
circulated to the Council for this debate. Finally, I also
thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
very useful briefings.
Inter-mission cooperation has assumed greater
importance at a time when peacekeeping operations

12-64450

are facing a number of problems, especially financial,
due to the difficult global economic situation. United
Nations concern about inter-mission cooperation is such
that, since 2004, the Council has remained seized of the
matter through presidential statements and resolutions.
The complexity of establishing a peacekeeping
operation has prompted the United Nations to reflect
on appropriate measures to address possible emergency
situations in a region where a peace mission is already
deployed. The merit of such an initiative includes the
reduced time and cost of deploying a new mission.
The Security Council had recognized the need and
the value of inter-mission cooperation when through
resolution 1951 (2010), it authorized a temporary
transfer from the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI). At the time, there was a need to deal
with the deteriorating situation in Côte d’Ivoire, which
posed a risk to the peace and security of the region.
The two missions then worked together seamlessly to
tackle the problem of illicit transboundary trafficking
and manage refugee flows.
Before that resolution, the Council, in its
presidential statement of 25 March 2004 addressed
cross-border issues in West Africa and requested the
Secretary-General to
“encourage the United Nations missions in
West Africa to share information and their
logistic and administrative resources as far as
possible, without impeding the satisfactory
execution of their respective mandates, in order
to increase their effectiveness and reduce costs”
(S/PRST/2004/7, p. 2).
While welcoming that cooperation, we reiterate
that we must not forget to consider a number of
parametres, including operational effectiveness,
compliance with initial mandates and the views of the
troop-contributing countries. Indeed, a mission should
be deployed to another country in a manner that avoids
creating or promoting a resurgence of the insecurity
that necessitated the mission’s establishment in the first
country. The means used and the troops deployed must
be identified within a determined time frame, as was
fortunately the case with UNMIL and UNOCI.
We also believe that greater effectiveness
necessitates a judicious distribution and coordination
of the required tasks, with a specific identification
of responsibilities in the chain of command. Clearly,

13

S/PV.6886

the desired result is to optimize the peace mission’s
potential for success at a reduced cost. Inter-mission
cooperation makes sense only if it is carried out within
the same region.
The temporary transfer of a portion of the equipment
and the forces of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon to Syria to the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria was also a rapid response to a situation
that required urgent action.
It is well established that the cost and scarcity of
certain types of equipment, such as aircraft vital to
the success of peace missions, requires us to consider
pooling them. Inter-mission cooperation can provide a
solution to that problem.
As in the redeployments in West Africa and the
Middle East, we believe that cooperation should
exist among missions operating in other parts of the
world when there is a need, particularly in Central
and East Africa with, of course, the consent of the
troop-contributing countries and under a well-defined
mandate. The Departments of Peacekeeping Operations
and Field Support have significant roles to play in that
area. In that regard, we welcome the publication of the
2012 United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual, which
provides some details on inter-mission cooperation.
Inter-mission cooperation should not only involve
the redeployment of troops and equipment; it should
go further to include the sharing of information
and intelligence. Such action is especially useful in
combating all forms of cross-border trafficking, which
persists with total impunity, for example, on the border
between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The same applies in combating the Lord’s Resistance
Army, which calls for inter-mission cooperation in
Central and East Africa among, for example, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. My delegation welcomes such
cooperation, which makes it possible to follow the
movements of that dangerous criminal group and to
track down its perpetrators.
Beyond the will to accelerate and improve such
action, we believe that above all, in redeploying a
mission, the risks must be assessed in real time as part
of operational planning. In that regard, any Council
14

resolution authorizing the creation of a peacekeeping
force must, in our view, take into account the
environment in which it will be deployed, and include,
if possible, a provision relating to cooperation between
the new mission and other missions operating in the
region. Such cooperation could then be adapted as the
security situation developed. Such a precautionary
measure is valuable in providing from the start a
clear mandate based on a strategic concept that takes
neighbouring missions and areas of cooperation into
account, as well as defined responsibilities relating to
the chain of command.
My country is convinced that if inter-mission
cooperation is well organized, it could become an
effective tool to contribute to the deployment of a
rapid intervention force in cases where it could take
several months to put together a mission in normal
circumstances.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for the initiative of organizing this debate. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support for their analyses.
Peacekeeping operations are an emblematic activity
of the United Nations and we must work continually to
improve their efficacy. France supports the principle of
inter-mission cooperation, which is one of the aspects
of the consideration of the reform of peacekeeping
operations that we launched in 2009, jointly with the
United Kingdom. Inter-mission cooperation enhances
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations by providing
for improved management of available resources and
by improving the response of the Organization when
tackling crises or other emergencies.
First of all, inter-mission cooperation optimizes the
use of the means available for peacekeeping operations
by facilitating the pooling or temporary redeployment
of means, equipment or units belonging to missions
that are deployed in the same region. When unforeseen
events threaten to destabilize a country, inter-mission
cooperation can be an adaptive and effective response
that will provide personnel and equipment in a timely
manner to missions that require them. Furthermore,
inter-mission cooperation allows economy of scale in
order to meet the requirements of good management
and budgetary constraints.
Such cooperation is a flexible mechanism of proven
efficacy. I will provide three examples. In West Africa,

12-64450

S/PV.6886

cooperation between United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) during the post-electoral crisis played
a leading role in increasing UNOCI’s level of personnel
and attack helicopters at a time when UNOCI most
required them. Such mission-cooperation was also used
preventatively to support UNOCI during the Ivorian
legislative elections of December 2011, and reciprocally
to support UNMIL during the general elections in
Liberia in November 2011. That cooperation ensured
that one of the two missions could always count on the
support of the other at a time when the Council was
working towards an orderly reduction of the number of
Blue Helmets deployed in West Africa.
Inter-mission cooperation has also been useful in
East Africa, where helicopters of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) were temporarily
deployed to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS).
In the Middle East, the rapid deployment of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria was made
possible only by the logistical support provided by
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
redeployment of military observers, civilian personnel,
equipment and vehicles from other missions.
In order to make better use of this mechanism and
to safeguard its flexibility, progress must be made in
two areas.
First, we believe that must take due account
in our consideration of all the components of
missions — military, police and civilian — and all
types of resources, including major, unit and specialist
equipment. The example of the deployment of helicopters
from UNMIL to UNOCI should not obscure the fact
that there are untapped opportunities for cooperation in
other areas, such as joint planning, information sharing
or logistical support.
Beyond the necessarily temporary pooling of
assets, in particular all-too-scarce aerial assets such
as helicopters, inter-mission cooperation must be
encouraged and even made systematic in order to
pool logistical support structures, which will enable
substantial streamlining of mission support, and to
share information, which will enable the regional
dimension of crises to be taken into account. This is
particularly useful when missions are deployed on both
sides of a border or when such complex processes as

12-64450

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
under way.
Inter-mission cooperation, along with cooperation
between missions and peacebuilding offices or regional
organizations, should allow for increased efficacy in
the struggle against cross-border threats that could
destabilize entire regions. Thus, in order to respond
to the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army in
Central Africa, MONUSCO, UNMISS and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
were encouraged to share their information and their
experience in the context of the regional strategy
developed by the United Nations.
The cooperation between UNOCI and UNMIL
entered a new phase this year through a closer sharing
of information, coordinated operations launched on
both sides of the border and the support of the Ivorian
and Liberian Governments to strengthen their own
security cooperation. This integrated strategy must
be sustained and further strengthened in order to
make progress in disarming combatants, securing the
border zone between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, which
the Council visited last May, and encouraging Ivorian
refugees to return home.
In terms of the second area that needs to see
progress, we believe there is a need for a clearer legal
basis and for inter-mission cooperation to be included in
operational planning from the very start of operations.
Using standard language in the memorandums of
understanding could, for example, facilitate cooperation
while respecting the mandates that have been assigned
by the Security Council to each mission and, of course,
ensuring close coordination with the troop-contributing
countries.
Inter-mission cooperation can and must still
make further progress. It is in our common interest
to streamline the means available to peacekeeping.
Continuing to enhance the efficacy of peacekeeping is
a duty of the Council and one way of paying tribute to
the commitment of Blue Helmets of all nationalities,
who often give their lives in service to peace.
Mr. Torsella (United States of America): As
the leading voice on United Nations peacekeeping
operations and a long-standing troop-contributing
country, Morocco is ideally placed to organize this
debate. We are grateful that you have taken this initiative
during your presidency, Sir. We also appreciate the

15

S/PV.6886

participation of top troop- and police-contributing
countries in this debate today.
The successes of peacekeeping rely on the
contributions and sacrifices of peacekeepers, to whom
the United States takes this opportunity to express
our gratitude. We thank Under-Secretaries-General
Ladsous and Haq for their briefings and for the tireless
efforts of their departments.
Turning to the subject before us, the United States
supports greater inter-mission cooperation for three
main reasons.
First, in some cases, the only way for the United
Nations to respond rapidly to an unexpected crisis or
to establish a critical new mission is by drawing on
resources from another existing mission. It is untenable
to wait several months to generate fresh forces and
procure essential equipment if thousands of lives and
the credibility of the United Nations may hang in the
balance.
Secondly, there are certain threats that affect more
than one mission in a subregion. It therefore stands to
reason that they should cooperate to tackle that common
threat.
Thirdly, it simply does not make sense for each
mission to create its own administrative and logistics
support structure if economies of scale and efficiencies
can be achieved through common services across
several missions.
For all these reasons, the United States is convinced
of the need for greater inter-mission cooperation. But
this is on the understanding that much work remains to
be done to ensure that we do not help one mission by
hurting another, we do not commit troop-contributing
countries to one task when they had signed up for
another, and we do not allow stop-gap measures to
become substitutes for long-term planning and
preparedness.
Fortunately, there are positive examples to build
on, but also hard lessons to be learned. The United
Nations peacekeeping missions in West Africa have
been among its most successful in recent memory. Part
of that success stems from the cooperation among them.
The missions in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone
have undertaken joint patrols and shared information to
address common threats posed by rebel groups freely
crossing borders. These missions have reinforced each
other in times of crisis.

16

For example, as we have heard, because of rapid
reinforcements drawn from the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire was able to respond to the extremely precarious
security situation that arose following the first round of
Côte d’Ivoire’s 2010 presidential elections. The United
Nations has made headway in countering the threat
posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army because the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
are working together to address this threat that plagues
the entire Great Lakes region. These missions would
have made far less progress if they had worked in
isolation.
The scope and benefits of inter-mission cooperation
are plainly evident, but the system is far from perfect, as
we saw earlier in this year. UNMISS would not have been
able to get to the remote areas of Jonglei, where security
was rapidly deteriorating, if not for a reinforcement of
helicopters obtained from MONUSCO. But many of
those helicopters arrived only after the worst phases of
the crisis had passed. The ad hoc nature of the system
was not equipped to respond rapidly enough.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s intention to
take a more strategic and predictable approach through
the provision of common administrative and logistic
support to missions through his global field support
strategy. The strategy has already dramatically improved
the effective and efficient sharing of scarce assets,
such as aircraft, and has standardized and streamlined
routine administrative functions across missions. We
therefore look forward to the full implementation of all
aspects of the strategy in coming years.
In closing, as inter-mission cooperation becomes
an increasingly important tool for United Nations field
operations, we strongly urge the Secretariat to explore
lessons learned and develop standard practices to
enhance the speed of response, improve performance,
account for costs in advance and capture efficiencies.
Of course, inter-mission cooperation is neither a
substitute for ensuring that each and every mission has
the resources it needs to carry out its own mandates, nor
a solution for addressing long-standing capacity gaps.
Indeed, while the United States views inter-mission
cooperation as an important mechanism to address

12-64450

S/PV.6886

the challenges faced by United Nations missions, the
Council has a continuing responsibility to ensure that
each mission can stand fully on its own. Our challenge
then is to uphold that responsibility while also accruing
benefits from the types of inter-mission cooperation
highlighted here today.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this afternoon’s
briefing on inter-mission cooperation and United
Nations peacekeeping, and more generally for your active
chairmanship of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Hervé Ladsous and Under-Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for their briefings today.
Over the past several years, inter-mission
cooperation has become an important part of United
Nations peacekeeping. We see this most visibly in
the sharing of assets, such as helicopters and troops,
between missions in response to crises. As many have
said, the support that the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire received from its sister mission in Liberia
in the aftermath of the contested Ivorian presidential
elections is an excellent example of such inter-mission
cooperation. Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Haq referred to
many other such examples.
But inter-mission cooperation is both wider and
deeper than an asset surge in times of crisis. A new
mission can be bolstered and deployed more quickly by
the temporary transfer of resources from neighbouring
missions. Often, speed of deployment is politically
critical in such missions. We saw this in the example
of the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syrian
benefiting from staff redeployed from the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force for an urgent
Syrian mission.
Peacekeepers operating in the same region can profit
immensely from sharing risk analysis, from conducting
joint planning and operations against common threats,
and from sharing experiences of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding work in communities living in border
regions. Transferring military assets and personnel,
civilian expertise, experience and planning is a natural
response to challenges that escalate quickly to crisis
point and which may not respect international borders.
The Security Council should recognize and welcome
that reality.

12-64450

Mr. Kapoor, who spoke on behalf of India,
suggested that inter-mission cooperation is promoted
not to increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions but to cut down the resources available
to individual peacekeeping missions. I do not
recognize that description. Effective use of resources
is, of course, important, but the motivation behind
inter-mission cooperation is greater effectiveness. The
Security Council saw for itself in West Africa that
force commanders on the ground are actually often the
driving force behind inter-mission cooperation, and
that it is capitals that put a brake on such cooperation.
In that context, I pay particular tribute to the flexibility
shown by Pakistan, whose troops were involved on that
occasion.
We have heard several strong examples to illustrate
the benefits of inter-mission cooperation this afternoon.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa have been
working together to tackle the threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army, including by establishing a joint
radio network for information sharing. MONUSCO
helicopters provided critical support to UNMIS during
the crisis in Jonglei in January of this year. The United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, UNMISS and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur are set to begin monthly coordination meetings
to support the Joint Border Verification And Monitoring
Mechanism. As I mentioned, military observers were
redeployed from across the region to ensure rapid
deployment of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in Syria in May earlier this year.
The United Kingdom recognizes that some Council
members have reservations about inter-mission
cooperation. We understand that inter-mission
cooperation, while critical to effectiveness, usually
offers only temporary solutions and it should not
prevent us from addressing more deep-rooted structural
deficiencies faced by individual missions; nor should it
be used to avoid addressing shortages of critical assets
which affect several missions.
But we are confident that inter-mission cooperation
as currently practiced by the United Nations adheres
to peacekeeping principles. Appropriate and necessary
consultation with troop-contributing countries will
continue, of course, to take place, and final authority

17

S/PV.6886

will, of course, remain with the Security Council. So
while we understand why delegations may wish to
express their concerns and set down their constraints,
we feel that they should not be overemphasized at the
expense of a concept that has led to more effective
peacekeeping, which we should all support.
We know that armed groups posing a threat to
security and stability frequently live and operate in
border areas. We have held debates in this Chamber
to consider the insecurity caused by the illicit flow of
weapons, drugs and people across porous borders that
separate countries affected by or at risk from conflict.
We know that borders may often be breached by flows
of refugees, which can be a cause of greater instability.
We must therefore ensure that peacekeeping operations
on either side of such borders have greater flexibility to
share resources, expertise and planning in developing
joint approaches to tackling such challenges.
Peacekeeping operations must be able to rapidly
surge assets to the point of a crisis. We remain open to
proposals to make inter-mission cooperation easier to
achieve in order to ensure that peacekeeping missions
are more effective and sustainable.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretaries-General Hervé
Ladsous and Ameerah Haq for their thorough briefings.
The theme of inter-mission cooperation remains
very topical. We support the desire of the Secretariat to
be prepared for the last-minute deployment of missions
and negative developments in the field, especially
when, in many areas of support to peacekeeping
operations, there truly is a shortage of resources. We all
remember the Syrian experience, when United Nations
observers had to be deployed on short notice. We
thank the Secretariat for its promptness and the troopcontributing countries for their flexibility in providing
personnel.
It is our view that United Nations peacekeeping
operations must have enough of their own resources
to execute their mandates. In that regard, the relevant
United Nations bodies must adopt a responsible
approach. The Security Council must give missions
realistic mandates; the Secretariat must make balanced
proposals on the composition of missions, based on
objective assessments and forecasting of developments
in the field; and the Fifth Committee must meet
resource requirements by approving sufficient but not
inflated budgets.

18

Inter-mission cooperation, as a temporary
mechanism, has shown its effectiveness in a number
of emergency situations. However, broad application
of those methods, and especially the standardization
of parameters of such cooperation, requires a number
of political, legal and financial conditions to be met.
Among those, we would include the consent of the
receiving country for a change, even a temporary
change, of the configuration of an international
presence, the preparedness of the troop-contributing
countries for troop redeployments to other missions,
and the harmonization of existing United Nations
administrative and budget procedures.
Of great significance is the consent of the Security
Council to the transfer of personnel and resources.
Strengthening the military component of one mission
and weakening another in fact means altering their
mandates. The necessary legitimacy for such processes
can be granted only by Council decision.
Inter-mission cooperation has already been
consolidated in existing practices of work in
peacekeeping operations. However, in order to move
forward, we need a detailed work-up of all general,
non-specific parameters of inter-mission cooperation
as well as inter-State coordination of them in the main
United Nations bodies.
From the political and operational standpoints,
it is important to calculate all possible scenarios for
developments in countries where those missions are
deployed. Every peacekeeping operation must be
prepared at any time to fully execute its mandate. There
should be no threat to the safety of the Blue Helmets.
Indeed, in the majority of cases, peacekeepers and
equipment will be redeployed into even more tense and
dangerous circumstances.
With respect to logistical support of missions,
relevant reform proposals must not have an impact
on the quality of services provided by peacekeeping
operations. The desire to optimize the use of resources
or to broaden opportunities for their more flexible
application must have a reasonable limit.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting and for bringing this
important issue to the Council. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretaries-General Ameerah Haq and
Hervé Ladsous for their briefings on the matter.
Since the deployment of the first operation in
1948, both the concept and reality of United Nations
12-64450

S/PV.6886

peacekeeping have evolved continuously. One of the
relatively new elements is inter-mission cooperation.
I would like to make three points today on that
topic — first, on the overall concept of inter-mission
cooperation and the major opportunities it provides;
secondly, on the preconditions and limits the concept
is facing; and finally, on inter-mission cooperation
beyond the military aspect of peacekeeping.
On my first point, United Nations peacekeeping
is a joint effort of all Member States, with special
responsibilities for the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other major stakeholders. In certain circumstances,
inter-mission cooperation can be a useful and efficient
tool of mutual support for missions that are located in
geographical proximity to each other. Inter-mission
cooperation can save resources and enhance the
efficiency of peacekeeping missions by using and
creating synergistic effects. That can be achieved by the
temporary shift of critical assets between missions. We
welcome recent examples of inter-mission cooperation
in the Sudan and South Sudan, especially among the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei,
and also between the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire in
West Africa.
But inter-mission cooperation is more than sharing
assets or supporting other missions with troops.
Inter-mission cooperation can also be achieved by
sharing information, coordinating activities and
developing common concepts and strategies within the
scope of missions’ respective mandates. For the future,
we should develop creative ideas within that field and
expand the functions and areas in which inter-mission
cooperation takes place. To focus only on the temporary
exchange of helicopters for troops is too narrow.
Secondly, inter-mission cooperation can be a tool
to enhance the efficiency of a mission or to cope with
an unforeseen crisis or shortage. It should not be a
permanent substitute for missing assets and capabilities,
and it must not be an excuse for understaffing or
underfunding a mission. Mutual support with military
assets is a complex undertaking that has to be well
prepared. In addition to the indispensable consent of
the parties, clear command and control arrangements,
sufficient logistical and medical support, and knowledge
of the terrain are key to the implementation process.

12-64450

Thirdly, we should not limit our understanding of
inter-mission cooperation to the military component of
a peacekeeping operation. Closer cooperation between
the civil components — for instance, in the fields of
early peacebuilding, human rights policy, security
sector reform or other areas — can also be envisaged.
We therefore support an exchange of best practices, not
only at Headquarters but also horizontally at different
missions.
Finally, as suggested by Mr. Ladsous, we would
welcome a comprehensive evaluation of inter-mission
cooperation by the Secretariat that would enable the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, and
other major stakeholders to further develop the concept
and implementation of inter-mission cooperation.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
peacekeeping inter-mission cooperation, as well as for
the concept paper on the topic. We are also grateful
to Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Haq for their informative
presentations.
Peacekeeping is a unique mechanism and an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to
maintain international peace and security. While
gradually evolving into a more complex institution
with multifaceted mandates, peacekeeping missions
constantly encounter a number of challenges that
negatively affect the implementation of their primary
tasks, especially in the light of the dynamically
changing political and security environment in certain
parts of the world. Today’s meeting therefore provides
a useful opportunity to further deliberate on ways to
increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping, with a focus
on the notion of inter-mission cooperation.
Notwithstanding the nature of conflicts and the
challenges they present, peacekeeping operations have
a specific geographic scope. They have mandates that
guide and provide them with a clear vision of their tasks.
Mandates must therefore be realistic and achievable,
and they must be tailored and constantly adapted to the
realities on the ground. Most importantly, peacekeepers
must be fully equipped with all the operational and
logistical capabilities necessary to carry out their
mandates.
Increased coordination and cooperation among
missions operating in geographic proximity to one
another are an important requirement for making them
more efficient and cost-effective in the implementation

19

S/PV.6886

of their respective mandates, in particular on issues
having cross-border or regional dimensions. Many
instances of such cooperation have proven to be relevant
and useful. However, there are apparent differences
and cautiousness among Member States with regard to
proposals on elevating the issue to the next level, such
as the elaboration of definitions and the standardization
and codification of inter-mission cooperation. I would
like to share our approach to the issue.
All peacekeeping operations are set up to prevent
violence and preserve peace. In that sense, coordination
and cooperation among neighbouring missions on
challenges that transcend the area of their deployment
should be regarded as a normal, logical and continuous
process. That process includes information exchanges,
joint assessment and planning, the development of
common strategies, joint patrolling, monitoring and
training, and shared border responsibility, and so on.
Such a level of inter-mission cooperation should be
endorsed by the Council and envisaged in the mandates
of the respective peacekeeping operations. Needless
to say, joint activities on cross-border challenges can
be authorized only upon the agreement of the central
authorities of recipient States and must be coordinated
with troop-contributing countries.
In the context of today’s deliberations, the
meaning of the term “inter-mission cooperation” has
been narrowed to refer to the process of transferring
enabling assets and contingents from one mission to
another in order to swiftly respond to a worsening
security situation and to fill existing capability gaps.
We view such cooperation, however — unlike the
cooperation I have just mentioned on cross-border or
regional challenges — as a temporary and short-term
measure applied on a case-by-case basis. Apart from
the Council’s authorization, the consent of both the
recipient State and the troop- and asset-contributing
country is a prerequisite in each case. One mission’s
capabilities must not be used as a permanent substitute
for the operational and logistical deficiency of another.
As a temporary stop-gap measure, the exchange
of assets and contingents is feasible between missions
in geographic proximity to one another. Therefore,
their mandates can envisage a certain flexibility for
larger inter-mission cooperation and rapid operational
adjustments in the face of a deteriorating situation on the
ground, provided that the legal, financial and procedural
implications of such adjustments are calculated in
advance. In order to inform the decision of the Security

20

Council in a timely manner, missions should elaborate
different scenarios and options based, inter alia, on
regular threat assessments and on prognoses of possible
political and security developments in the area of their
deployment.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to express
my delegation’s appreciation for your leadership
of the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and your efforts to hold focused thematic
discussions, involving both Council members and the
wider United Nations membership, on different aspects
of peacekeeping, including last week’s discussion on
inter-mission cooperation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Amira Haq, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support, for their comprehensive
briefings.
I would also like to warmly commend the
personnel and the peacekeeping forces for their efforts
on the ground. They accomplish their noble mission in
circumstances that are often very difficult, often at the
cost of their lives.
Despite the current international financial crisis,
it goes without saying that peacekeeping missions
and operations remain an effective and irreplaceable
instrument that needs to be developed and maintained
on an ongoing basis. The complexity and multifaceted
nature of peacekeeping operations require United
Nations action on a number of levels, which in turn
requires a coordination and cooperation strategy among
missions, not to mention the need to develop a rapidresponse military reserve that can intervene in urgent
crisis situations.
Today’s debate seeks to canvass the opinions of
Council members regarding inter-mission cooperation
with a view to developing the concept of collective
ownership of these mechanisms and to reaching an
agreement on what concrete measures to take. In the
concept paper distributed to Council members, we
have tried to highlight a number of aspects of potential
cooperation. Through debate in the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, we have also tried to highlight
inter-mission cooperation, particularly with respect to

12-64450

S/PV.6886

the protection of civilians through rapid intervention in
emergency and humanitarian crisis situations.
The Council’s visit to West Africa in February
highlighted the added value and benefits of such
cooperation, which is why we thought it necessary to
hold this debate today. At its meetings on 23 March and
7 December, the Working Group considered various
forms of cooperation. Member States were briefed
on inter-mission cooperation by representatives of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the Department of Field Support (DFS), who
emphasized that this useful tool offers some short-term
advantages, particularly in emergency situations.
In their briefings to the Security Council, the
Working Group, the Fourth Committee and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
representatives of the Secretariat underscored the
increased use by DPKO and DFS of inter-mission
cooperation as an effective mechanism for designing
and optimizing the use of available resources. That
mechanism has enabled us to temporarily deal with
crises and fill the gaps in various peacekeeping
operations operating in the same regions. Specific
cases, such as in Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, South Sudan,
Abyei in the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, have proved the relevance of the mechanism.
Those actions would not have been possible without
the cooperation and understanding of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs), which made it possible
to rapidly redeploy their personnel, military equipment
and supplies, thereby contributing to protecting and
saving the lives of many civilians.
The cases I mentioned illustrate the usefulness of
inter-mission cooperation and the challenges it faces.
One of the lessons learned in such situations is the
importance of early planning and political consultations

12-64450

for ensuring the effectiveness of inter-mission
cooperation. Such planning enables early commitments
to be agreed with TCCs, which in turn strengthens the
possibility of using this mechanism when it is needed.
While inter-mission cooperation can provide a rapid
response in boosting capacities that are very underequipped, it is still an ad hoc mechanism and temporary
solution for very specific situations. Such cooperation
can be affected by the capacity of missions at both
the receiving and the sending ends, since transferring
equipment and personnel could lead to a vacuum
between the two. Success in such types of cooperation
depends on a number of interdependent factors, such as
the practicality of the peacekeeping mandates created
by the Security Council and the necessary cooperation
between the Security Council and the TCCs, the
Secretariat and the host countries.
We are mindful of the fact that inter-mission
cooperation is a work in progress that is driven by dayto-day practice and the specific nature of each particular
mission. It is enriched by the mutually beneficial
partnership between the TCCs and the United Nations.
Today’s debate is one pillar in that process, which we
hope will be followed up and contribute, going forward,
to strengthening peacekeeping around the world.
Morocco will continue to be a traditional partner with
the United Nations in order to enrich and develop this
debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

21
