140

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

Noting with appreciation that, in paragraph 175 of
its report, the International Law Commission stated
that special attention was given to the need to take a
formal decision regarding the commencement of work
on the topic of the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, in conformity with General
Assembly resolutions 2669 (XXV) of 8 December
1970, 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December 1971 and 2926
(XXVII) of 28 November 1972,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-fifth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work it accomplished at that
session;
3. Recom111c11ds that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Complete at its twenty-sixth session, in the light
of comments reci:ivcd from Member States, the second
reading of the draft articles on succession of States in
respect of tre:ities adopted at its twenty-fourth session;
(b) Continue on a priority basis at its twenty-sixth
session its work on State responsibility, taking into
account the views and con~idcrations referred to in
General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) of 20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November 1963,
2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968 and 2926
(XXVII) of 28 November 1972, with a view to the
preparation of a first set of draft articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrong[ul acts;
(c) Undertake nt an appropriate time a separate
study of the topic of international liability for injurious
consequences arising out of the performance of other
activities;
(d) Proceed with the preparation of d::-nft articles
on succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties, t:!king into account the views and considerations referred to in the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
( e) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause;
(f) Continue its study of the question of treaties
concluded between States and international organizations or between two or more international organizations;
4. Recommends further that the International Law
Commission should at its twenty-sixth session commence
its work on the law of non-navigational uses of international watercourses by, inter alia, adopting preliminary measures provided for under article 16 of its
statute;
5. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1974 and a
twelve-week session for that year;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to complete the
supplementary report on the legal problems relating
to the non-navigational uses of international watercourses, requested by the General Assembly in resolution 2669 (XXV), in time to submit it to the International Law Commission before the beginning of its
twenty-sixth session;
7. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number of jurists of developing countries;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyeighth session of the General Assembly.
2186th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
3072 (XXVIII). United Nations Conference on the
Ucprescntation of States in Their Relations
with International Organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 2966 (XXVII) of
14 December 1972, it decided that an international
conference of plenipotentiaries should be convened as
soon as practicable to consider the draft articles on the
representation of States in their relations with international organizations, adopted by the International Law
Commission at its twenty-third session,5 and to embody
the results of its work in an international convention
and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 2780 (XXVI)
of 3 December 1971, it expressed its appreciation to
the lnter;iational Law Commission for its valuable work
on the question of representation of States in their relations with international organizations and to the Special
Rapporteur on the topic for his contribution to this
work,
Having considered the memorandum on the methods
of wor!, of the conferenceu submitted by the SecretaryGeneral in pursuance of resolution 2966 (XXVII),
Notiilg that an invitation has been extended by the
Government of Austria to hold at Vienna the conference on the representation of States in their relations
with international organizations,
l. Decides that the United Nations Conference on
the Rcp,-cscntation of States in Their Relations with
International Organizations, referred to in General
As,cmbiy resolution 2966 (XXVII), will be held early
in 1975 at Vienna;
2. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other interested intergovernmental organizations to send observers to the Conference;
3. Refers to the Conference as the basic proposal
for its consideration the draft articles on the representation of States in their relations with international
organizations adopted by the International Law Commission at its twenty-third session;
4. Invites the States and intergovernmental organizations which have not already done so to submit to the
Secretary-General not later than 1 September 1974, for
circulation to participants in the Conference, their comments and observations on the draft articles on the representation of States in their relations with international
organizations adopted by the International Law Commission at its twenty-third session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the presence at the Conference, as an expert, of the
International Law Commission's Special Rapporteur
on the topic of relations between States and international organizations;
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-.sixtla
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/8410/Rev.l), chap. II, sect D.
6 A/9167.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

6. Request.r the Secretary-General to submit to the
Conference all relevant documentation and recommendations relating to its methods of work and procedures and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities
and services which it will require, including the provision of summary records;
7. Decides to determine at its twenty-ninth session
the question of participation in the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their
Relations with International Organizations, to be held
in 1975, and to include in the provisional agenda of
that session an item entitled "Participation in the
United Nations Conference on the Representation of
States in Their Relations with International Organizations, to be held in 1975".
2186th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
3102 (XXVIII).

Respect for human rights in
armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that only complete respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and general and complete disarmament under effective international control can
bring about full guarantees against armed conflicts and
the suffering caused by such conflicts, and determined
to continue all efforts to these ends,
Conscious of the fact that armed conflicts continue to
cause untold human suffering and material devastation,
Convinced that in all such conflicts rules designed to
reduce the suffering as much as possible and to increase
the protection of non-combatants and civilian objects
are needed,
Reaffirming the urgent need to ensure full and effective application by all parties to armed conflicts of
existing legal rules ,relating to such conflicts, in particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 7 the
Geneva Protocol of 1925 8 and the Geneva Conventions
of 1949,9 and to supplement these rules by new ones
which take into account the modern developments in
methods and means of warfare and which are practicable,
Welcoming the convocation by the Swiss Federal
Council of the first session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed
Conflicts, to be held at Geneva from 20 February to
29 March 1974, with a possible second session in 1975,
Welcoming as an excellent basis for discussion at this
Conference the draft Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 prepared by the International
Committee of the Red Cross after thorough consultations with government experts, particularly during conferences held at Geneva in 1971 and 1972,
Recalling the successive resolutions adopted in the
preceding years by the United Nations relating to human rights in armed conflicts, in particular General
Assembly resolutions 2852 (XXVI) and 2853 (XXVI)
of 20 December 1971 and 3032 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972,
7 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
8 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
a United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

141

Noting resolution XIII adopted by the twenty-first
International Conference of the Red Cross, held at
Istanbul in 1969, 10 and the resolution on the reaffirmation and development of international humanitarian
law adopted by the twenty-second International Conference of the Red Cross, held at Teheran in 1973, 11
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on respect for human rights in armed conflicts, 12
Recalling resolution 3058 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973 in which the General Assembly invited the Diplomatic Conference to submit its comments and advice
regarding the draft articles on the protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict,
Recalling its resolution 3076 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973 concerning napalm and other incendiary
weapons and all aspects of their possible use as well
as the resolution on the prohibition or restriction of use
of certain weapons adopted by the twenty-second International Conference of the Red Cross, held at Teheran
in 1973, 13 inviting the Diplomatic Conference to take
up the question of rules on the prohibition or restriction
of use of specific conventional weapons which may
cause unnecessary suffering or have indiscriminate
effects,
Welcoming, in this regard, the survey prepared by
the Secretariat on existing rules of international law
concerning the prohibition or restriction of use of
specific weapons, 14
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking in 197 4 the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts and to the International Committee of the Red
Cross for the extensive work it has performed in preparing the draft Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949;
2. Urges that the national liberation movements
recognized by the various regional intergovernmental
organizations concerned be invited to participate in the
Diplomatic Conference as observers in accordance with
the practice of the United Nations;
3. Urges all participants in the Diplomatic Conference to do their utmost to reach agreement on additional rules. which may help to alleviate the suffering
brought about by armed conflicts and to protect noncombatants and civilian objects in such conflicts;
4. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to acknowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the humanitarian instruments and to observe the international humanitarian rules which are applicable, in
particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907,
the Geneva Protocol of 1925 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949;
5. Urges that instruction concerning such rules be
provided to armed forces and information concerning
the same rules be given to civilians everywhere, with a
view to securing their strict observance;
6. Requests again the Secretary-General to encourage the study and teaching of principles of international
humanitarian rules applicable in armed conflicts;
10

See A/7720, annex I, sect. D.

11 A/9123/ Add.2, annex, sect. IV.

1 2 A/9123 and Corr.I and Add.I and 2.

13 A/9 I 23/ Add.2, annex, sect. Ill.
14 A/9215.
