TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING: 22 MAY 1973

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1716) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

.,,..,

.,...

. . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . ., ,..

.,....

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of Guinea and Kenya to
the President of the Security Council (S/ 10925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920andCorr.l)
..... .. . .. ... .. ... . .. . . . . .. .. . .... .. .

1

SIPV.1716

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTEENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 22 May 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Rahmatalla ABDULLA (Sudan).

what it is that we expect of the Council and each of its
members.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

4. It will be recalled that on 11 November 1965 the illegal
minority regime of Ian Smith seized power in the British
colony of Southern Rhodesia in defiance of the British
Crown, the British Government and the British legal
principles governing the handing over of power to a
generally supported Government of all peoples in a colony.
AS a consequence, the United Kingdom Government
undertook to deal with the rebels firmly, in accordance
with known British vigour where such defiance sets foot,
and to restore the colony to a constitutional path of
development.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 716)
I, Adoption

of the agenda.

concerning the situation in Southern
2. Question
Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to the President of the
Security Council (S/10925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia (S/10920 and Corr.1).

5. It is 110~ nearly nine years later, and the rebels still
remain in power. The United Kingdom Government has had
a series of dialogues with the rebels, but to no avail, save
making the world and Africa fearful of a selling out of the
5 million Africans to the qvarter-million white minority
whose aspirations have been to gang up with the racist
regime of South Africa and the colonial regime of Portugal
to continue the enslavement of African peoples for economic ends. It is worth comparing the British handling of
the Southern Rhodesian question with their handling of the
so-called Kenyan rebellion of 1952, and, subsequently, the
Anguilla uprising of 1967. Why such a vast difference in
treatment?

The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. It would be sad to believe that in each case the
difference in the swiftness and rigour of the measures taken
would appear to depend on who rebelled against whom.
Rebellion by a minority of colonial residents of British or
white origin is fine; rebellion by indigenous people must be
smashed and the natives must be contained. This characterization hardly accords with the known British concern
for legal and just considerations.

Question concerning the situatiou in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of
Guinea and Kenya to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 0925);
(/I) Second special report of the committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920 and Corr.1)

7. Aside from the position taken by the United Kingdom,
the General Assembly and the Security Council reflecting
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
view of numerous organizations and bodies throughout the
world which have condemned the unilateral declaration of
independence by the rebels, we call for the adoption by
Britain of measures which will facilitate realization by the
people of Zimbabwe of their independence and right to
self-determination. Indeed, that has been the untainted
message of the General Assembly and to some extent-and
to some extent only, as I shall show later-of this Council
since 1965.

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to recall at this juncture the
decision taken earlier by the Council [1713th meeting/ to
invite the representative of Somalia, at his request, to
participate in the discussion under the terms of Article 31
of the Charter. A place has been reserved for that
representative in the Council chamber,
2. Members of the Council are aware that there are two
draft resolutions on the question before the Council
[S/l 092 7 and S/l 09281.
3. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Before we launch into
deciding the fate of the two draft resolutions before the
Council, we should ponder for a moment and ask ourselves

8. The Council has patently been pained by the realization
that the measures it has taken since 1965 have so far been
1

ineffective. It is for that reason that resolution 320 (1972),
and in particular its paragraphs 4 and 5, requested the
Security Council Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968) to undertake, as a matter of urgency,
consideration of the type of action which would be taken
in view of the open and persistent refusal of South Africa
and Portugal to implement sanctions against the illegal
rCgime and to submit a report inter alia for extending the
scope and improving the effectiveness of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia.

13. The United Kingdom Government is the administering
Power of the rebel colony; this we all acknowledge, My
delegation would have thought therefore that the United
Kingdom would welcome any practical measures such as
those provided in draft resolution S/10928, which, coming
about nine years after the unilateral declaration of in&pen.
dence, might, together with measures provided in resolution
253 (1968), be given a fair trial. Yet, the contempt with
which the delegation of the United Kingdom holds out
against that draft resolution is implicit from the statement
made by that delegation to the Council on Friday, 18May
/I 715th meeting]. The United Kingdom made no reference
to that draft-the only draft that requests States to protest,
in a meaningful manner, the recalcitrant, open and per.
sistent violation of sanctions. by Portugal and South Africa.
When they refer to effective sanctions and the toppl& of
the Smith rdgime, I wonder whether the United Kingdom
delegation and mine are talking about the same thing.
Clearly not. If the United Kingdom wants to disavow the
responsibility for its colonial possession, it should make no
pretences; it should come out in the open, as it has
persistently done in the exercise of the veto, and say so.

9. I do not find it necessary to repeat that the Committee’s report to the Council contained in document
S/l0920 and Corr.1 hardly meets the mandate of the
Council. The reason is quite clear. It is that in spite of
modest African proposals supported and significantly improved upon by the delegations of China and the USSR, to
which my delegation is grateful, the United Kingdom and
the United States would not let down Southern Rhodesia,
South Africa and Portugal by enabling the Committee, and
subsequently the Council, to discharge its mandate by
adopting measures likely to bring about the fall of the
Southern Rhodesian illegal rigime.

14. In his statement on 18 May, the United Kingdom
representative recognized the following:

IO. We might therefore ask how serious are some of the
members of the Council concerning the effectiveness of the
Council’s decisions. Indeed, we must ask whether the
doings of those members and their generous protection of
illegalities in the case of the South&n Rhodesian and South
African questions in the exercise of veto accords with the
original intention of the provision of that privilege in the
Charter. We must ask ourselves to what extent that privilege
serves the interests of the weak and of international public
opinion. We must ask whether it was intended that the
goals set by the Council should be subject to automatic
frustration by one or two of the members of the Council.

“In considering what should be done now, therefore,
the touchstone-the
criterion-must
be the effectiveness
of what is proposed as a means towards stopping the
illegal trade which continues and, therefore, towards
promoting the chances of a just and acceptable settlemerlt
in Southern Rhodesia.” [ibid., para. 21.J
Yet, in spite of the fact that it is known and accepted by all
that the most substantial violators of the sanctions are
South Africa and Portugal, the United Kingdom itself has
proposed no measures to rectify this situation, and is not
willing that any action be taken against those two. The
statement of disavowal of extension of sanctions which
would amount “to a declaration of economic warfare
against the whole of southern Africa and whk11 ml;
Government, for one, could not countenance”[ibid.]
does
not demonstrate the seriousness of the United Kingdom
Government in the discharge of its responsibilities to the
people of Southern Rhodesiaas a whole, other than the
racist minority. Nor has the United Kingdom comeOUT
with measures,even protests,againstother known violators
of sanctions,suchasthe United States.

11. My delegation is at a loss to appreciate the seriousness
of some members of the Council concerning the intent to
terminate the state of rebellion in the British colony of
Southern Rhodesia. I wish I were wrong in this impression.
My impression will be clarified by tile vote on the draft
resolution in document S/10928, which, if adopted and
faithfully implemented, would bend not only the Ian Smith
clique in Southern Rhodesia but also its two allies, South
Africa and Portugal.
12. However, the draft resolution seems a target of those
aiding, abetting and facilitating the breach of sanctions for
apparently they hold that the Council should not adopt any
decision which comes to grips with the problem of
Southern Rhodesia. I need not recall that of the recent
vetoes on African questions, and in particular on Southern
Rhodesia, the Africans have been dismayed by the readiness
with which the United Kingdom, the administering Power
of the colony, and the United States, the open importer of
chrome from the rebel colony, have been willing to ignore,
ridicule and caricature the African stand and international
public opinion. We watch the deeds of those friends of
independent Africa, and equally, if not more, the friends of
Southern Rhodesia, Portugal and South Africa, with
bleeding hearts. They give with the right hand and at the
same time they take away with the left hand. We find this
very strange.

15. It would appear,therefore, that the United Kingdom
has colluded or connived with its collaboratorsin encouraging,by action or inaction, the breachof Security COULD
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and therefore tie
continuation of the illegal regime of Ian Smith. The point
made by you, Mr. President, as a representative of the
Sudan,that the United Kingdom naval patrol at Beira113s
been relaxed in its work, gives credence to the theory Qf
collusion. It is obviously with concern that my dclegatioll
heardyou say:
“It [the Committee] should have beenaware of thefact
that the British naval patrol, at Beira Port, has not onI>
been relaxed but that Lourenqo Marques and Durban
Ports have extended their port facilities in the serviceof
2

contraband trade from
[ibid., paw. 51.1

and to Southern Rhodesia.”

believed to work for the Southern Rhodesian regime or to
further its ends.

All these things, in the view of my delegation, do not
enhance the seriousness of the United Kingdom, either in
enforcing sanctions, or in terminating the state of rebellion
in Southern Rhodesia or in observing the spirit of the
Charter and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
1960.

20. To sum up, we have before us two draft resolutions
which have been under consideration by the Council since
bt
week. It is the hope of my Government that the
Governments represented here in the Council have had
adequate time to study the two drafts and that, after
reflection, members of this Council will react to them in a
positive and credible manner which would help this Council
take concrete and meaningful steps towards a solution of
the Rhodesian question.

16. The Southern Rhodesian question cannot be divorced
or examined in isolation from the southern African
question. It is an integral part of that area. Thus, the
Council should recall that the southern African question, be
it the apartheid r&me of South Africa, the Namibia11
question, the brutal colonial policies of Portugal, or the
Rhodesian rebellion, has, taking its aspects individually or
together, been rightly determined as constituting ,..threat to
international peace and security. The special responsibility
to maintain international peace and security and to arrest
situations that may threaten them falls on the Security
Council, with the permanent members assuming a major
role in this.
17. Yet, what is the posture of some key permanent
tnembers on the question before the Council? 1 will be
disclosing no secrets in pointing out that short-term
economic benefits in trade and investments, with cheap
labour, amounting to a new form of slavery under the
capitalism of the twentieth century, and military strategy
juxtaposed with dying colonialism have regrettably, in the
short run, won over principle!;, the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, justice and morality. These are
the overriding forces of the United States and the United
Kingdom in their mis-exercise of the privilege of the veto,
and hence perpetuation of the racial policies of South
Africa, Southern Rhodesia, and Portuguese colonialism in
Africa.
18. May f remind the Council, however, that Africa, and
Kenya for that matter, shall not give up until all Africa is
free, and until a just order reigns in Southern Rhodesia, in
the Territories under Portuguese rule, and in South Africa
itself. The sooner all understand and accept this, the better
it will be for all, so that a beginning in a constructive
relationship of all races and peoples can be made.
19. In The Observer of London of 20 May 1973, the
lobbying operations of the Rhodesian Government’s information office in Washington are brought into question.
The hosting of such an agency of an illegal regime in the
United States, and according it facilities to propagate the
views of the illegal rCgime, scores yet another black mark
on the United States Government’s handling of the Southern Rhodesian question, My delegation commends the
investigation being carried out by United States citizens on
the activities of the so-called Rhodesian information office
in the United States. The position of my delegation is that
any manifestation that would give the semblance of any
Government recognizing the illegal Ian Smith clique should
not be permitted to operate in any form by any Governtnent in its territory, whether through Southern Rhodesian
individuals or not, We would therefore urge all Governments to scrutinize closely the activities of individllalq

21. It will be recalled that one of the draft resolutions,
document S/10927, is currently sponsored by Australia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan
and Yugoslavia. This is a support our delegation welcomes
because it is a reflection of the enlightened concern and
thinking that prevails amongst the majority of the members
of this Council. My delegation hopes that more Member
States will put their names as sponsors of the draft
resolution, for the draft is nothing but a direct response to
paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 320 (1972),
which urged the sanctions Committee to extend the scope
and improve the effectiveness of sanctions. My delegation
again hopes and trusts that this draft will be supported
unanimously by the collective membership of the Council.
?2. The second draft resolution is in document S/10928
and is another response to resolution 320 (1972), calling on
the sanctions Committee to consider what action could “be
taken in view of the open and persistent refusal of South
Africa and Portugal to implement sanctions”. In other
words, this draft is not a bolt from the blue, but it answers
a call made to the Committee by this Council itself. At the
moment, this draft is sponsored by Guinea, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. I would
again appeal to more members of the Council to join us in
sponsoring this draft so that whatever action the Council
takes goes out to the world as a united and unanimous
Council decision.
23. We meet in the shadow of the “velvet veto”. We call it
velvet because the deadly weapon is presented, as it were, in
a velvet glove, giving the impression that it is being used to
obstruct “precipitate and hasty actions on the part of
irresponsible and hot-headed Afro-Asian delegations”. It
may again perhaps be worth while to concentrate for a
moment or two on this brazen brandishing of the veto and
to see whether its intended use would conform to the
original ideas that led to its inscription in the Charter in
those smoky chambers in San Francisco 27 years ago.
24. If the veto is used, as we fear it might very well be, its
use will, in the humble opinion of my delegation, have the
:ffect of nullifying the previous decisions of this Council,
or at least frustrating them, As I explained earlier, the
action envisaged in the draft in document S/10928 is in
response to and is calculated to further an earlier Council
decision to take meaningful steps to meet the situation
whereby South Africa and Portugal persistently flout the
decisions of the Council. It is the view of my delegation
that such a veto will be exercised and executed to thwart
tl.0
.,., steo-by-step consideration and action by this Council.

regimes in southern Africa is a wrong priority, We should
make it priority number ten, or perhaps give it llo priority
at all.

In the view of my delegation, this will be a very serious
situation, in view of the Council’s earlier verdict that the
situation in southern Africa is a threat to international
peace and security.

29. I am not surprised that this type of advice comes from
lllze New York Times. It comes from those who believe that
Africans do not know how to order their own business,nor
how to order their own priorities. We are being told that,
instead of obsessing ourselves with opposition against white
minorities in southern Africa, we should put as priority
number one the question of the famine now ravaging some
parts of Africa, and perhaps, as number one also, we should
halt the killing of Africans by other Africans for ethnic and
tribal reasons. I must say that The New York Times has
recognized the fact that the white rulers of South Africa are
not holy, for the newspaper says: “The white rulers of
South Africa, Rhodesia, Angola and Mozambique deserve
the world’s censure for repressing African majorities . . .“. I
do not know whether I should repeat that for the benefit of
the representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States, but they can read it for themselves.

25. The p,osture of some of the big Powers here is, as we
all know, designed to protect their capitalist interests in
southern Africa. Those interests are of such paramount
importance to them that the ideals enshrined in the
Charter, the operations of the Security Council and so
forth, could be subjugated to servethose interests. We have
at the moment a permanent member of the Security
Council openly defying the sanctions by importing minerals
from Southern Rhodesia. But that very same country is
doing more. We have situated right here in New York the
office of Air Rhodesia; we have situated in Washington the
Rhodesian information office, operated by two ofticersMr. Kenneth Towsey, and Mr. John Hooper. They have
been operating that office singe the unilateral declaration of
independence in 1965. One wonders, therefore, how serious
some permanent members of the Security Council are when
they proclaim to the world that they support United
Nations action to put an end to the illegal regime in
Rhodesia, We would again appeal to the United States
Government to reconsider its action and close down those
two offices and abandon the ill-fated open breach of
sanctions.

30. My remarks are as follows. It is true that at the
moment we have a calamity, a natural disaster: a drought
which is going to afflict a number of African countries with
famine. This is a disaster not of our making; it is a natural
disaster. And instead of ridiculing us for falling victim to
this natural disaster the editors of The New Yovk netter
should come out and help and appeal for help so that those
of our people who are faced with famine can get some help
and some comfort.

26. There is today in southern Africa what actually
amounts to a new form of slavery. What we have been
trying to do all these years in the United Nations is to put
an end to this slavery. This slavery is as odious, sordid and
dehumanizing as that which men of faith and foresight
campaigned against in the last century. People like
Abraham Lincoln were faced with fierce opposition from
racial fanatics, capitalists, and other vested interests, who
were reaping enormous gains out of slavery, and it took a
civil war in this country to put an end to slavery.

31. As regards the halting of the killing of Africans by
other Africans for ethnic and tribal reasons, let me saythat
all countries in the world have their problems and we have
ours. I do not want to compare our problems with
problems existing in other countries. We are doing our best
through the machinery of the Organization of African
Unity to unify Africa and to ensure that peace reigns
through understanding and through the abolition and
overcoming of problems like tribalism and others which are
still dividing our countries. We are doing our best within
our means. Instead of ridiculing us, please join hands with
us to help us unify our continent.

27. We cannot be expected to speak with moderation
when it comes to the question of the enslavement of our
people in Southern Rhodesia. That is because their enslavement is our enslavement. We cannot compromise with the
evil forces which, in Southern Rhodesia, turn our people
into chattels. We are up against what Prime Minister Heath
has called ‘“the unpleasant and unacceptable face of
capitalism”. We know that for the rebels in Rhodesia this
capitalism is not ugly, for it means to them and affords
them economic and political domination, comfort, wealth
and profit. We equally know that for our people in
Southern Rhodesia it brings humiliation, oppression, agony
and poverty. We cannot abandon our brothers and sistersin
Rhodesia, for their fate is our fate, and those who oppress
them also oppress us. Let those who wish to compromise
with these evils veto our draft resolution, and may God
have mercy on their souls.

32. The Organization of African Unity is celebrating its
tenth anniversary after an impressive record of achieve.
ments. Th. ,ugh the machinery of OAU we have avoided
many disasters, many conflicts on the African continent,
and OAU ought to be congratulated because I think it is the
one and only regional organization with a membership of
41 States that is working smoothly and is showing results. 1
do not want to compare it with other regional organba.
tions, but as far as we are concerned we are happy with its
achievements.
33. As regards our obsession with our opposition to white
minority rule in southern Africa, I should like to inform
The New York Times that it is more than an obsession
becauseto us it is a matter of life and death.

28. I should like to make a few brief comments on an
editorial appearing in The New York Times of today, which
I think bears some relevance to what the Council is now
discussing. The heading of the editorial is “Priorities for
Africans” and the editors of The New York Times are
advising Africans to re-order their priorities correctly. We
are being told that our opposition to racial and minority

34. The PRESIDENT: As no other representative wishes
to speak at this stage, I would suggest that the Council now
proceed to vote on the two draft resolutions before it in
4

accordance with rule 32, first paragraph of the provisional
rules of procedure, that is, in the order of their submission.
As there is no objection I shall put to the vote first the
draft resolution in document S/10927 and afterwards the
draft resolution in document S/10928.

40. Therefore my delegation understands the proposals in
question as an invitation to seek, within the Austrian legal
order, adequate legislative solutions to achieve the aims
behind the relevant parts of the resolution, With this
understanding, and in order to express our full support for
the political objectives behind this and previous resolutions
of the Council on the same matter, namely, the ending of
the rebellion against the British Crown in Salisbury, and to
give the people of Zimbabwe the right of self-determination
at the earliest possible moment, my delegation has voted in
favour of the draft resolution.

35. I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
submitted by Australia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia in document
s/10927.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

41. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Soviet delegation has
already had an opportunity to state the position of the
Soviet Union on the substance of the question of Southern
Rhodesia and on the second special report of the Committee on Southern Rhodesia during the discussion of this
item in the Security Council.

In favouc Australia, Austria, China, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

42. In relation to the question of Southern Rhodesia, the
Soviet Union is guided by the fundamental Leninist
position of support for peoples struggling against imperialism, colonialism and racism. In the United Nations,
the Soviet Union supports all proposals which are genuinely
designed to achieve the earliest possible elimination of the
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia, to give the Zimbabwe
people an opportunity to enjoy its lawful and inalienable
right to freedom, independence and sovereignty, and to.
ensure the implementation of Security Council decisions
and the provisions of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in respect
of that people.

The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions. 1
36. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes on the draft
resolution just adopted before the Council votes on the
second draft resolution,
37. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): When I explained my
delegation’s position on the second special report of the
Committee [171&h meeting/, I expressed our support for
the suggestions contained in section III as well as our
conviction that their adoption by the Council was a most
urgent matter. This was our foremost consideration in
voting in favour of the draft resolution in document
S/10927 which proposes in operative paragraph 1 the
approval of the recommendations and suggestions contained in paragraphs 10 to 22 of the report.

43. The discussion of the question of Southern Rhodesia
in the Security Council has clearly demonstrated that the
situation in that country does indeed cause serious concern
to the world community, and above all to the countries of
Africa. The distinguished representatives of Kenya, the
Sudan, Somalia and Guinea, speaking in the Council, have
convincingly demonstrated that the policies of the colonial
racist regime in Salisbury are becoming increasingly harsh,
despite the decisions taken and the efforts made by the
United Nations. This inevitably leads to a deterioration of
the situation both in Southern Rhodesia and in southern
Africa as a whole.

38. The resolution contains on the other hand a number
of proposals drawn from section IV on which the Committee could not reach agreement. The Council will recall,
however, that I referred to these proposals in expressing the
hope of my delegation that further agreement can be
reached on them and in expressing our readiness to
co-operate in such an effort. My delegation has also stated
in paragraph 36 of the report that it could support some of
the proposals on which there was no agreement but that it
had difficulty with some others because of their incompatibility with present Austrian legislation.

44. The situation is made still worse by the fact that the
racist regime of Ian Smith continues to exist as a result of
military, political, financial and economic support from
certain Western countries and international imperialist
monopolies, in circumvention and violation of United
Nations decisions.

39. Let me say in this context that, with many other
delegations, we share the belief that appropriate legislation
is without any doubt a useful instrument within the
context of preventing sanctions violations. Nevertheless, we
have to take into account the differing legal orders of
Member States, which might make certain specific legislation difficult to enact. This, however, would in no way
prevent them from taking other measures, legislative or
administrative, which could achieve.the same aims.

45. The Soviet delegation has already referred to the
particularly sinister and pernicious role played by South
Africa and Portugal in the provision of direct support to the
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia, and this was fully
confirmed in the statements by the representatives of the
African countries.
46. The Council cannot fail to take all this into account in
considering the recommendations submitted by the Committee on Southern Rhodesia and in adopting a decision on
these recommendations.

1 Seeresolution 333 (1973).
5

47. Thr Soviet delegation wishes to confirm its view that
in the light of the actual situation in Southern Rhodesia
and southern Africa, the recommendations of the Committee on Southern Rhodesia cannot be regarded as fully
satisfactory.
However, since the sponsors of the draft
resolution requested support for the text they submitted,
the delegation of the Soviet Union, taking this fact into
account, voted in favour of the draft resolution just
adopted by the Council, with the reservations I have stated.

53. I would add that, for our part, we confirm the
commitments we undertook in 1966 when the sanctions
were voted. This follows from the explanations we gave in
the Committee and the clarification we gave when lt
debated certain points. Furthermore, we are now studying
measures intended to make possible a firmer application of
sanctions in so far as this is compatible with the needs of
international trade. This means that our abstention on this
first draft resolution is not and cannot be interpreted as
inaction. We have reservations on the procedures proposed
as a result of the Committee’s work but we have no
reservations in regard to implementing stronger sanctions.

48. The PRESIDENT: If no other representatives wish to
explain their votes, the Council will now vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/10928, submitted by
Guinea, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia.

54. As regards the draft resolution contained in document
S/10928, the French delegation indicated in the course of
its previous statement why it could not endorse the
provisions contained therein.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

5s. Mr. CBUANG YEN (China) (translation from Chinese).
The Chinese representative, Mr. Huang Hua, pointed out
in his earlier statement [1715th meeting] that the two
draft resolutions before the Security Council were only
preliminary measures for strengthening and expanding the
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. Regrettably, however,
the second draft resolution has been vetoed by two
permanent members, the United Kingdom and the United
States. This cannot but offer food for deep thought.

liz favour: Australia, China, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Yugoslavia.
Aguinst: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Austria, France.
The result of the vote was 11 in favour, 2 against, with
2 abstentions.

56. Certain representatives who are stubbornly against the
second draft resolution have kept on saying that they are
also “in favour of strengthening sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia” and have even stated on many occasions that
they are “second to none” in implementing the sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. They also admit that the South
African and Portuguese authorities are doing their utmost
to undermine sanctions against Southern Rhodesia; they
too notice the “plain fact” that many products front
Southern Rhodesia have been exported under the cover of
South African or Portuguese certificates. They say that
they are in favour of stalling all illegal trade with Southern
Rhodesia so as to implement thoroughly the relevant
resolutions. They allege that “paper sanctions are useless”,
which implies that they intend earnestly to strengthen the
sanctions in deed.

The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative votes
being those of permanent members.
49. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote.
50. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of France wishes to explain its vote on the
two draft resolutions.
51. In regard to the first draft resolution, it goes without
saying that we could have voted in favour of the provisions
contained therein had they been limited to approving
section III of the special report, with which we are,
nevertheless, determined to comply. We regret that, in the
Council, procedures which were not the subject of a
consensus in the Committee were reintroduced. The result
was that we had to abstain.

57. These words sound so nice that people have expected
that their deeds would be consistent with their words and
that they would translate their pious wishes into action.
Unfortunately, when it comes to concrete acts, they have
completely changed: They will say, “This will not do” and
“That cannot be done either”. They say either that the
suggested measures are “inoperative”
or “have brought
practical and legal difficulties”. In short, they are unwilling
either to stop their open violations of the sanctions against
Southern. Rhodesia or to strengthen and expand the
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

52. As we indicated very clearly in our statement on 16
May [I 713th meeting], we are in favour of strengthening
sanctions against Rhodesia, and we wish to recall that we
voted for them at the request of tJze administering Power
and in order to meet the expectations of Africa on
condition that an agreement could be reached on the
practical modalities for the application of sanctions, a
prerequisite for their actual effectiveness. In this spirit we
proposed that in the text of the draft resolution contained
in document S/10927 there be introduced amendments to
take account of the concern we had expressed to the
sponsors. The latter, however, did not see fit to accept the
changes we had hoped for. Therefore the delegation of
France felt compelled to maintain the position that it had
consistently upheld in the Committee.

58. No amount of flowery words can cover up their true
features of saying yes and meaning no. Since they have
arbitrarily vetoed such an elementary draft resolution, it is
not difficult to see even more clearly what force is
obstinately working to obstruct the adoption of effective
measures against the Southern Rhodesia racist @ime and
what force is abetting and supporting the authorities of
6

Southern Rhodesia, South Africa and Portugal in violating
the sanctions and in forming a reactionary alliance for joint
suppression of the national liberation movements of the
people of Zimbabwe and southern Africa. They can in no
way shirk the responsibility for their criminal acts. in SO
doing, they can only make the people of Zimbabwe and the
whole of southern Africa further enhance their political
consciousness, get united, cast away illusions and redouble
their efforts to carry on struggles. In this sense, the current
event will undoubtedly serve as a useful lesson for the
African people.

64. In a very quick review, I find that the Council has
passed 11 resolutions on this subject. In addition, on a
related subject the General Assembly has adopted six
resolutions referred to it by the Council. If despite all these
efforts there is no desire to implement the measures for
sanctions, I think it would be right to give the widest
publicity to our decision today and to prove that all that
the Council has done until now for imposing sanctions has
not really been meant seriously.
65. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): In my statement before
the Council on Monday, 14 May [1712th meeting], I
clearly stated the Yugoslav delegation’s views and position
concerning the whole Southern Rhodesian situation in the
context of the over-all developments in the south of Africa,
concerning the role of the United Nations sanctions policies
in securing the inalienable rights of the people of Zimbabwe
and, particularly, concerning sections III and IV of the
Committee’s second special report and the decisions that
the Council, as we saw it, should therefore adopt.

59. Mr. SEN (India): After the moving and cogent
statement by our friend and colleague from Kenya, with
whom
I of course agree, there is not very much I want to
say on the merits of these two draft resolutions. I should
Uke, however, to explain briefly our attitude towards the
second draft resolution, which we supported.
60. In our view, that draft resolution did not ask for
extension of sanctions to South Africa and Portugal; so
there need not have been any hesitation or any illusion that
by adopting it we would be imposing sanctions against
South Africa and Portugal. My delegation would have been
very happy to agree to any such sanctions, In fact, as is well
known, India has no trade with South Africa or Portugal.
What we were asking for in that draft resolution was
implementation of sanctions already agreed upon, and I was
under the impression that all members of the Council had
already agreed on the need to redouble our efforts to
implement those sanctions.

66. It was in keeping with those views and that position of
our delegation, and it was along the lines of Yugoslavia’s
essential stands on African matters and its friendly relations
with African and non-aligned States, that we sponsored
from the outset the two draft resolutions contained in
documents S/10927 and S/10928.
67. We are now reasonably gratified by the very impressive
adoptic;. of the first draft resolution because it contains the
recommendations and suggestions forming section III of the
report. That part, those recommendations, although inadequate when confronted with the present-day realities of
wholesale sanctions violations, do constitute an advance
and an improvement, and the main reason for the violations
of the sanctions is, as was stated in Security Council
resolution 320 (1972) “the open and persistent refusal of
South Africa and Portugal to implement sanctions”.

61. The negative votes cast today against that draft
resolution simply mean that those members who tell us
again and again about the need for effective implementation really do not wish to take the concrete steps
which were suggested in the draft resolution.
62. What were the three concrete steps in that draft
resolution? One was to respect the trading level in terms of
1965 figures. If the 1965 figures are supposed ro be
troublesome, let us have an increase of 10 per cent over
those of the last eight years. We could allow for that,
perhaps, But there is no such desire. Yet we all know that
more and more stuff is going to various countries through
South Africa and Portugal.

68. But we are almost more heartened by the fact that the
Council recognized that it should take several steps more
and that it was able to correct the situation to a certain
degree by adopting the text that, in addition to the
recommendations and suggestions in section III, contained
some important African proposals from the unagreed
section IV. This, perhaps, proves once more that persistence
in the pursuance of a good and right cause can often bring
better results than those that seemed possible in the first
place.

63. When, therefore, we talk about blatant violations
having been brought to our notice and we suggest measures
to stop those violations, we seem to be paralysed by the
veto. No reasons are given, and therefore we are entitled to
draw the conclusion that those who voted for sanctions do
not wish to enforce them. What it means in terms of
eventual majority rule in Zimbabwe is that the people of
that country, as indeed of Africa as a whole, must redouble
their efforts to wrest power by violence. Now the Council
will know, as will indeed the outside world, who has
encouraged this state of affairs, in spite of their protestations that violence must be given up in order to achieve
political settlement, I am, of course, assuming that the
illegal r@me of Smith will not countenance any’ just and
civilized solution through negotiations with the majority of
black people.

69. As one of the sponsors of the text just adopted, we
appreciate the understanding and co-operation of all those
who made that advance possible, however modest it may
be. Of course, as has been stated here so often by
everybody, everything depends on the political will of all of
us, of all States, to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council regardless of how good they might be in
themselves.
70. We sponsored the second draft resolution because we
fully adhered to the idea contained in its third preambular
paragraph, that there was an “urgent and simultaneous need
for more stringent measures in order to meet the requirements of paragraph 4 of resolution 320 (1972)“. We
7

thought, and think, that that seconh draft resolution was
complementary to the first one we have just adopted, that
in it was contained the further logical step-the concrete
measures for the extension of sanctions. All its operative
paragraphs, from 1 to 5, contained the decisions and
requirements that simply have to become an inseparable
part of the United Nations sanctions policies if they are to
become more effective, with more telling effects. Let me
here add that that draft resolution would have answered the
Council’s directive in its resoIution 320 (1972) asking the
Committee, inter alia, to submit proposals and suggestions
for “extending the scope” of sanctions. The second draft
resolution, which was not adopted because of the negative
votes of two permanent members of the Council, stopped
well short of asking for an extension of the sanctions
themselves against South Africa and Portugal. May I recall
that it was my Government’s view, officially expressed to
the United Nations, that “sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia can be fully effective only if they are applied
against Portugal and South Africa as well”.

ever, once that course ,was not adopted, it can hardly have
come as a surprise to find that my delegation would have to
abstain on one draft resolution since we could not vote for
a draft resolution containing certain proposals which we
would not think it right to put into effect and, if necessary,
to cast a negative vote on the other.
76. It is the report of the sanctions Committee which we
have been discusking. I shall refrain from following other
speakers into a discussion of the Rhodesian situation as a
whole or of the general question of the veto. I must
however point out that my Government’s position on fie
question of sanctions, and more specifically on the exteasion of sanctions to South Africa and Portugal, was made
abundantly clear throughout the prolonged discussions ia
the sanctions Committee of the report we have been
debating. It has indeed been made clear whenever the
question of sanctions has been discussed here. I made it
clear in my statement before Security Council resolution
320 (1972) was adopted on 29 September last year
[1666th meeting], explaining, my delegation’s attitude
towards certain paragraphs of that resolution, in. the vote
on which my delegation abstained. I made it clear again in
addressing the Council last Friday.

71. In regretting very much the Council’s inability to
adopt this second draft resolution, although a large
majority of members supported it, I would just mention
that the Committee and the Council have been able in the
past to adopt later what earlier seemed impossible. The
Council can and should therefore return to the matters and
proposals contained in the second draft resolution.

77. It has been suggested that the wording of resolution
320 (1972) somehow commits the Council to deciding on
an extension of sanctions to South Africa and Portugal and
that this has been frustrated by my delegation’s attitude in
the sanctions Committee and here in the Council. That
really is rather far-fetched. There seem to be two argu.
ments. The first concerns the instruction to the Committee,
in paragraph 4 of resolution 320 (1972), to consider the
type of action to be taken “in view of the open and
persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal to itnple+
ment sanctions”. This, of course, is just what the Coma
mittee did; and it gave us agreed recommendations which
reflect the perhaps obvious conclusion that “in view of the
open and persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal to
implement sanctions”,
all Governments professing to
support sanctions must be diligent to ensure that their
countries’ trade with southern Africa is legitimate trade.
The secondargumentseemsto hinge on the instructionsin
paragraph5 of resolution 320 (1972) requestingthe Corn.
mittee to examine and report on proposalsfor extending
the scopeof sanctions.This too is what the Committee did;
it examineda number of proposalsin this sense,but asthe
report makesclear there was no unanimity on them. TO
arguethat in order to conform with the termsof resolution
320 (1972) any proposalwhich is made and examinedhas
to be adoptedis really goingtoo far.

72. We think that there are ample reasons to believe-and
that that has been the case all along here-that the Council
is progressively becoming more and more ready to give
wider and wider support to the just cause of the liberation
of all the peoples of Africa. The fact that the first draft
resolution was, uniquely, sponsored by nine members,
which is an important event perhaps without precedent in
the Council’s history, is most encouraging in that respect.
73. On the whole, the outcome of the consideration of the
second special report, while disappointing in some important aspects, does represent a step forward, in my opinion,
a step that can materially contribute to the more effective
implementation of better sanctions policies. As I have
already said, that will require persistent political readiness
and struggle to make them effective, We are confident that
the forthcoming meetings of the Organization of African
Unity and the summit of the non-aligned countries will
contribute to that.
74. Sir Colin (‘ROWE (United Kingdo-): I much regret
that the sponsors found it necessary to press to the vote the
draft resolutions in documents S/10927 and S/l0928
despite the fact that they go beyond the agreed conclusions
of the report submitted to us by the sanctions Committee
and that they were introduced without prior consultation.

78. As I havesaid, I do not intend to go beyond the report
of the sanctions Committee into a discussion of the
Rhodesiansituation as a whole. But I must make it quite
clear that my delegation firmly rejects the chargesof
collusion and ill faith which have been made againstmy
Government and its predecessors.I repeat that their
purposeremainsthe purposewhich is common tb Us all: a
just and acceptablesettlement of the problem of Southern
Rhodesia.

75. As I said in my statement on 18 May f1715th
meeting], the logical and effective course would have been
for the Council to consolidate on the substantial area of
agreement which is reflected in the report, whose practical
recommendations we do indeed welcome and will support,
A unanimously adopted resolution would have had a real
impact, not least on those who doubt the willingness or the
ability of the Council to achieve the proper application of
the sanctions provided for in resolution 253 (1968). How-

79. I would only add that the prospectswould be greatly
improvedif the Council could ensurethe effective applica8

84. Our difficulties with paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 were made
clear by my delegation during the sanctions Committee’s
long deliberations, and there is no need to elaborate
further. However, I wish to assure this Council that we will
adhere strictly to the basic purposes and intents of these
paragraphs.

fion of the present sanctions as provided for in resolution
253 (1968). That is why I deeply regret that it has hot been
possible for us to put our differences on one side and adopt
unanimously a resolution reflecting the agreed proposals in
the sanctions Committee’s report.
80. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): My delegation
has voted in favour of the draft resolutions in documents
S/10927 and SfI 0928. The first draft resolution, which my
delegation has sponsored, endorses the recommendations
and suggestions of the sanctions Committee and also draws
on the Committee’s report to make a number of other
practical suggestions, which my delegation can readily
accept, regarding ways in which appropriate regulatory
measures can be used to impede further the flow of trade
into and out of Southern Rhodesia.

85. The subject of the sale of three Boeing aircraft to
Southern Rhodesia has been raised by several speakers
during these meetings of the Security Council, The United
States representative noted before the sanctions Committee
on 16 April that three Boeing aircraft, actually 72Os, had
appeared in Southern Rhodesia. It was explained that the
United States had authorized neither the sale of any Boeing
aircraft to Southern Rhodesia nor the re-export of such
aircraft to Rhodesia. I can add that the United States will
not authorize the servicing of these aircraft or the sale of
spare parts, It was also explained that the United States
would look into the details of when and how the sale took
place. This investigation continues and we assume that
Governments whose nationals may be involved are also
looking into the matter.

81. The second draft resolution, in document S/10928, is
the kind of measure that I foreshadowed in my statement
here last week [1714th meeting] when I said that if States
did not play their full part in applying the existing range of
sanctions, the Council would find itself having to consider
more drastic steps, The vote just taken has shown that this
- draft resolution is at present too far-reaching to be
acceptable to two members, whose negative vote is to be
regretted. I wish to make it clear that had it been adopted
and its provisions generally applied, my Government would
have been prepared to co-operate fully in seeking to apply
them.

86. There is less to say about the second draft resolution,
contained in document S/10928. We regret that it was
introduced for Council consideration. It includes several
proposals that were debated fully in the sanctions Committee, on which my delegation and others expressed their
strong reservations. While we can well understand the
sentiment behind the draft resolution, we consider it
unrealistic to call for broader sanctions until the full
membership of the United Nations has demonstrated its
willingness to take more seriously the sanctions already in
force. In the circumstances we do not believe this draft
resolution would enhance the ability of the United Nations
to act effectively. In our view, to adopt a resolution which
is’clearly unenforceable will seriously damage the reputation and credibility of the United Nations and further erode
public confidence in United Nations ability to act in a
meaningful way.

82. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Wnen I spoke
In the Council on 16 May [1713th meeting], I underlined
the importance that my Government places on the sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, Looking at the draft
resolution in document S/10927 as a whole, I wish to
emphasize that my delegation is in sympathy with its
general aims. We strongly hope that the recommendations i?
contains will contribute significantly to making sanctions
more effective. We would, therefore, have liked very much
to have voted in favour of the draft resolution, but were
unable to do so because of our domestic legislation and
practical problems with some of its recommendations
which were discussed but not agreed to in the sanctions
Committee.
.”

87. This consideration, and this consideration alone, underlies my Government’s decision to vote against the draft
resolution. Those who impute other motives stray far, far,
far from the facts and I reject these accusations. They have
no foundation and deserveno further reply.

83. The importation of certain strategic materials from
Southern Rhodesia into the United States has again been
-raised in the Council, I wish it noted that these materials in
1972 amounted to less than 5 per cent of the projected
total of Rbodesian export earnings for that year. My
Government has co-operated with the sanctions Committee
in fully reporting these imports. We wish other importers of
Rhodesian commodities would do the same. We would then
know a great deal more than we know now about how
Southern Rhodesia is surviving sanctions. This does not
detract, however, from our complete support for the
recommendations for improving sanctions made in paragraphs 10 through 22 of the sanctions Committee’s second
special report. We are also fully in favour of paragraphs 2
and 8 of the resolution. In particular, we believe the
information called for in paragraph 8 will prove useful in
evaluating the sanctions programme and we hope all States
will co-operate.

88. Mr. GONTHA (Indonesia): After the statements of the
other sponsors and supporters of the draft resolutions in
documents S/l 0927 and S/10928, my delegation will be
very brief since we made our views quite clear during our
intervention last week [.Z713th meeting] I
89. My delegation is of the opinion that the two draft
resolutions only tried to comply with the requests in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution 320 (1972) as the lo@d
and positive response- to that resolution. The substantive
parts of those two draft resolutions are in line with the
recommendations and suggestions of the Committee contained in its second special report. As we stated earlier in
the debate, my delegation is not entirely satisfied with the
recommendations and suggestions. We would have been
happier if the proposals submitted by the African members
could have been adopted in their entirety.
9

countries, in order to prevent them from reselling Southern
Rhodesian goods.

90. The debates in the Council have clearly demonstrated
that the sanctions are being inadequately implemented. The
latter must be attributed to the loop-holes in the present
system that provide the opportunity for certain forces to
defy strict and complete implementation Of those Sanctions. If, therefore, we seriously desire the sanctions to
become more effective than has been the case, it will be
imperative to plug those loop-holes whereverthey exist. My
delegation therefore very much regrets that the draft
resolution in document S/10928 has been vetoed, since
adoption by the Council of both draft resolutions would
have helped a great deal towards the plugging of those
loop-holes.

96. The adoption of such measures would not have
contradicted the oral statements by the United Kingdom
Government that it is in favour of the application of
sanctions. By voting against this draft resolution, the
United Kingdom has shown yet again that it says one thing,
but in fact acts contrary to its declared intentions.
97. Thus, the triple alliance of Salisbury, Pretoria and
Lisbon, that stronghold of imperialism, reaction, colonialism and racism in the south of the African continent,
has again been defended, in the United Nations and in the
Security Council, by two permanent members of the
Security Council.

91. Of course, we understand that the problem of the
elimination of the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia will
not dissolve merely by the adoption of sanctions. The
problem is certainly more complicated than that. On the
other hand, the adoption of both draft resolutions would
have been proof to the world and especially to the people
of Zimbabwe of the serious concern and support of the
Security Council for the just struggle of the African
majority in Southern Rhodesia.

98. But no one can halt the onward march of history.
Whatever obstacles are put in ‘its path, whatever help the
Southern Rhodesian racists receive from their overt and
covert friends, the Zimbabwe people, with the support of
all freedom-loving peoples of the world, will achieve
inevitable and irreversible victory in its just struggle against
colonialism and racism, and will win its right to freedom,
independence and sovereignty. And the Zimbabwe people
will never forget those who, when it was facing a difficult
time, uttered words of sympathy for it, while in fact siding
with and helping its enemies.

92. Mr. OVINh!IKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): Mr. Malik intended to
speak himself, but in view of the lateness of the hour and
the fact that he had other obligations, he asked me to make
the following statement.

99. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (interpretation
from lkxch).:
Having heard all the flattering statements and the rather
overwhelming justifications, we were in fact right in
insisting on a vote on the two draft resolutions. The
outcome of the discussions has proved that the illusion of
sanctions could only lead to the embarrassing situation of
the United Kingdom, which has proposed this measure that
in fact was designed to assist it to protect those who are
violating the economic blockade against the rebel colony of
Zimbabwe and those who proclaim their support for the
struggle of the peoples while at the same time helping those
who are selling the cannons to be used to crush them. This
illusion of sanctions, I repeat, is also a manoeuvre designed
to maintain and strengthen the Ian Smith regime in order to
enable new proposals to be made, proposals based on
selective suffrage rather than on the universal suffrage
demanded by the Zimbabwe people.
..

93. The Soviet delegation associates itself with the statements of the representatives of African and other countries
which are members of the Security Council who expressed
dissatisfaction at the latest instance of obstruction by the
United Kingdom, with United States support, of the
adoption of a resolution on Rhodesia. The delegation of the
United Kingdom used an unjust veto against the adoption
of this draft resolution. The United Kingdom has once
again shown the world whose side it is on, who it is
protecting, and whose advantage it is working for. By its
vote against this draft resolution, the United Kingdom
delegation has yet again shown that the United Kingdom
callously and cynically ignores the national interests of the
Zimbabwe people, which is groaning under the heel of
bloody racism. It is protecting the racist Smith regime
which oppressesand exploits that people.

100. Another lesson that we have learned from these
discussions is that those who are against the economic war
are the very ones who are the instigators of a racial war, a
war of liberation which, as we all know, has already begun
in Rhodesia and is raging in southern Africa as well as in the
other territories in Africa that are still not independent. It
is the same Powers also which, by their support for the
white minority regimes in southern Africa, provoke the
independent States neighbours af those colonies. The
independent neighbouring States of Guinea (Bissau),
Mozambique, Angola and Namibia have been the victims of
repeated aggressions in recent times and are constantly
expecting them to be repeated. But what is certain is that
the peoples of Africa are determined not only to defend
their national sovereignty but also to do everything in their
power to hasten the liberation of peoples that are still
subjugated.

94. This latest veto by the United Kingdom is yet another
unjust veto on its part. It is the United Kingdom’s fifth veto
in the Security Council on the question of Southern
Rhodesia.
95. What prevented the United Kingdom delegation from
voting in favour of this draft resolution proposed by
African and other countries? Let us make no bones about
it, the draft was more than modest. It provided for further
curtailment of the possibilities of the racist r&me in
Southern Rhodesia of transporting its goods to other
camtries. This draft resolution, which did not even directly
proclaim sanctions against South Africa and Portugal, called
timPlY for curtailment of purchases of goods from those
10

101. AI%c.~~sin the press, which are but the reflection of
the political and social environment of the countries where
they are published, cannot intimidate us. We call on the
authors to echo this morning’s double veto-a double veto
that will be noted by the Council of Ministers which is now
meeting in Addis Ababa, and by the people of Zimbabwe,
We invite those journalists to cover the debate extensively,
but what matters, what is essential for us, is not the veto
but the overwhelming support the two draft resolutions
received this morning, which proves resoundingly that
history does not lie, that history always favours just causes
and people who fight for their liberation, whichever
colonizing Power is involved and despite alliances.

into, But perhaps this is the way it should go, namely, that
the people of Zimbabwe must fight and shed blood in order
to win their independence and gain dignity for themselves.
And in that senseI should like to sayto the two permanent
members of the Council that they have done a job. It is not
enough to reject our arguments and to accuse us of
imputing improper motives when we know that what we
say is a fact. The three Boeing jetliners did not descendinto
Rhodesis from heaven. They werenot sent by Satan from
hell, They came from some country in the world where
there are corporations, individuals and Governments willing
to connive and work in collusion to break the sanctions.
That is what happened and that is what we are pointing
out.

102. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): I should only like to
thank the members of the Council which voted with us on
the two draft resolutions. I should like particularly to
mention the two permanent” members of the Council-the
delegations of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
China-which were good enough to support our position in
the two draft resolutions.

10.5. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on the
list of speakers. I shall, with the Council’s consent, say a
few words asthe representative of the SUDAN.
106. I would not wish to add anything since our position
has been made clear during this debate and before. I wish
only to join my colleague from Kenya in expressing our
sincerest wishes to all those who gave the African cause
their full support during this debate.

103. I do not know whether to thank the two permanent
members of the Council which vetoed the draft resolution
in document S/10928, because what they are trying to
work against, what they are opposing, is inevitable. These
changes will take place and justice will prevail in Rhodesia
and ultimately in South Africa, whether they like it or not.
This is a lesson of history which, I am sure, every one of
them knows. But by refusing to take the same stand aswe
Africans who are familiar with what is going on in Southern
Rhodesia, they have merely rejected the position of
negotiation. However, they have created a situation in
which the people of Africa, and indeed the people of
Zimbabwe, will now learn that they have no friends in some
members of this Council. This will give them the determination to fight even more. What I regret is for this Council to
treat the situation the way it has been treated becauseby
this veto we have left the people of Zimbabwe with no
alternative except to fight.

107. I wish also to add that the aim of draft resolution
S/10928 is really a genuine attempt to strengthen sanctions
a little bit further and to hurry up the emancipation of the
people of Zimbabwe. It is most regrettable that this draft
resolution was not adopted becauseof the negative votes.
But I should like to saythat the negative vote will not deter
the African group and its friends from continuing in the
Council for the same purposeswhich they have initiated. Of
course, that means we will continue to test the sincerity of
those who share our viewsand differ from us regarding the
methods. Lastly, I think the negative vote is not really a
lost one because I am sure its political implication is that it
givesan impetus and added stimulus to the freedom fighters
in Zimbabwe to escalate their struggle for liberation.

104. The Security Council wasestablished precisely to try
to preempt situations such as the one we are now running

77~ meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
KAIC

IIOJIYWiTb

EIaAaHsa

H3AAHHH

OPrAHH3AWfW

OB’bEAWHEHHhIX

HAIWH

Ob’be~HnemibIx
HaqwR YOXKHO K~IIHT~
3WHaX
H E4reHTCTBaX BO Bcex pafiOHaX
Mupa. HaaoAwTe
CnpaBKH
Bsmetd KHWXHOW Mara3twe
wnw ~RLUWT~ no anpecy : OpraHH3aqaa
HaqaR.
Cexua~ no npo~awte
HaAaHHfi,
Hbm-ROpK
WJIH %eHeBa.
COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

OpraHH3aqHH

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DR LAS

NACIONES

a KHWxHblX
06

Mara-

NBAaHHRX

B

06’beAHHeHHblX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjasa
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1 .OO (or equivalent

currencies)

73~82161-November

1976-R

-‘*:s
