UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1808) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South Africa:
(cr) Letter dated 30 September 1974from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/11525);
(h) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent. Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

ZYPV.1808

.. ;

jr
2’

:

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to:a United
;,
I
Nations document.
,
,.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given..
^*

.,‘,

(

t

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
Mr. Michel NJINE
Republic of Cameroon).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
(Algeria),
Mr. Karirn (Bangladesh),
Mr. WaldronRamsey
(Barbados),
Mr.
Mondjo
(Congo),
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba),
Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Adjibadh (Dahomey),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Boaten
(Ghana),
Mrs.
Jeanne
Martin
Cisse’ (Guinea),
Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait),
Mr.
Harmon
(Liberia),
Mr.
Maghur
(Libyan
Arab Republic),
Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr.
Slaoui
(Morocco),
Mr.
Ogbu
(Nigeria)
Mr. Akhund (Pakistan),
Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Datcu
(Romania),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Palmer
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia),
Mr., Botha
(South Africa),
Mr. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Driss (Tunisia), Mr. Kinene (Uganda),
Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. Salim (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Yaguibou (Upper Volta),
Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia)
and Mr. Mutuale (Zaire) took
the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/lSOS)

of the agenda

Relationship
between the United Nations and
South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September
1974 from the
President of the General Assembly to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October
1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11532)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.35 p.m.

Adoption
The agenda

was

1974, at 3 p.m.

Romania,
Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia,
Uganda,
the United Arab Emirates,
the United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and
Zaire to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion of the question before it.

President:

(United

30 October

MEETING

of the agenda

adopted.

2. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): Mr. President,
on an earlier occasion my delegation already had the
opportunity
of expressing to you its congratulations
and pledging its support. I think that as the Council
approaches the end of this important debate a renewed
tribute is due to you for the excellent manner in
which you have guided our debates, and I should like
to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation.

Relationship
between the United Nations and South
Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President
of the General Assembly to the President of the
Security Council (S/11525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11532)

3. During the past two weeks, the Council has
between the United
reviewed “the relationship
Nations and South Africa in the light of the constant
violation by South Africa of the principles of the
Charter and the Universal
Declaration
of Human
Rights”, as the General Assembly had requested in
its resolution 3207 (XXIX).
This is the first time that
the Council has ever been requested by the General
Assembly to review the relationship
between the
United Nations and one of its Members.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken previously
[179&h-179&h
and 1800th-1803rd
meetings]
under
Article 31 of the Charter and in accordance with the
pertinent
provisions
of the provisional
rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria,
Bangladesh, Barbados, the Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey,
Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic,
Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Kuwait,
Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritius,
Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar,

4, The request of the General Assembly refers to
a problem which has been before the Organization
1

ever since the first session of the Assembly convened
in 1946. It was in 1946 indeed that the delegation
of India succeeded in in&ding the matter. of the
treatment of South Africa’s citizens of Indian origin
on the agenda of the Assembly.

by Guin&, as “slavery” by Nigeria, as “degrading.”
by Canada, as “fundamentally immoral” by Japan,
as “shameful” by the USSR, as the “negtitiqn of
all social purpose” by Bolivia, as “a cancer” by
Algeria and as “a catalyst of violence” by Tanzania.
It would not be -.difflcuit to add to this .iist not
only the views and voices of nearly ail countries of the
world, but also the views .and voices of some of the
most enlightened statesmen of our time. It woutd not
be difficult either to quote views and findings on the
nature of South Africa’s regime from the large- and
growing volume of research and writing on this subject
which today already constitutes a massive scientific
pluidoyer against apartheid.

5. In the following j&%-s the problem of South
Africa, its racial policies and the meanings of these
poiicies for the United Nations and indeed the world
have increasingly occupied the agenda of the General
Assdmbiy, ,and later of the Security Council. The first
resolution of the Assembly condemning upakheid
was adopted in 1952--eight years before the new
Africa could join its voice to that of the people of the
world. By October 1963, hardly 10 years later, no
fewer than 27 Assembly resolutions and 2 Security
Council resolutions condemning apartheid had been
adopted. By October of this year there were more
than 59 resolutions of the Assembly and 7.resolutions.
of the Countiil,’ including one imposing an tiirns
embargo on South Africa. During the past four sessions
of the Assembly the credentials of the South African
delegation have been rejected by a majority of the
Members.

9. World bodies of the highest moral and professional
calibre, such as the World Council of Churches, th.e
International Commission of Jurists and many otheis,
have thrown their spiritual and intellectual authority.
into the fight against apartheid. Popular movementsin
mariy.countries &the world, including tiy own, have
taken up the issue of South African racial policies
and become the spearhead of w.orld opinion on this.
matter.
10, It is hardly necessary to mention at this &ge
that the Austrian Government, firmly supported by t6e
Austrian people, rejects the policies of upurrheid
being pursued by the South African Government, as
it rejects any-policy which is based on human inequality
on grounds of race, religion, political beliefs or other
motives. Thus, since the early days of its membership
in the United Nations, Austria has been on the side
of those who spoke up against apartheid. At a meeting
with the Special Committee on Apartheid as recently
as May of this year, the Austrian Foreign Minister,
Mr. KirchschEgcr, who a month later was elected
President of Austria, emphasized in his welcoming
statement that Austria had never left any doubt about
its strong rejection of any policy which is based on
human inequality. Mr. Kirchschlsger underlined the
fact that apartheid was not merely an atistract political
concept, but had concrete effects, and that no one
should close his eyes to the human suffering endured
as the consequence of such a policy.

6. The basis for this consistent preoccupation with
South Africa has been the universal recognition of the
fact that basic concepts of the Charter and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were being openly
violated by successive Governments of what was
formerly known as the Union of South Africa and is
now, after its withdrawal from the Commonwealth,
the Republic of South Africa. These violations have
been committed by one of the founding M&ibex-s. of
the Organization, whose representative at the San
Francisco Conference-ironically, as the report of the
Special Committee on Apartheid’
points out-had
himself pressed for the inclusion of a clause in the
Preamble of the Charter reaffirming “faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women”.
7. South Africa’s attitude towards the Organization
has further been characterized by its eonstant disregard
of its duties vis&vis the Mandated Territory of
South West Africa (Namibia) and its continued refusal
to abide by United Nations decisions against Southern
Rhodesia, in particular, decisions relating to economic
sanctions.

Assembly,

‘.

11. We have l‘istened with the utmost attention and
great care to the statements which Members of the
Organization representing all continents have made
in the course of this debate in the Security Council..
An impressive volume of facts and figures has been
put before the Council, and it is hardly necessary now
to offer any further comments.

8. For a long time world opinion has been unanimous
in its view of South Africa’s race policies. Describing
the state of international opinion on South Africa
some years ago, Colin Legum, a leading British voice
against apartheid, noted that apurtheid had been
described as “abhorrent” by Britain, as “toxic”
by ^the United States, as “hateful” by. India, as
“thoroughly repugnant” by Belgium, as “inhbman”
’ Oficial Records of the Generul
Session, Sczpplement No. 224, part I.

i

12. We have not failed to be deepiy moved by the
statements made in particular by the representatives
of the African National Congress of South Africa
and the pan Africanist Congress of Azania. whose
eminent role in the struggle against r&al
discrimination, economic exploitation and poiiticd
oppression is already a legendary fact of the history
of the liberation movement within South Africa. They

Twenty-ninth

2

:

L

,

>. ;:

.
. . ..-.

have also spoken for those whose voices have been
silenced by death, imprisonment or oppressive laws:
they have spoken for Chief Luthuli, whose untimely
death deprived his people of one of its finest and
most authoritative and respected leaders, and they
have spoken for Nelson Mandelaand Robert Sobukwe,
who are languishing in gaol, but also for many white
South Africans exiled, imprisoned or silenced, but
whose support demonstrates the non-racial nature of
the fight against upartheid.

.

15. Only the most-reactionary and backward regimes
in history have aspired to national or racial purity
against the human reality of today’s world, which
cannot be viable without multiracial and multinational
-coexistence.
_
- 16. South Africa has been no less intransigent’
towards all the efforts of the Organization regarding
Namibia. It was only a short time ago that the Security
Council itself, during its historic series of meetings
on African soil, in Addis. Abeba, offered South Africa
(the chance, through the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, to engage in meaningful negotiations with the
Organization on the future of Namibia. It must be
noted with particular regret that South Africa did not
see fit to take adequate advantage of that opportunity.

13. The debate in the Security Council has thus been
one of the most profound and far-reaching
investigations into the practice and theory ofapartheid.
It has become obvious that after more than two
decades of apartheid, this system has not solved the
race problems of South Africa. Indeed, one of the
main effects of the years of apartheid rule has been ._17. It is all. those facts and developments which
to turn a non-violent situation into one of increasing confront the United Nations with. the ‘undoubted
violence. The attempt to divide the economy, in -necessity of looking into new ways and means to
defiance of economic laws and with total disregard
deal with the situation which the international
for humanitarian considerations has created more community seems no longer prepared to tolerate.and
massive injustice. Externally, apartheid
rule has which, as one speaker after another has pointed out,
isolated South Africa within the world community.
is in total contradiction to the values and ideas on
which the Organization is founded.
14. Over the years South Africa has rejected again
and again the. innumerable efforts of the world
18. Indeed, as far as the United Nations is concerned,
community to lend a helping hand in correcting the the provisions of the Charter, in particular those laid
evils of a situation which it has imposed upon down in Article 6, are quite clear. It can hardly
itself. In particular,. it was the African States be denied that the prerequisites for invoking that
themselves that tried to impress upon South Africa
Article exist. It may well be argued, furthermore, as
the principles which must govern modem human indeed it has been, that successful action under
society’. To quote only one such example, the Lusaka Article- 6 would be in the interest of the world
Manifesto on Southern Africa, emanating from the Organization as it would benefit its moral standing
Fifth Summit Conference of East and Central African
and increase its internal cohesiveness.
States held in April 1969, provides a particularly
impressive example when it states:
19. We therefore fully understand the feelings and
motives of those members, especially the African
“Our stand towards southern Africa .,. involves
members of the Council and the many other
a rejection of racialism, not a reversal of the existing
members who have spoken in this debate, who find
racial ,domination. We believe that all the peoples it difficult to share membership in an Organization
who. have made their homes in the countries of
with representatives of a Government that professes
southern Africa are Africans, regardless of the colour
to political principles so diametrically -opposed to
of their skins; and we would oppose a racialist
our own. But we are dealing not only with a State,
majority government which adopted a philosophy of with a Government or with a regime but, in the final
deliberate and permanent discrimination between its analysis, with people living in a country. What we
citizens on grounds of racial origin. We are not are concerned with, in other words, is the future of
talking racialism when we reject the colonialism
23 million human beings in South Africa.
and apartheid policies now- operating in those areas;
we are demanding an opportunity for all the people 20. It is because of those considerations that one
of these States, working together as equal individual
should not forget that one of the major functions of
citizens, to work out for themselves the institutions
the Organization is to expose a Member State to the
and the system of government under which they
pressure of world opinion and to confront it again
will, by general consent, live together and work
and again with the purposes and principles of the
together to build a harmonious society.“2
Charter.
The sense of that declaration is clear: the people of
Africa do not dispute the right of South Africa’s
white population to live in their ancestral homes in
peace and security, free of racial discrimination.
2 Ibid.,
Twoary-fuurfh Sessien,
document Al?%& para. 8.

Annexes,

agenda item

21. We can cite no less authoritative a voice from
South Africa itself than that of Patrick van Rensburg,
who, on page 209 -of his memorable book Guilty
Land3, said:

106,

3 Frederick A. Praeger, New York; 1962.

3

“Perhaps I am over-optimistic,
but I have a strong
faith in world opinion. Of all the possible ways of
changing South Africa, I think that international
intervention
is the strongest.”

Africa from the United Nations. This is indeed, as
so many speakers have stressed, a historic choice for
the Security Council. It is for that reason that my
delegation would advocate continued and scrupulous
study of the possibilities
open to the Council. In
taking that approach we do not want to invalidate
the arguments that have been advanced so far. We’
would, on the contrary, reinforce in advance the
value of any decision we might take in the future.
The ultimate alternative of expulsion has now been
put before us, and it will remain before us as a very
specific and dramatic warning signal. We hope that
it will not be ignored, as so many previous warning
signals have been.

22. We have seen only recently how a Member State
chart a
can, with courage and determination,
completely new course and find its way back into the
community
of ideals
which
this Organization
represents.
We should not exclude
from our
deliberations
trust in the legal and moral force of
this Organization,
and we should most certainly
uphold this trust when the question at stake is the
abolition of a political, social and economic system
which is based on racial criteria, which is consequently,
by any standard, untenable in the second half of
the twentieth century and which, finally-again
in
the practically
unanimous
opinion
of the world
community-is
irreconcilable
with the concepts of
human dignity.

26. Mr. de1 CASTILLO
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): The Security Council is considering
the present item in accordance with the desire of the
General Assembly, which in its resolution 3207 (XXIX)
“Culls upon the Security Council to review the
relationship between the United Nations and South
Africa in the light of the constant violation by South
Africa of the principles
of the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights”.

23. We feel it to be imperative,
therefore, for the
Council to take a decision regarding the future
relationship
between the Republic of South Africa
and the Organization.
Indeed, that is the mandate
which the General Assembly has given to the Council,
and it is the task before us. It has become abundantly
clear that this relationship
cannot continue to be
one-sided, with the United Nations demanding specific
action and attempting to open new ways to deal with
the problem in a positive and constructive way, and
South Africa continuing
to reject all these efforts.’
Today the world community
is unanimous
in its
rejection
of the policies of apartheid
in South
Africa, and it must therefore strive to achieve the
same community of purpose in its approach to South
Africa.
Austria
continues
to believe
that that
community
of purpose can be achieved and that the
best basis on which the Organization
can work
towards that goal is the basis of a universal
organization.
However, the principle of universality,
to which we firmly adhere, applies first and foremost
to the human community of the United Nations. While
we feel that its possibilities have not been exhausted
and still provide powerful instruments,
it must not
become a shield behind which those unwilling
to
perform the tasks imposed upon them by the Charter
can hide.

27. When that resolution was adopted, Costa Rica
voted in favour of it because we have long held
that it is the Council that must initiate action to
alter the status of a Member State.
28. My delegation has always taken that position,
even at the risk of its opposition to other positions
being misinterpreted.
It is well known that the
discussion on South Africa, and particularly
on the
credentials
of its representatives
to the General
Assembly, has time and again in the past few years
taken place in the Credentials Committee. Costa Rica,
as a member of that Committee,
has always opposed
invalidating
the credentials of a Member State when
the formal requirements of rule 27 of the Assembly’s
rules of procedure have been met. However, the
General Assembly supported those in the Committee
who wanted to reject the credentials
of the
representatives
of South Africa. That decision has
had more symbolic than practical meaning, because
the procedure for depriving a State of its membership
in the Organization
has to be in accordance with
Articles 5 and 6 of the Charter, and that is something
that falls first within the authority of the Security
Council, and then within the jurisdiction
of the General
Assembly.

24. It is those principles and considerations that will
guide my country’s vote on the draft resolution now
before the Council. Yet, whatever the outcome of
the vote on the draft resolution before us [S/11543]
may be, my delegation strongly feels that, looking
beyond the present stage of our deliberations,
everything must be done to ensure the most intensive
and most wide-ranging
examination
of viable
alternatives which will enhance the prospects for a
speedy solution.

29. The authorities of South Africa, in statements
heard in the Council, have been accused of violating
the Charter, primarily
through practices of racial
discrimination
and by illegally occupying Namibia.
30. The position of my country on those two subjects
is very clear. In line with the respect for human rights
which is found in Costa Rica, we have always been
in the vanguard of the Organization’s
efforts to ensure
that human rights are faithfully observed everywhere.

25. The emphasis so far has been on one particular
alternative:
the expulsion of the Republic of South
4

31. We do not condone
the type of racial
discrimination
being practised in South Africa in the
form of apartheid, and our support for all condemnations of those policies appears in the records of the
Organization.

37. The segregationist policies of South Africa have
made some impression in the Security Council, and
we are encouraged to see that violations of human
rights have reached this principal body of the United
Nations.
Does this mean that other violations
of
human rights will meet the same fate? Perhaps our
optimism should not take us that far. To be perfectly
realistic about it, although the problem has reached
this point-and
it is true that the segragationist policies
of South Africa have set this whole process in
train-the
Security Council’s doors have been opened,
not to receive denunciations
of the shameful forms
of racial discrimination
being practised in South
Africa, but primarily because that country has begun to
have very tense relations with African countries, and
that is beyond any doubt something which can imperil
international
peace and security, responsibility
for
which must be assumed by the Council.

32. Costa Rica participated
as a member of the
Special Committee
on Apartheid
since it was
established in 1962. From that date on, until 1968,
Messrs. Volio and Tinoco, the Permanent Representatives of Costa Rica, to the United Nations, were in
turn Vice-Chairmen
of the Committee.
33. That has been in accordance with our principles,
for we do not believe that some violations of human
rights rank below others. Our passion for human rights
has made us advocate machinery to reconcile the
clear contradiction
between the commitment
of
Member States to abide by the provisions of the
Charter relating to human rights, and the absence of
means to make those obligations a reality. We feel a
certain amount of frustration when we see that the
clear feeling expressed here against racial discrimination was not to be found when we were seeking
support for our proposal to create a high commissioner
for human rights.

38. As regards the illegal occupation
by South
Africa of the Territory of Namibia,
my delegation
sees this matter much more clearly in the light of
the substantial background material available to us.
39. We all know that in resolution
2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966, the General Assembly decided
to terminate
South Africa’s
Mandate
over the
Territory, which later came to be known as Namibia,
and to assume direct responsibility
for that Territory
until it became independent.
In accordance with
that decision the General Assembly
later on, in
accordance with resolution
2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, decided to create the United Nations Council
for South West Africa, which was later called the
United Nations Council for Namibia.

34. On the subject of human rights, well-founded
complaints, which my delegation supports, have been
made against the abhorrent practices of apartheid,
but they do not seem to be enough to produce action
against South Africa. The truth is that there is no
machinery in the Organization-certainly
it is not the
Security Council-which
is empowered to intervene
when there are violations of human rights.
35. On 10 December 1973-almost
a year ago-during
the commemoration
of the twenty-fifth anniversary 07
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Mr. John
Humphrey-one
of the drafters of the Declarationsaid in his statement,
with a certain degree of
bitterness:

40. Once the General Assembly had terminated
South Africa’s Mandate, both the Assembly and the
Security Council, in numerous subsequent resolutions,
called on that country to withdraw from Namibia.
Among the many resolutions
of the Security that
declared illegal the occupation
of the Territory
of
Namibia by South Africa I would refer to resolution 264
(1969), resolution 269 (1969), resolution 276 (1970),
resolution 283 (1970) and resolution 284 (1970).

“ . . . it is now over a quarter of a century since
the San Francisco Conference,
and the United
Nations has not yet been able to devise effective
procedures for the implementation
of the rights and
freedoms to which it is dedicated and whose respect
and observance it is committed to obtain. Whether
or not it will be able to do this will be the ultimate
test of its ability to make the Charter’s finest
purpose a reality.“4

41. To strengthen its declaration
on the unlawful
occupation of Namibia,
the Security Council, in its
most recent resolution 284 (1970), called for an advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice, which
handed down a ruling on 21 June 1971,5 part of which
reads as follows:

36. Our reference to this lack of protection
and
lack of guarantees for fundamental
human rights
should not be taken as a reflection on the Organization’s efforts to denounce violations
of human
rights.

4 Official
Records
of
Session, Plenary
Meetings,

the

General

Assembly,

“the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
being illegal, South Africa is under obligation
to
withdraw
its administration
from Namibia
immediately and thus put an end to its occupation of
the Territory”.
5 Legal Consequences
for
Stales of the Continuid
Presence
of
South Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory
Opinions
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.

Twenty-eighth

2195th meeting, para. 98.
5

.

._

sanctions, and that, we believe, has not taken place
in this case. That forces our deIegation to abstain
in the vote -on the draft resoiutiun which has been
circulated in document S/l 1543.

The Court also put -forward considerations relating
to the fact that the application ofapartheid in Namibia
constitute‘d a flagrant violation of the purposes and
the principles of thecharter. The Court aIs0 confirmed,
in its advisoty opinion, that fhe United Nations
Council for Namibia is the de jure government of
Namibia.

47. In accordance with the foregoing, my delegation
is prepared to support decisively and firmly any
draft resoIution recommending the immediate
suspension of South Africa, such suspension to be
maintained for as long as that country persists in
its policies of apartheid and refuses to abide by the
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council regarding the illegal occupation of the Territory
of Namibia.

42. For ail these reasons it is clear that South
Africa’5 reluctance to abandon its illegal occupation
has prevented the United Nations, which has direct
responsibility for fhe Territory of Namibia, from
exercising its obligation. to support and promote the
rights of the people of Namibia until they achieve
cumpiete independence. In the circumstances, my
delegation cannot ignore South Africa’s recalcitrant
attitude, since it persists in performing unlawful
“acts in the Territory of Namibia, and thereby fails to
abide by its international obligations.

48. Mr. SCALI (United States of America):
Mr. President, as I begin my remarks, allow me to
pay a tribute to you for the skilful and fair-minded way
in which you have led the Council during this busy
month, and particularly during this important debate.

43. My delegation has been strongly in favour
of the broadest representation of States in this
Organization. We have been in favour of increasing
the membership of-this Organization-wheti&&
we
have spoken on the subject in the Council or in the
General Assembly. We are in favour of expanding the
membership of this Organization. because that -is a.
move towards the universality of the Organization.
But this liberal attitude to accepting new Members
who might add something Lo an Organization made up
of a great variety. of States cannot, because of the
very nature of the principle involved, be applied when
considehng-an item which, as the tone of the statements
we .have heard clearly shows, involves the expulsion
of a Member.

.

49. Permit .me also -to express my delegation’s
sincere condolenctis to -our colleague from Iraq on
the untimely death of his Foreign Minister, Shadhel
Taqa. I hope he will transmit this messageof sympathy
to his Government.
-56.’ Ov& the p&t tw6 weeks,- Members of the.
Organization and individual petitioners to the Council
have expressed their opposition to the South African
Government’s practice of apartheid. In virtually ail
cases their arguments were predicated on the
abhorrence of the unequal treatment of peoples within
a society and a minority rule which discriminates
against the majority on the basis of colour.

44. Filrthermore, my delegation ‘is very much
concerned over the, failure to respect the principles
of the Charter because,-if we continue to permit that,
we shall be. eroding the power of the Qrganiiation.
Furthermore, this. is a defiance of the S&urity‘
Council’s resolutions, and thus also undermines the
authority of this august body.

51. Let there be no doubt or confusion, despite the
efforts of some, about the attitude of the United
States. concerning apartheid. In simplest terms, the
Government of the United States opposes’ it
categorically-~and absoiuteIy. It is eviI. It is ugly.
The United States shares the indignation of those who
during this debate have decried South Africa’s
persistence in holding on to the iniquitous and caiIous
policy of apartheid. The system of legislated racial
discrimination and associated repressive legislation
that prevails in South Africa is an indefensible affront
to the spirit and principles of the Charter and to human
digniv around the world. It denies what the United
Nations Charter proclaims: the dignity and worth of
every person and the equal rights of all men and
women. It is a matter of profound concern to the
United States that the Government of South Africa
has ignored calls in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly to put an end to its inhumane,
outmoded and short-sighted policies.

45. B.ecause of our loyalty to our own principles,
and to the Ofganizafion of which we are a Member,
we cannot fail to recognize that South Africa deserves
some form of action’ because of its reluctance to
act in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
the express desire of the General Assembly, and the
decisions of the Security Council.
46. We have now stated our views on the item
proposed by the General. Assembly ‘in hits resoiution 3207.(x?(X). The basic question which needs.
to be settled is what -type and degree. of sanctions
should be applied to South Africa and what type do
we wish to become involved in. We believe that
expelling ti Member State is a very grave decisionwhich should be taken only after all other means
provided in the Charter have been exhausted. There
should be a gradual application of a regime of

52. Despite ail warnings and admonitions, the South
African Government continues to practise apartheid.
It continues to uproot non-whites and consign them
to often barren homelands in order to preserve the
supremacy of the fifth of the population which is
6

;

white. It maintains Draconian restrictions on the.
movement of non-whites. It persists in providing to
.non-whites inferior education, keeping them in a
disadvantageous position. Segregation and inequality
in all areas of life are pervasive. Non-whites are not
represented in the Governemnet that dominates and
mtrudes into almost every aspect of their lives.

bitter experiences in the past make him an impressive
witness today, has also found hopeful aspects in the
new South African voices which are being heard.
57. We believe that a just solution of South Africa’s
racial dilemma indeed lies within South Africa itself.
Taking practical steps towards improving the
condition of non-whites and seeking changes through
communication seem to us more likely to have impact
than some-other measures suggested. American firms
in South Africa, for example, have had notable success
in improving the pay and working conditions of their
noniwhite workers. They do. this as a matter of
enlightened policy-with the support of the United
States Government. The United States also believes
that through its &n-rent cultural exchange programme
prominent South Africans of all races have gained a
new, more accurate, perspective of their country’s
problems and standing, as well as a determination to
seek a solution to them.

53. South Africa’s denial of basic human rights is
compounded in Namibia by its illegal occupation
of that Territory. The United States finds it
reprehensible that South Africa has failed to honour
its obligations under international law to withdraw
‘from Namibia in accordance with General Assemblyand Security Council resolutions and the 1971advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. South
Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of Namibia.
is made all the more outrageous. by the manner in
which it administers the Territory. The repression of
peaceful poiiticai activity, the flogging of dissidents
by the South African administration’s surrogates and
the division of the Territory into so-called homelands
are indefensible and inconsistent with- the responsibilities South Africa had assumed as administrator
of a Mandated Territory.

58. At the same time, the United States continues
to bar the sale-of mihtary equipment to South Africa.
In this regard, I would like to state flatly that
the United States has not collaborated with South
.Africa on military or naval matters for over a decade
and has no intention of, beginning such co-operation
‘in the future..

54. But I am obliged to point out. that even in this
grievous case the United States continues strongly to
adhere to the view that resort to force and other
forms of violence are not acceptable means to induce
change. This is our view with regard to other serious
problems throughout the world and it is our view
with respect to South Africa. Armed confrontation
is no substitute for communication.

59. The situation in southern Africa is significantly
different now from what it was six months ago.
South Africa has no alternative but to reassess its
position in the light of recent events. The United
States urges that, in doing so, the South African
Government look at the realities of the future.

55. The description of South Africa’s transgressions
I have just presented is not new. Observers have
agreed about the essential facts. of apartheid for
many years. Some of the words I have just used are
borrowed. Members of the Council may be familiar
with the statement made on the issue of apartheid
in the.Speciai Political Committee on 17 October by
my co-representative Mr. Joseph SegeL6 That was a
.personai statement, as well as an official one, delivered from the heart by a man now serving as a
-“public member” -1 repeat, a public member-of the
United States delegation. it is also a statement to which
I subscribe and to which the United States Government
subscribes.

60. We call on South Africa to make good the
-assurances it gave- the Secretary-General in April
last year, to allow the people of Namibia to determine
the future of the Territory by exercising. their right of
self-determination, and to withdraw from Namibia.
We urge that South Africa simultaneously begin to
bring an end to its apartheid -policies and establish
the basis for a just society and government where
all are equal. We believe that after a quarter of a
century of warnings, it is time for the South African
Government to adopt the measures that will lead to
a -society of equal opportunity, equai rewards, and
equal justice for all. We call on South Africa to fulfil
its obligations under Articie 25 of the Charter and
to comply with Security Council resolutions on
Southern Rhodesia.

56. We are heartened, indeed, by some encouraging
words in this chamber voiced by the representative
of South Africa. On 24 October [1806th meeting],
he himself implied that the South African Government
was’ responding not in a‘ vacuum but in reaction
to worid events, not the least of which. has been the
condemnation of South Africa’s apartheid
and.
Namibian and Rhodesian poiicies within this
international Organization. I have noted with special
interest that a distinguished African leader, whose
6 See -0fficiui
Session, Specid

Records
Political

i

61. Some speakers have argued that the best way to
bring the-Government of South Africa to accomplish
these objectives-to bring the South African Govemment to heel-is for this Council to recommend to
the General Assembly that South Africa be expelled
from membership in the United Nations. My
Government believes that this kind of all-or-nothing
approach would be a major strategic mistake,
especially at a time when we are hearing what may

of the

General
Assembly,
Twenty-ninth
Committee,
915th meeting.

7

in which ideas and ideals are voiced and revoiced
along with conflicting views until elements of injustice
and oppression are forced to give way to reason.

be new voices of conciliation
out of South Africa.
These new voices should be tested. We must not be
discouraged, as we were last December when we
instructed
the Secretary-General
to abandon his
contacts with the South Africans on Namibia.

66. This, in sum, is the appeal of my delegation.
Let us continue to hold the evils of apartheid under
the light of world opinion until all our fellow human
beings have seen it for what it is. Let us continue
to press South Africa, in this forum and others, to
move rapidly towards an era of equality and justice.

62. Many of our colleagues during the past weeks
have cited time and time again the poetic reference
to “winds of change”.
With the fresh winds of
change blowing from an enlightened Portuguese policy
towards Angola and Mozambique
effecting important
and progressive changes in southern Africa, the
United States believes that it is incumbent upon the
Organization
not to deflect those very winds as they
rush toward South Africa. By doing so we confess that
the Organization
is powerless to influence change
there. My Government does not accept the view that
the United Nations is powerless; rather, we strongly
believe that it is through both increased bilateral
contacts and the strong will of a determined United
Nations that peaceful change will occur in South
Africa.

67.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
French):
I should like, first of all, to observe
that the major debate that has been taking place in
this hall for almost two weeks is one of the most
important
and most exhaustive that we have had
the opportunity of hearing in a long time. Its interest
and the quality of the arguments advanced by so many
speakers have struck the French delegation;
and
I should like to say this here to those who have
helped to’remind
us of the scope of the subject we
are dealing with; for is that subject not simply, in
a way, that of human dignity?

from

63. The United Nations was not founded to be
simply a league of the just. Rather, in our view, it is
a unique international
forum for exchanging ideas,
where those practising
obnoxious
doctrines and
policies may be made to feel the full weight of world
opinion. There is, therefore, a clear, positive and
indispensable role for the United Nations in bringing
change to South Africa.

68. Moreover,
Mr. President,
the circumstances
that placed under your authority and entrusted to
your wisdom as a great African the problem that
concerns and provokes indignation
on the continent
you represent, have prompted my country and its
representative
to follow this debate all the more
closely.
My delegation
could only listen with
understanding to what friendly countries had to say
about the deplorable
situation
still prevailing
in
southern Africa. Thus, because it is a matter of our
concept of the human race, and because it is the
human race in Africa which is concerned, France has
many reasons to participate
in a debate of such
significance.

64. My delegation believes that South Africa should
continue to be exposed, over and over again, to the
blunt expressions of the abhorrence of mankind for
apartheid.
South Africans should not hear of that
abhorrence only from afar, from beyond the range of
our voices, where we would be casting them by
expulsion
from our ranks. Our analysis is that
expulsion would say to the most hardened racist
elements in South Africa that their indifference to
our words and resolutions has been justified.
We
think it would say to the South Africans that we have
not heard, or do not wish to encourage, the new
voices-the
voices that augur hope of change. We
believe that the United Nations must continue its
pressure upon South Africa, moving step by step until
right has triumphed. It is self-defeating to fire a single,
last, dramatic, salvo with only silence to follow.
History holds no example of a pariah State that
reformed itself in exile. The pariah is by definition
an outlaw, free of restraint. There is no record of
good citizenship in the land of Nod, east of Eden,
where Cain, the first pariah, was banished.

69. It is the particular significance of our subject
which prompts me, first and foremost and essentially,
to evoke the ideals that we wish to defend but which
we see despised in South Africa. I should like
resolutely to reiterate the unwavering opposition of
France and of all Frenchmen to the policy of apartheid.
Discrimination,
segregation, and the seperation of
people have always run counter to the ideals of both
Christian France and revolutionary
France, neither
of which has ever accepted that a system of laws
should force people, who should be born free and
equal before the law, to live in isolation from one
another and to behave as strangers; or that a system
should measure fundamental freedoms by the colour of
one’s skin. Such a policy is in itself inadmissible and
only deserving
of condemnation.
Apartheid,
in
theory as in practice, is inspired by an ideology
completely
alien to the spirit of our times; it is a
counter-democracy.

65. My delegation has another grave concern about
the wisdom of expelling South Africa. Even if this
would help thwart the crime of apartheid, expulsion
would set a shattering precedent which could gravely
damage the United Nations structure. It would bring
into question one of the most fundamental concepts on
which the Charter is based: the concept of a forum

70. It is this very policy of apartheid
which
unfortunately
leads the Government
of South Africa
to manifest its solidarity with its twin neighbouring
8

elsewhere. We should consider in its entirety the
essentially political issue raised by the attitude of a
given country-that
is, the attitude that the community
of nations should adopt vis-a-vis one of its members.
It has taken 25 years for the United Nations to become
a more or less exact mirror of the composition
of
our world. We have almost succeeded, and it is not
without reason that the United Nations has been
laudably stubborn over the admission here of all
States of the world. Doubtless we were thinking of
the grave consequences of the decline of an all too
brief experiment, of an all too disrupted organizationthe League of Nations. Under these circumstances,
I wonder whether we shall achieve the appropriate
results by drawing a blank on our map. I very much
doubt that we shall be able to admit Namibia
to
United Nations membership any sooner if we exclude
from our ranks the country which, whether we like it
or not, holds the material power there, and in which
those circles most opposed to any progress will feel
all the more free to perpetuate subjugation in that they
will be more isolated. My delegation believes, generally
speaking, that even the radical differences that divide
us should not kill any hope of bringing back to the
true path those who have strayed from it in error.
Doubtless, the developments to which I have referred
are sometimes slow, too slow, and this leads us to
wonder as to the effectiveness of the United Nations.
We should not, however, despair of ourselves; we
should, on the contrary, realize that the United
Nations has brought about spectacular transformations
and that it can still do so.

regime,. the illegal rebel regime of Rhodesia. And
since the subject before us concerns the entire
relationship
between South Africa and the United
Nations, I would also deplore the political, economic
and military support that the .South African Govemment openly accords ‘to the Salisbury Government,
despite the mandatory
sanctions adopted by the
Security Council in its resolution
253 (1968). My
delegation considers that the Government
of South
Africa should forthwith withdraw the police forces
and military personnel stationed in Rhodesia. That
Government
should also undertake a commitment
to
respect the economic sanctions, in order to put an
end to the abnormal situation resulting from Southern
Rhodesia’s unilateral declaration of independence.
71. France can only regret the tardiness of the
Pretoria authorities in settling the Namibia problem in
the way the course of history demands. As we have
said and repeated for three years, a new regime should
be negotiated.
The French Foreign Minister quite
recently had occasion to deplore the fact that the
efforts undertaken
by the Secretary-General
to
establish a dialogue with the Pretoria Government
in order to lead Namibia to self-determination
and
independence have so far been in vain. We have, of
course, noted that South Africa, after having envisaged
a lo-year period for the Namibian people to prepare
itself to exercise its right to self-determination,
now
believes that that “stage may be reached considerably
sooner”. However, that statement seems inadequate
to us, not only because it is vague, but also because
it does not dispel certain ambiguities concerning the
right of the Namibian people as such to independence
and territorial integrity.

75. In saying this I am not asking anybody to live
on hope alone. The evolution of the world, as indeed
its revolution,
does not come about without forces
exerting pressure and convincing those who do not
understand or do not wish to understand the needs
of the hour. I note simply that the .United Nations,
which is called upon to represent
everyone’s
conscience, has been the instrument
of a series of
real advances resulting from the constancy of its
policy, the continuity of its views and its resolutions,
its perserverance,
but also the patience of our
Governments.
It is certain that these have played a
not insignificant
role in the process that has led to
recent changes in Africa itself.

72. Thus there are three most serious complaints
directed by the entire international
community against
the policy of the South African Government:
the
first concerns human dignity; the second concerns the
non-implementation
of the mandatory
measures
adopted by the Security Council; the third relates to
the duty of decolonization.
We all agree on those
three points; none of us seeks to find excuses for
conduct that everyone would like to see changed as
soon as possible. All of us, then, wonder what course
to,adopt and what means to use.
73. Despite’ the high regard I feel and wish to
express for the sponsors of the draft resolution that
has been submitted, I cannot conceal my Government’s
opinion that the expulsion of South Africa is not the
appropriate
solution.
The frankness
which my
delegation owes to those who have endeavoured
here to justify the application
of Article 6 of the
Charter obliges me to put forward a number of
thoughts and reasons which, it seems to me, merit
attentive consideration.

76. Because the United Nations is the place where
each can influence the other, where the smallest can
make themselves heard by the largest, and the youngest
by the oldest, because it is one of the centres of
universal policy, it should retain within its ranks those
who, for better or for worse, hold the reins of
government.
It is in this sense that the argument
drawn from universality
seems to me the most
pertinent. We must, furthermore,
mention the very
serious dangers which such a precedent could create
for our Organization.
There are, as you know, many
degrees in the definition of evil, many differences of
opinion
in the assessment of the wrongs and
distortions of which,each country, or even amajority

74. I will not enter into legal arguments, although
jurists could adduce a most convincing rationale on
the matter. The main problem,
in our view, lies
9
.

. .

of countries, may accuse another. A drastic measure
can call for others in an endless chain reaction which’
we should not encourage. The present international
community, it is true, includes States whose behaviour,
sometimes in flagrant contradiction with our Charter,
we have not liked. Are we’ all beyond reproach?
Who will unhesitatingly pass final judge.ment? : ,:: .,
77. These are the basic comments I wished to submit
to ihe Council. They do not mean that the French
delegation does not condemn South Africa’s policies
or. that it is not mindful of the three legitimate
complaints that I have mentioned. On the contrary, it
is to make these complaints more ,valid,- to enable
pressures to be exerted and to invite negotiations,
taking into account the just cause of the United
Nations and of Africa that France wants to. avoid
granting the Pretoria regime the facilities and pretexts
which exclusion would provide.
78. I now come to the draft resolution which we
have before us and which proposes to our Council
the expulsion of South Africa fromthe United Nations.
I have just referred tc the reasons which lead us to
disapprove of such a drastic step, one which, we
believe, will not solve the problem. My delegation
will, for these reasons, be compelled to oppose the
draft. We should like to ‘express our regret at seeing
other ideas discarded which have been discussed
during numerous negotiations with authorized
representatives of the African Group, outside our
debates. These ideas were set .ouf in a preliminary
&&$&ich
my, delegation and the United Kingdom
delegation submitted to, ,various spokesmen. It would
have seemed preferable to us to take them ‘into
consideration in the political spirit that I advocated
a moment ago.
79. The guidelines that could have been followed
were centred on a few simple ideas. They consisted,
first and foremost, of the express condemnation of
acts on the part of the South African regime which
are worthy of condemnation, and which can neither
bejustified-nor permitted. It would have been possible
to request that three types of negotiations should be
conducted forthwith with Pretoria and to provide that,
within a given timeilimit, our Council would define
its approach to the question in the light of the progress
made. Finally, we could have entrusted these
negotiations to the Secretary-General, since we are all
well aware that he faithfully represents the collective
thinking of our States. Perhaps we could have exerted
the necessary pressure and thus achieved the progress
that we all desire.
I SOi I have said this before ‘anal I shall conclude
by stressing this point again: our world is developing
and the situation of Africa is developing. It. has
changed since last year in the immediate vicinity of
southern Africa. There are new factors appearing and
those who are stubbornly opposed to change must
take them into account. Perhaps they are doing so

.

already, and perhaps they may be led to d0 ao.tlirqugh
our unanimous impatience. Ours is a healthy,
Organization. It is not the Organization,which we :$nust
save by amputating one of its members,. To. pr&r
medical treatment to surgery, to accept the possibility
of a long and maybe useful negotiation with what is
wrong is not .proof of indulgence or forebearance
but, I think,:of wisdo’m and coinmcn.sense. ;
81. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, at the outset of what I have to, say, might
I congratulate you upon the skill and the competence
with which you have guided our deliberations
throughout this-difficult debate. We are all gratefulto
you.
82.. ’ -No one who has listened to the debate which ..
opened in the Council on 18 October and which has
continued without interruption since then can have
failed to recognize the gravity of the issue which the
General Assembly has called upon the Council to
consider. No one can have failed to be impressedby
the passionate conviction. with which the. United
Nations condemns the policy of ap.arlheid practised
by the’- Government of South Africa, No member
of this Council, no member of th~e.Grganizatiog. n6
African-above all, uo South African--can have been
left in any doubt of the degree to which.South.Africa
is isolated from the mainstream of international
opinion.
83.’ Lest there be any misunderstanding of where my
Government stands, lest there be any more loose
talk about certain Governments defending the system
of apartheid, I must make, my Government’s views
absolutely clear. Speaking only five days ago about
South Africa; Mr. James C&&an, M: P., Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs., said:
’ The Labour’ Party, and Labour Governme.nts
from 194s onwards,, have. a long historical. re.csrd
in the cause of anti-colonialism and anti-racialism,
We repudiate both colonialism and racialism. The
British Government has. nothing in comfnon with
: the. policies of upmheid
and racialisnt which are
repugnant to us and which cause particular main
in our relations with South Africa;”
84.. We regard aparrheid as an evil system, as one
that is repugnant in morality and. unacceptable in
practice. It is a degrading policy, acre so for t&se
who impose it than for those.on whom it: is i.mpased..
With respect to the representative of South. Af&a,
the distinction he. sought. to-- draw. between
discrimination--to which. he admitte.d+and.~.@$$a1
discrimination-which
he repudiXtned--is. in pract&e~
a distinction without a difference.
85. ‘we are quite convinced that the Government
of South Africa must change its policies of facial
discrimination. We have worked for that change and
yve will continue to work, for it. We will use what.e.ver

..
:

’

:.

i,

1

-.

..-

I
-.

influence we have to that end. And. it is ‘our firm
belief that not only we, but the United ‘Nations as
a whole, have a joint obligation to bring influence to
bear on South Africa to change its policies.
’
86. Most of those who have addressed the Council
have done so with great sincerity in advocating action
now to expel South Africa from the United Nations.
This is indeed the recommendation of the draft
resolution before us. I ask you to believe that my
Government speaks with no less sincerity when it
declares that our objectives are identical with those
of the advocates’of expulsion. With no less sincerity
do we hold that the particular course they advocate
is not the right one. We do not think it is right for
the people of South Africa and we do not think it is right
for the United Nations.
.,

that the belief that one or more permanent members
of the Council would vote against expulsion has
enabled others to express attitudes they might not
necessarily have adopted had the basic responsibility
been theirs. In consequence, I must say that this
debate has become more of an exercise in condemning
South Africa than a review of the relationship
between South Africa and the United Nations. It has
not been a serious examination of the pros and cons
of expulsion,as an effective means of pressure.
90. I undertook to review the arguments in favour of
-expulsion and to explain why my Government did not
accept them. _But first I would like to deal with
yet another misrepresentation which has been frequent
in this debate. It is in no way legitimate-in no
way-to present. the refusal of ..a Government to
endorse the expulsion of South Africa as if it ‘was
an endorsement of apartheid. Britain believes in, and
practises, freedom and equality for all citizens ,under
the law. We have fought for those beliefs. I hope
we shall always uphold them. They ‘are indeed the
beliefs on which this United Nations is founded.

87. The advocates of expulsion have, over the past
12 days, if I have understood them correctly,
advanced three main lines of argument which must
be considered with’ the utmost seriousness. First,
it is argued that South Africa has so breached the
Charter that hit is deserving of expulsion. A sort of
international punishment is merited and should now be
meted out. Secondly, it is contended that, somehow
or other, expulsion has become the most effective,
indeed the only way of bringing pressure to bear on
South Africa, which is so intransigent that nothing
short of complete international isolation will have. any
effect. And the third argument seems to be that it is
in the wider interests of the United Nations
Qrganization that South Africa should be expelled.
Each of these threee arguments is formidable, and
each deserves to be answered by those who oppose
expulsion.

91. But we also believe in the rule of law, ‘and
respect for the rule of law must, in this context,
entail respect for the Charter. We also attach cardinal
importance to the ,process of conciliation, to the
application of peaceful persuasion, in short, to those
peaceful means for the solution of problems which
are set out and recommended to Members of the
Organization in the Charter itself. It was for this
reason-because we believe in maintaining contacts
and communication-that
my delegation became
involved in an attempt to find an alternative to the
proposals advanced by--the African members of-,the
Council.
. _

88. There is, however, a quasi-constitutional
argument which has crept in, namely, that it is
somehow the function of the Security Council to
recommend expulsion because that course is assumed
to be the ‘will of the vast majority of the General
Assembly. But the Council cannot be absolved from
reaching its own decision. Indeed, that is precisely
what the General Assembly has asked it to do.
Moreover, that is what the . Charter. specifically
.
provides for.

92. We wished to try and find a constructive outcome
to this debate, moved as we were by the justified
call for action by the African delegations which have
spoken in the debate. We reject the contention that
those Governments which do not endorse each new
call for particular measures against South Africa,
for the adoption of particular tactics in the battle
against apartheid, are to be dubbed supporters of
apartheid.

89. Nor does my delegation accept the contention
that some permanent members of the Council should,
in this particular matter, cease to behave as such.
The argument seems to be that, in some unspecified
way, the Western permanent members of the Council
are disqualified from exercising the functions conferred
on them by the Charter itself. That seems to reduce
itself to the proposition that those who can be
guaranteed to vote in favour of expulsion are by
definition behaving objectively and with wisdom, but
those who might actualIy dare to disagree should
remove’ themselves from the -arena. To sttite the
argument is to defeat it. It ‘cannot in any case be
taken seriously, since it has become quite evident

93. We do not question for one moment the deep
seriousness of these issues. We do not doubt for one
moment the sincerity of those African countries which
have taken the lead in advocating South Africa’s
expulsion. But I must say we are less impressed by
some of those who, to. borrow a metaphor one of
our colleagues here is wont to use, have come here
to fish in troubled waters. I remain unmoved by
criticism directed at the United Kingdom by the
representatives of countries which preach one thing
and practise another, either because of their own trade
with South Africa or stheir own record on human
rights.

l?
_ :

__.

...
:Z ‘--

94. Why then do we object to the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations at this time? My
Government’s
broad view of the situation
was
expressed by the Foreign Secretary speaking in
Parliament
shortly after the Labour Government
took offtce early this year. He said:

Government
from
the pressures
of civilized
international
opinion inside the Organization
would
be a terrible confession of failure by us all. My
Government
is opposed to such a course. It is the
easy option. We believe there are more difficult
but infinitely more worth-while possibilities.

“It is our view that the prosperity
and the
stability of the African continent depend-in the long
run on removing the sources of racial and other
frictions between its different parts. We shall play
our part in the international
community in seeking
to end discrimination
and injustice in southern Africa
in conformity with the wishes of its inhabitants.”

98. The United Nations is now, to all intents and
purposes, a universal Organization.
It reflects the
realities of the world of 1974 and it is the stronger
and the healthier for this fact. Yet it is argued that
universality should not be an overriding consideration;
Article 6 of the Charter was purposely inserted and
was intended for use. It was indeed, but it was
intended
for use only in the most hopeless
circumstances;
it should be used when the Member
is beyond redemption,
when the influence of the
Organization
to remedy the situation
is totally
exhausted. In our view, that is not the case here.

It follows that we would support expulsion if we
believed that such action would remedy, or even help
to remedy, the situation in South Africa itself, and
if we thought that the well-being of the Organization
would thereby be served. But would either of those
objectives
be promoted?
In the opinion
of my
delegation, they would not.

99. The use of Article 6 to expel a Member in
circumstances other than those I have just described
would not only be a counsel of despair but a most
dangerous precedent. This argument has been brushed
aside from time to time in this debate by some of
those who have spoken. But I doubt whether any
Israeli student of the records of our meetings over the
past 12 days would so readily exclude the possibility.

95. The expulsion
of South Africa would solve
nothing in itself. It would not, in our view, encourage
the South African Government to alter its attitude or
alter its policies. It would make it difficult, if not
impossible,
for the Organization
to explore and
exploit the recent statements made both here and in
South Africa which hold out some hope of change
in the right direction.
On the contrary, expulsion
would be all too likely to encourage the most illiberal
elements in South Africa to take refuge in their
famous hger
of earlier times, to wrap themselves
round with a cloak of self-righteous
obstinacy, to
remove themselves, and with them the unfortunate
majority of South Africa’s people, still further away
from the real world around them.

100. Are all Members of the United Nations who
persistently violate the principles of the Charter and
who constantly violate the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights to be expelled? The fact is that this
has not been the practice of the Organization
under
Article 6 of the Charter. Since the Organization
has
to deal with the real problems of the world as they
exist and does not operate in a semi-Utopia,
it does
not and it should not use Article 6 except as a very
last resort, when all hope of remedying the situation
has been abandoned.

96. Expulsion
would do nothing to improve the
condition
of the Africans, of the Coloured, or of
the Indians in South Africa. It would not restore their
dignity. It has been argued that it would restore the
dignity of the United Nations.
My delegation
is
prepared to risk that, if it benefits the people of
South Africa. One representative
told us during the
debate that:

101. The principle of universality
my delegation will lightly sacrifice.
not sacrifice it for no sure return.

102. It will be said-and
indeed it has been saidthat no other course offers a sure hope of any return,
that the end of a 30-year journey has been reached,
that the time for the ultimate measure of expulsion
has come. But perhaps there are viable alternatives.

“The expulsion of that regime may not improve
the situation in South Africa, but I think it will
certainly improve the situation in the Organization.”

103. In the statement we heard from the representative of South Africa on 24 October [180&k Ineeting],
we were told of progress towards ending racial
discrimination.
We were given to expect more
progress.
We were given hints-perhaps
halfpromises-with
regard to Namibia
and Southern
Rhodesia: the two territories of particular interest to
the Organization
over which the South African
Government stands condemned by the United Nations.
Let those promises be redeemed; let the hopes then
aroused be fulfilled; let South Africa fit its actions to

In our view, that is utterly the wrong approach. The
objective is not to purge the United Nations. The
object is to persuade the South African Government
to change its policies.
97. Expulsion would therefore, in our view, amount
not to a measure for progress and reconstruction
but, at best, to a punishment:
sending South Africa
to a sort of international
purgatory-in
our view a
gesture of despair. To remove a country or a
12
b

is not one which
We will certainly

its words. The time is very late; but in our view, it is
not too late.

109. My Government’s aims-and
may I set them out
briefly-are
to secure South Africa’s compliance with
its international obligations over Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
and to secure early progress towards
righting the undoubted wrongs done to the majority
of South Africa’s people. Our honest judgement
is
that to expel South Africa would not help to achieve
those aims. On the contrary, we believe it would
hinder their accomplishment.

104. We have noted too that others who could by
no stretch of the imagination be accused of befriending
the South African Government
have been prepared
to take a similar view of recent statements. If this is the
voice of reason for which Africa and the world have
waited for many years, it must surely not now be
ignored.

110. We believe that the alternative
offered by
France and the United Kingdom would have proved
a far better way forward. Expulsion is too easy and in
our view it would be quite ineffective as a means of
bringing international pressure and influence to bear on
South Africa and on its rulers.

105. My delegation in consequence thought it right
to discuss with other parties whether we could find
a more promising alternative to the single operative
paragraph of the draft resolution recommending
the
immediate expulsion of South Africa from the United
Nations.

111. With reluctance we have therefore decided to
vote against this draft resolution. In so doing we are
giving South Africa a further opportunity of putting its
affairs in order. I hope it will recognize the weight of
international
opinion that is opposed to its policies.
I hope it will heed the voices we have all heard in
this chamber. I trust it will act accordingly.

106. Members of the Council will have seen the paper
which my French colleague and I circulated and which
contained the proposals which my delegation could
have supported had it been the desire of the Council
as a whole to take that course in preference to what
I have called the counsel of despair. We saw in it the
opportunity
to bring South Africa further towards
United Nations policy over Namibia.
We saw the
opportunity to bring the Government of South Africa
to a proper respect for its international
obligations
with regard to Southern Rhodesia. We saw in it the
opportunity
of securing progress towards easing and
eventually
eradicating
the policies
of racial
discrimination
practised within South Africa.

112. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I should like now to speak in my capacity as
representative
of the UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF
CAMEROON.
113. In adopting, by an overwhelming
majority of
its members, resolution 3207 (XXIX) requesting the
Security Council to review the relationship
between
the United Nations and South Africa in the light of
the constant violation by South Africa of the principles
of the Charter and the Universal
Declaration
of
Human Rights, the General Assembly has given the
Council the opportunity to open an exhaustive debate
on the policy of apartheid which will be a landmark in
the history of the Organization,
since it is the first
time, I believe, that a Member State has been made
the subject of a procedure that is so fraught with
consequences.

107. These
are honourable
objectives.
Their
attainment,
even their partial attainment,
would
alleviate the suffering of Africans in southern Africa.
It would be worth a thousand expulsions.
My
Government
remains
ready
to exploit
every
opportunity
to secure genuine progress over these
matters. We are not prepared to give up yet. For
there is here a clear choice. If one believes that all
hope for peaceful progress in South Africa has gone,
if one believes that the Government and people-and
let us not forget that it is people we are talking
about, and people are capable of being persuaded-are
past all possibility
of redemption,
then it would be
right to vote to expel South Africa now. It would
be right to cut the cord and to do it cleanly and
quickly, recognizing that, if we do, our power to
influence is diminished thereby. I see the force of that
argument. But it is precisely because I do not hold
those views that I cannot follow this course. I do not
reject the way of peaceful progress and compromise,
and, may I say, nor do many who have called for
expulsion in the course of this debate.

114. It is not surprising that the South African
racist rkgime stands here &used.
Indeed, apartheid,
the expression of the official policy of that rkgime,
has been repugnant to the international
conscience
for more than a quarter of a century. It is the most
ruthless form of racial oppression,
the denial of
human rights, the adamant political
and economic
domination
by a white racist minority
of the
majority of the African population. No one, no State,
can remain indifferent to this criminal system which
makes a mockery
of the lofty values of our
civilization.

108. This has not been an easy debate. Nor has the
decision over how to vote on the draft iesolution
been an easy one. The debate has resulted in the
public exposure and examination
of the affairs of a
Member State which has no precedent. The weight of
condemnation
has been overwhelming.

115. Pope Paul VI, in the message he addressed
to the Organization
on the occasion
of the
commemoration
of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of
the Declaration
on Human Rights on 10 December
1973, clearly stated:
13

“There can be no peace where there is no respect
for, no defence and no promotion of human rights.. .

threat in Africa, and their policies purport to be
dictated by historical and geographical determinism.

“The fundamental rights of man represent a
common good for the whole of mankind on its
path towards the conquest of peace.‘:’

122. Such alibis sadly recall the cold war’ of the
1950s but they do not deceive anybody when
international detente makes for understanding and
tolerance among peoples.

116. During this debate the crimes of apartheid
have been depicted very brilliantly .by many speakers
and particniariy by the representatives of. the
libemtion movements of South Africa, who are the
genuine spokesmen for the majority of the population
of that country. At this stage I will confine myself
to recalling briefly certain striking aspects of the
situation in South Africa which could not be passed
over in silence.

123. The high spiritual authorities of the West are
not hoodwinked and they have always condemned the
apartheid regime as making a mockery of the moral
principles underlying Christian morality. His Holiness
Pope Paul VI reasserted the firm opposition of the
Church to racial discrimination during the private
audience he granted to the- members of the Special
Committee on Apartheid on 27 May last. The Most
Reverend Arthur Michael Ramsey, then Archbishop.
of Canterbury, on 1 December ‘1970, after a visit to
South Africa, unequivocally condemned the aparrheid
regime and invited the international community to
imagine in that country a vast racial confrontation
which could be fraught with the most frightening and
tragic consequences. Moreover, the’worid Council of
Churches and trade unions and popular forces in the
world support the just struggle of the liberation
movements,‘thus strikingly thwarting the manoeuvres
of the racists who would identify apartheid with
Western civiiization.

117. Indeed it is a veritable tragedy for the African
peoples to see a white minority, representing less
than 20 per cent of the population of the country,
a minority that has come from distant lands, arrogating
to itself, without sharing, the political and economic
power in South Africa, expelling by force thousands
of Africans from their ancestral lands so that the whites
might profit, confining the majority of the population
of the country to bantustans, veritable ,concentration
camps where they languish in terrifying misery,
deprived of ail.-political, trade union and press rights,
freedom of movement and so on.

124. Furthermore, the allegations of the racists that
the.Africa’n peoples are attempting to throw the whites
into the sea, though they also are Africans, is a gross
distortion of the facts, because indeed what was
advocated by the Lusaka Manifesto but a reconciliation
among all the inhabitants of South Africa w.harever
the colour of their skin, and respect for the fundamental
rights of all? Paragraph 8 of the Manifesto reads:
.*, ,,“We believe that ail the peoples who have made
their homes in the countries of southern Africa
are Africans, regardless of the colour of their skins;
and we would oppose a racialist majority gavemment which adopted a philosophy of deliberate and
permanent discrimination between its citizens on
grounds of racial origin.“2

118. Through an arsenal of racially discriminatory
laws, unceasingly reinforced, the Pretoria regime has
since 1946 deprived the blacks of the right to vote;
anti-apartheid political parties .have .been prohibited
and their leaders gaoled, in, pursuance particularly
of Law No. 44 of 1950on the repressionof communism.
Laws on sabotage, .on terrorism and pubIic security
and, on Bantu labour are all aimed at intimidating,
humiliating and muzzling Africans and stifling their
legitimate aspirations to freedom and equality, while
perpetuating in the country a system of colonial-type
exploitation profitable to the whites alone.
119. Worse, the racists practise calculated genocide,
systematically eliminating the African elite and cadres
through assassinations, police repression or exile.
The memory of Sharpevilie, where racists cynically
massacred peaceful African demonstrators, and that
of the miners killed in the mines of Carietonviiie
will never be erased from the minds of peace-loving
men.

It is regrettable that the Manifesto, adopted
enthusiastically by the Organization, was ignored
as recently as, 24 October by the representative of
Pretoria when he addressed the Council.
,
125. .The truth is that it is the white racists who
intend to seize ownership of the country, who deprive
the Africans of their status & ,men and who cannot
imagine a Republic of South Africa which would be
really multiracial and democratic. One Mr. Botha,
then Minister of the racist regime in charge of the
administration and development of the Bantus, was
clear on this point when, in a statement made to
:1
Parliament on 21.May -1973 he said:

120. These: sad South African realities have once
more during this debate been beiiberateiy falsified by
the racists. to misuse the good faith of peoples to
which they believe themselves linked by ideological
or racial ties.
KZi. ‘Ihe &Voczttes-6fuparrheid
claim tobe defending
Western Christians civilization against the cormnunist
’ Ibid., Twmty-eighfh

para.26.

.-

--e
.

-. -.._.

“The Bantus who come to work in white areas,
in our factories, our homes, our shops or whewa

Session. Plenary Meetings, 2195th meeting,

14
-.

:

,
,’

:

..’

,,

.!

. ..

130. Hence, I find it strange, to say the least, to
see certain Powers which themselves disapprove of the
policy of apartheid coming here in force to support a
belligerent regime that rejects the idea of equality
among men, a regime that for almost 30 years has
been trampling the principles of the Charter under
foot, a. regime that is illegally occupying the
international Territory of Namibia and cynically
violating the economic‘sanctions voted by the Security
Council against the rebel regime of Rhodesia.

they’ work are not authorised;. Qnder our policies,
to attain economic.ally or professionally the same
status as whites-Qra status equal to that of whites . ..
Those among&em vuho are authorized to come to
white Africa; are permitted~ to do so in conditions
of non-integration ,”
126. ‘fhe distress caused by the aggressiveness of
has :led the.Security Council more than once
objectivefy to condemn the criminal acts of the South
African racist @ime. Thus,- at its session in Addis
Abaha in 1972, in resolution 311(1972), it condemned
the’ Government of South Africa for continuing its
policies of uparrheid in violation of its obligations
under the Charter; .it reiterated its opposition to
apartheid;
and it recognized the’ legitimacy of the
struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa.
It should be noted that there were 14 votes, including
those of the United States and the United Kingdom.

aparthetd

131. The attitude of those Powers that have special
responsibilities under the Charter would seem worthy
of interest were it not for the fact that these are
Governments that have always tried to thwart United
Nations action on South Africa and that in fact
encourage the Pretoria racists to continue their policy
of apartheid because those Governments give the
racists political assistance, sell them arms and grant
them economic and financial aid, in flagrant violation
of the many relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the Genera1 Assembly.
.
132. My delegation reaffirms its attachment to the
principle of the universality .of the United Nations,
a principle that must be borne in mind in view of the
provisions of the Charter.’ But a State that is not
peace loving and does. not respect its obligations
under that Charter-and
that is true of South
Africa-has no justification for claiming a place in
an organization as respectable as ours.

,i2?; Morere-exIWtIy, the GeneraI Assembly has
repeatedly demonstrated its basic opposition to the
policy of apartheid. Thus, in its resolution 2671 F
(XXV) of 8 December i9fb, it declared that “the
policies of apartheid of the Government of South
Africa are a negation of the Charter of the United
Nations’ and constitute a crime against humanity”.
In its resolution 2646 (XXV), adopted the same year,
the..Assembly declared also th_at “any State whose
official policy cr practice is based on racial
discrimination, such as apartheid, contravenes the
purposes and.principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and should therefore have no place in the
United Nations”.

133. It.seems to us that the expulsion of that racist
regime from the United Nations would be healthy from
every point of view. It would constitute a serious
waning to all the States that might be tempted to
imitate the barbaric behaviour of the racists; the
credibility of the Organization, which must remain a
forum of ‘peace and brotherhood, would be strengthened; and, as the representative of the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania stressed here [I798rh meeting],
Pretoria’s isolation would move international public
opinion to place itself at the side of the democratic
forces within the country struggling for freedom.
*
134. Faithful td its trtiditions of struggling for the
freedom of al1 men, the people of Camerobn wiIl
always condemn regimes, such as those of nazism
and upqheid,
based on racia1 fanaticism, terror and
crime. In presenting the Manifesto on Southern Africa
to the General Assembly in 1969, El Hadj Ahmadou
Ahidjo, President of the United Republic of Cameroon,,
and at’ that time Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity, clearly defined the meaning of our
opposition to apartheid. He said:

128. The racists, who’d0 not understand the language
ofdialogue and conciliation, have rejected with insolent
scorn <hose various warnings of the international
community. If there have been changes recently in
South Africa, as the envoy of the racists claimed
here- on 24 October, we must regretfully note that
their sole effect has been- to strengthen the structures
of apartheid through, the repression ,and exploitation
of-the blacks, as the Special Committee on Apartheid
indicates in its report-’
.
..
129. All the acts of the racist regime in flagrant
violation of the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, and .in constant contravention of
the relevant resolutions of the main bodies of our
Organization; undeniabIy indicate, on the one hand,
that the Pretoria regime itself has chosen to be a
dgime for the-whjfes and not for a$ the inhabitants of
South Africa and, on the other, that it intends to
remain outside our Organization. the centre for
harmonizing the efforts of nations in the maintenance
of peace, in international co-operation, and in respect
for’ the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all.

“It would ,be senseless to give racist overtones
to our campaign when’ it is precisely racism that
we are fighting; racism, that prejudice which aims
to divide humanity jnto superior and inferior races
and to justify the domination ofone race by another.
1 Consequently,
‘our campaign implies the
15

condemnation
of all racism and not the establishment of another, reverse, racism. It is based on
our unshakeable belief that to deny the human value
of a single man is to imperil the dignity of all men.“9

are discussing this afternoon has been on the table
since 24 October. There has therefore been a long time
for all the members of the Council to conduct the
normal negotiations, to conduct the normal consultations, and therefore nobody can claim that all this
has been presented in’a hurry. Indeed, we have already
pointed out in our earlier statement [1806th meeting]
that no one can say that anyone is being rushed.

135. Colonies are made to be lost: they are born
with a cross on their foreheads, a great humanist wrote.
The present collapse of colonial empires, particularly
that of Portugal-which
some had thought invulnerable-gives
great significance to that statement.

141. Those who have claimed
that they have
attempted to prepare alternative draft resolutions know
very well that not until late yesterday afternoon were
any attempts made to present what appeared to most
of us as a clear insult to our intelligence. The so-called
draft resolutions, which those who opposed the present
one presented, contain nothing more than what has
been going on for the last 29 years in the United
Nations: empty words; contained in resolutions that
have no means of enforcement or action. We reject
the suggestion that there was anything new, and the
draft resolutions are available for anyone who knows
what has been going on to verify the truth of what I say.

136. My delegation is therefore convinced that South
Africa, like the other colonies, will soon be free; it is
only a question of time. Apartheid,
the most hateful
form of colonialism,
cannot stop the march towards
freedom of the oppressed people of South Africa; the
popular support given their cause within the country is
proof of the justice of that cause, and the active
solidarity
of the peoples of the world with the
oppressed people of South Africa is a striking indication
of the legitimacy of their struggle.
137. The Security Council cannot remain isolated
from this irreversible
development.
History
will
triumph over the attitude of those who, during this
debate, preferred to defend selfish and dubious
interests instead of more effectively supporting United
Nations action to promote respect for human rights,
self-determination
of peoples and world peace.

142. We reject also any attempt to associate the
truth w.ith the overriding
vote, or the veto. The
fact that some may have one vote which can override
14 does not necessarily mean that that one vote
carries the truth with it, and no attempt should be
made to assocate truth or justice with the veto vote.
To attempt to do so is equally to insult the intelligence
of the entire world Organization here.

138. My delegation strongly believes that the best
contribution
that this important United Nations body
can make at present to the cause of the oppressed
people of South Africa, to the cause of peace and to
the strengthening of the authority of our Organization,
is to recommend
to the General Assembly
the
immediate
expulsion
of South Africa from the
Organization
under Article 6 of the Charter, as
provided in the draft resolution submitted by Kenya,
Mauritania
and the United Republic of Cameroon,
and now Iraq [S/1154.?].

143. Indeed, we are pleased that the discussion that
has taken place in rhe last two weeks has confirmed
what we have been saying in other forums, in the
General Assembly and in all the committees which
discuss the question of apartheid: that South Africa
has powerful supporters, powerful friends, who are
prepared to use the machinery of the United Nations
to continue discussion, while at the same time giving
full support because of the benefits that have been
stated very clearly before today.

139. Mr. MAINA
(Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me a chance to make a few remarks in
connexion with the debate which has been going on
this afternoon and for the last two weeks. Kenya is
not in the habit of asking for the floor after the debate
has been concluded, but I did feel compelled, as the
co-sponsor of the draft resolution under discussion,
and the one who presented the draft resolution on
behalf of the countries that have been listed, to make
a few remarks, since apparently all those who have
made up their minds to oppose the draft have decided
to make their speeches at the very end so that there
was no proper chance of answering their remarks.

144. I felt that I should take this opportunity to make
these few remarks, lest it be said afterwards that all
those who spoke in favour of the draft resolution
were irresponsible
people. The fact that there is a
number of votes against the draft resolution is not a
discouragement. The fact that those few votes have+the
overriding authority over all the others does no more
than underline what we have been saying for a long
time: that we can continue to discuss the question of
South Africa, but so long as there are those who
continue to benefit immensely and who make empty
statements in condemnation,
no result is likely to be
seen for a long time in what we are trying to achieve..

140. The discussion of the relationship between the
United Nations and South Africa has been going on
for nearly two weeks. The draft resolution which we
9 Ibid.. Twenty-fourth
para. 16.

Session,

Plennry

Meetings,

145. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): My delegation
has
already expressed its views on the item before us in
some detail during the course of the previous
meeting. But I refrained from making any comments
on draft resolution S/11543 of which my delegation

1780th meeting,

16

is a sponsor. Before the Council proceeds to the vote
on the draft resolution,
we would like with your
indulgence,
Mr. President,
and that of the other
members of the Council to make the following brief
..
remarks.

only to the regime of South Africa but also to its
friends and partners. Throughout that entire period,
we have avoided placing the friends of South Africa
or the Council in the position of having to make the
choice which they have to make today; yet it is a
choice that is extraordinarily
simple; It is as simple
as this: a choice between injustice, the complete denial
of the most elementary human rights, domination and
colonialism
on the one hand, and, on the other, the
dignity
and freedom of man. Thus that choice
eventually - had to be made. The time ..has now
,(.. come.

146. Not a single representative
has spoken in
defence of South Africa’s polidy of apartheid. There
has been nothing but denunciation and eondemnation
of that policy. No one has denied the fact that South
Africa has persistently violated the principles of the
Charter and of the Declaration of Human Rights. No
one has refuted the evidence put before the Council
to the effect that South Africa and the policies it
pursues constitute a threat to international
peace and
security. And yet, ,whenever the Council is called
upon to take effective action to put an end to these
violations of the Charter and to the threat to peace
and security, those efforts are aborted by certain
Powers which choose to collaborate with the racist,
colonialist minority regime in Pretoria-even.
when it
is done .at the expense of international.
peace and
security and in the face of the overwhelming judgement
of international
public opinion.’

150. The members of the Council who support our
initiative will be living up to the expectations of the
people of South Africa, which has placed the burden
of its poverty and indignation
on the consciences of
all the members of the Council and of all the Members
of the United Nations. This people has placed its
hopes in the Organization
and primarily in. the body
most competent in the matter, the Council. Instead of
responding to those hopes, people are telling us:
“Be patient, be patient, perhaps one, perhaps 10 years
more; wait until South Africa bows to reason”.
151. Another objection has been’ made. We have
been told that we should be rendering a poor service to
the cause of the universality of the Organization.
But
should universality
be achieved . by flouting
the
purposes and principles that are the framework, the
very essence of the Organization?
We can truly say
that we’ do’ mot understand
the meaning of, that
objection or of that universality.
As a final irony, we
have been told that we are doing the Organization a
poor service by asking that South Africa be expelled.
Well, that would be much better for those who want
to establish or continue relations with South Africa,
and who in that way would not have to expose their
activities here at the United Nations.
,.
152. The votes in favour of our draft resolution
and the support that some members of the Council
will give it will be noted by our peoples and by
history as an essential and unforgettable contribution
to the cause of mankind in general and to the cause of
Africans in particular.

147. The medicine to-remedy the situation in South
Africa prescribed so far has not been effective. Indeed,
it was-not even properly administered. The failure to do
so has led to such an aggravation of the situation
that the international
community
now has no choice
but to resort to a surgical operation. If amputation
is the last resort in certain hopeless cases, it is
undertaken to save the rest of the living organism.
148. What-we, the sponsors of the- draft resolution
before the Council, have recommended
is nothing
as drastic and irreversible as an amputation. The door
would always remain open for the readmission
of
South Africa to the ranks of the United Nations as
soon as it shows its readiness to abide by the resolutions
of the United Nations and by the principles of the
Charter.
149. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from French): I regret to have to speak at this rather
late stage of our debate. I would like to say, however,
that the initiative of the African Group, supported by
84 Member States, an initiative which led to the draft
resolution that my delegation and other Members have
submitted to the Council, was not one that was taken
lightly. For 14 years we Africans have accepted the
compromises
of the Council.
We accepted the
demands, the solemn warnings addressed to South
Africa. We considered that the resolutions adopted by
the Council since 1960 were in fact warnings to that
regime, lack of respect for which should normally
have led to South Africa’s expulsion. Thus for 14 years
we have hoped that the regime in South Africa would
bow to the decisions of the Council and would finally
pay attention to world public opinion. For 14 years
we have hoped that reason would win out .and that
our.willingness
to compromise
would be. useful, not

153. ilre know that a veto may be cast. We know
that our draft resolution will be rejected. But we are
sure that we shall receive the affirmative
vote of
history. We know that we are doing a great service to
freedom and to the cause of mankind. And we are
convinced that, very shortly, the people of South
Africa will show, by all means, that we have indeed
been right.
154. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
No more representatives
have indicated their desire’
to speak in the general debate. It is therefore my
intention to put to the vote the draft resolution in
document
S/11543, sponsored
by Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania
and the United Republic of Cameroon,
unless there are representatives who wish to explain
their votes before the vote.
17

155. Are there any delegations which wish to explain
their votes before the vote? Since that is not the case,
I put the draft resolution to the vote,.
A v&e was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Australia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United
Republic of Cameroon.
1.
Against:

and Northern

France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
Ireland, United States of America.

Abstaining:
There were
2 abstentions.

Austria,

Costa Rica.

10 votes

in favour,

3 against

and

The draft reso1utio.n was not adopted, the negative
votes being those .of permanent
members
of the
Council.

156. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
As there are no delegations that wish to explain their
votes after the vote, and no other speakers on my
list, I should like, on behalf of the UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF CAMEROON,
to express my
gratitude
to all members
of the Council whose
co-operation and constant understanding have made it
possible for me to discharge my diff&.tlt task. I should
like on this occasion very sincerely to thank the
delegations
of Australia,
Byelorussia,
China,
Indonesia, the Soviet Union and Peru, all of which.
have voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted
by Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania
and the United Republic
of Cameroon: The oppressed people of Azania, the
other pe-oples of Africa, all people of African descent
and all peace-loving
people throughout the world will
always remember the great political significance of
that support.

157. By iailing on the Security Council further to
define the relationship between the United Nations
and South Africa, the General Assembly assigned to
us a task the complexity of which is well understood
by all. The Council has just played a most important
role. The 51 representatives
of Member States and
the 3 representatives
of the liberation
movements
recognized by the Organization
of African Unity
who participated in the debate in the Council have
clearly understood what is at issue when reference is
made to the problem of apartheid. It is a matter of
conscience at the individual
level and a matter of
faithful adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations at the level of Member States.’
158. Historians will later say whether the vote today
was merely a response to the needs of the .moment,
or whether it was in fact a reflection of the profound
feelings of all peoples represented here with regard
to racism, justice and fraternity among .a11 mankind.
In the opinion of my delegation, the status of South
Africa in the Organization
is quite clear, inasmuch
as it is a Member now only because of the veto
power. All peace-loving forces throughout the world
that are opposed to the criminal policies of apartheid
may consider that they have earned a moral victory
from this important debate, which is:but .the prelude
to other fights and a great‘source of c,omfort to the
oppressed people of Azania.
159. With the inevitable. deterioration of the political
situation in South Africa, public opinion in our,various
countries and world public opinion in, general will
surely understand
who bears the overwhelming
responsibility
for the defeat of the draft resolution
recom.mending.
the immediate
expulsion
of South
Africa from the United Nations.

,2@The meeting ros‘e at 6p.m.

, 18
Jitho in Unired Nations. New York

00400

74-82001June

1983-2,200
