Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1555 (XV). Administrative budgets for 1961 of
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appredation of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the administrative budgets for 1961 of
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency ;1 7
2. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency to the
comments and observations made in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and to the views expressed in the Fifth
Committee at the fifteenth session of the General
Assembly.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1556 (XV). Report of the Negotiating Committee
for Extra-Budgetary Funds
A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds18 appointed at the
fourteenth session of the General Assembly,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee;
2. Decides that:
(a) An ad hoe Committee of the whole Assembly,
under the chairmanship of the President of the session,
shall be convened as soon as practicable after the opening of the sixteenth session, where pledges of voluntary
contributions for the refugee programmes for the following year would be announced ;
( b) States not Members of the United Nations, but
members of one or more of the specialized agencies,
shall be invited to attend the meetings of the ad hoe
Committee for the purpose of announcing their pledges
to the refugee programmes ;
( c) In order to ensure maximum attendance, as
great advance publicity as possible shall be given to
the meetings of the ad hoe Committee and they shall
be so scheduled that no other meetings are held at the
same time.
954th plenary mectin[J,
18 December 1960.

B
The General Assembly
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary
Funds consisting of not more than fourteen members,
with the same terms of reference as those laid down in
Assembly resolution 693 (VII) of 25 October 1952,
to serve from the close of the fifteenth session to the
close of the sixteenth session of the Assembly;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixteenth session the item entitled "Report of the N egotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds".
954th plenary meeting,
18 Deceniber 1960.

*
*
*
The members of the Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgeta,ry Funds -will be appointed at the resumed fifteenth
session.

41

1557 (XV). Organization and work of the
Secretariat

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the interim report of the Committee
of Experts on the Review of the Activities and Organization of the Secretariat 19 and the related observations
of the Secretary-General 20 and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ;21
2. Confirms the provisional decision of the SecretaryGeneral that, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of the General Assembly resolution 1446 (XIV)
of 5 December 1959, the composition of the Committee
of Experts should be increased from six to eight
members;
3. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
of Experts that, pending examination of its final report
by the General Assembly, United Nations organs should
not, save in cases of real urgency, propose the initiation
of studies or other projects involving additions to the
budget or to the permanent establishment of the
Secretariat.
954th plenary meeting.
18 December 1960.
1558. (XV). Public information activities of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the Secretary-General's report of 25 August 1960 on public information activities
of the United Nations, 22
Recalling its resolutions 1086 (XI) of 21 December
1956, 1335 (XIII) of 13 December 1958 and 1405
(XIV) of 1 December 1959 relating to the establishment of information centres and setting out the basic
policy measures to be followed in the field of public
information activities,
N ofing further the progress achieved in the implementation of the above-mentioned resolutions,
Having regard to the increased membership of the
African States in the United Nations,
Welcoming the Secretary-General's announcement of
the intention to open during 1961 eight new information
centres : one in Latin America, one in eastern Europe,
one in Asia and five in Africa,
Noting that for the years 1960 and 1961 the SecretaryGeneral has planned the public information programmes
at an expenditure level of about $5 million net for
each year,
Emphasizing the importance of the dissemination of
information on the United Nations objectives and
activities in those regions where mass information media
are less developed, particularly in the Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Consultative Panel on Public Information and the
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, document A/4599.
18 Ibid., agenda item 55, document A/4623.
19 Ibid., agenda item 58, document A/4536, annex.
20 Ibid:, document A/4536, paras. 1-7.
2 1 Ibid., document A/4554.
22 Ibid., agenda item 59, document A/4429.

42

General Assembly -

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, as appropriate :
(a) To give high priority to the opening of information centres or arranging for adequate information facilities in the less-developed areas, particularly in the
newly independent countries and Trust and Non-SelfGoverning Territories, by effecting economies in other
directions ;
( b) To intensify his efforts to achieve a more effective regional representation at the policy-making level
of the Office of Public Information ;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session on the progress made in implementing the
present resolution.
954th plenary merting,
18 December 1960.

1559 (XV). Geographical distribution of the staff
of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the geographical distribution of the staff of
the Secretariat,28
Recalling Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Reaffirming the third paragraph of the preamble to
General Assembly resolution 153 (II) of 15 November
1947, namely:
"Whereas, in view of its international character and
in order to avoid undue predominance of national
practices, the policies and administrative methods of
the Secretariat should reflect, and profit to the highest
degree from, assets of the various cultures and the
technical competence of all Member nations",
Taking into account the various views expressed by
delegations during the discussion of this question.
Recognizing that the present method of determining
the desirable range of posts for each Member State on
the basis of the scale of assessments to the United
Nations budget needs review,
Noting the steady increase in the proportion of the
fixed-term staff of the Secretariat,
1. Requests the Committee of Experts appointed by
General Assembly resolution 1446 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 to study the categories of posts subject to
geographical distribution and the criteria for determining the range of posts for each Member State with a
view to securing a wide geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat, taking into account, inter alia,
the relative importance of various posts, and to report
to the Assembly at its sixteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to implement the General Assembly resolutions
on the question of the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session on the
implementation of the above-mentioned provisions.
954 plenary meeting,
18 December 196fJ.
23 Jbid., agenda item 60, documents A/C.5/833 and Addl
and A/C.5/834.

Fifteenth Session

1560 (XV). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the annual report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board ;24
2. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development on the transfer of pension rights of
participants in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund and of participants in the Staff Retirement Plan
of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development ;211
3. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Monetary Fund on the
transfer of pension rights of participants in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and of participants
in the Staff Retirement Plan of the International
Monetary Fund. 26
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1561 (XV). United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the expert group 27
appointed by the Secretary-General to undertake a
comprehensive review of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1310 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, the report
of the United Nations Toint Staff Pension Board 28 and
the proposals made by the Secretary-General, as a result
of those reports, in conjunction with the executive he:1ds
of the other member organizations and in co-operation
with the Board, 29
Agrees that the expert group has accomplished a
difficult task with skill and thoroughness, and places on
record its warm appreciation of the services of the
group;

I
PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION OF THE STAFF

1. Decides that, for the purposes of contributions
payable to the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
the pensionable remuneration of the staff with effect
from 1 April 1961 shall be established as follows:
(a) Base pensionable remuneration:
(i) For staff who are subject to the Staff Assessment
Plan under staff regulation 3.3, the base pensionable remuneration shall be the annual rate of the
United Nations gross salary, expressed in United
States dollars or such other currency as may be
agreed between the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board and the organization, applicable
to the grade and step (including any language
allowance) of the official, less one half of the
24 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/4469 and
Corr.I).
25 Ib;d., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 62, document A/C.5/846, annex A.
26 Ibid., annex B.
2 7 Ibid., agenda item 63, document A/4427.
28 Ibid., document A/4467.
29 Ibid., document A/4468.
