S/PRST/2014/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 September 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7271st meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 September 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning Iraq”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the newly formed Government of Iraq
and calls on the international community to support its efforts to strengthen
further democratic institutions, to maintain security and combat terrorism and
to create a safe, stable and prosperous future for the people of Iraq. The
Security Council reaffirms its support for the independence, sovereignty, unity,
and territorial integrity of Iraq and reaffirms further the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council underscores the need for all segments of the Iraqi
population to participate in the political process and engage in political
dialogue. The Security Council is encouraged by the Iraqi Government’s
commitment to resolve longstanding issues through an inclusive political process
and consistent with the Iraqi Constitution and look forward to implementation
of this commitment through its new national agenda. The Security Council
encourages Iraq’s leaders to accelerate implementation of this agenda and
national reconciliation to address the needs of Iraq’s diverse communities.
“The Security Council also urges Member States to work closely with the
Government of Iraq to identify how best the international community can aid
implementation of the new Iraqi agenda. The Security Council reaffirms its
full support for the UN Assistance Mission for Iraq in advising and assisting
the Iraqi people and the Government of Iraq in strengthe ning democratic
institutions and advancing inclusive political dialogue.
“The Security Council strongly condemns attacks by terrorist
organizations, including the terrorist organization operating under the name
“Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant” (ISIL) and associated armed groups, in
Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon and emphasizes that this large -scale offensive poses a
major threat to the region. The Security Council expresses again its deep
outrage about all Iraqis as well as nationals of other states who h ave been
killed, kidnapped, raped, or tortured by ISIL, as well as its recruitment and use
of children. The Security Council stresses the need that those who have
committed or are otherwise responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law or violations or abuses of human rights in Iraq must be held
14-61338 (E)

190914

*1461338*

S/PRST/2014/20

accountable, noting that some of these acts may constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Security Council stresses the need for those
responsible for such violations of international humanitarian law or violations
or abuses of human rights to be held to account, and calls upon the
Government of Iraq and the international community to work towards ensuring
that all perpetrators are brought to justice.
“The Security Council welcomes the Government of Iraq’s efforts, in
association with local and regional authorities, to combat the terrorist threat
facing all Iraqis, including members of its ethnic and religious minorities,
notably Yezidis and Christians, and women from all communities who h ave
been particularly targeted by ISIL.
“The Security Council reaffirms that all parties, including ISIL,
associated armed groups, and other militias, must respect the human rights of
the Iraqi people and abide by all applicable obligations under interna tional
humanitarian law, including those protecting the civilian population, by which
both official Iraqi forces and member states that assist them must also abide.
“The Security Council also recognizes the steps taken to address the
urgent humanitarian needs of those displaced by the current conflict. The
Security Council calls for an intensification of these efforts by all parties and
urges all Member States to continue to fund the UN humanitarian appeals.
“The Security Council urges the international community, in accordance
with international law to further strengthen and expand support for the
Government of Iraq as it fights ISIL and associated armed groups. The
Security Council welcomes the “International Conference on Peace and
Security in Iraq” that took place in Paris on September 15, 2014 and the
summit-level meeting of the Security Council responding to the global threat
posed by foreign terrorist fighters that is scheduled for September 24.
“The Security Council stresses that terrorism can only be defeated by a
sustained and comprehensive approach involving the active participation and
collaboration of all States, as well as international and regional organizations,
to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist threat.
“The Security Council reiterates the urgent need to stop any direct or
indirect trade in oil from Iraq involving ISIL with the aim to put an end to
financing terrorism.
“The Security Council supports Iraq’s further economic, social, political
and diplomatic integration into the region and the international community and
calls upon regional states to engage more actively to facilitate this process.
The Security Council recognizes that the situation that now exists in Iraq is
significantly different from that which existed at the time of the adoption of
Resolution 661 (1990), and further recognizes the importance of Iraq
achieving international standing equal to that which it held prior to the
adoption of Resolution 661 (1990).
“The Security Council reiterates that no terrorist act can reverse the path
toward peace, democracy and reconstruction in Iraq, which is supported by the
people and the Government of Iraq, and by the international community.”

2/2

14-61338
