S/PV.8969

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8969th meeting

Friday, 18 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy/Mr. Kirpichenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2022/117)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26145 (E)
*2226145*

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

President Jovenel Moïse’s term would have officially
ended. While the publication of a revised electoral
calendar is still forthcoming, momentum does seem
to be building around an effort to form an inclusive,
credible and effective provisional electoral council that
would inspire confidence and trust among a critical
mass of national stakeholders.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2022/117)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/117, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: It is an honour to provide the Council
once again with an update on the situation in Haiti,
which remains fraught and highly polarized, despite
some signs of progress.
In the past month, Prime Minister Ariel Henry
has continued to engage with actors from across the
political spectrum to further enlarge consensus around
a single, unified vision that would lead to the restoration
of fully functional, democratically elected institutions.
Negotiations among proponents of competing transition
governance models have now reached the stage
where success will be determined by their collective
willingness to compromise. The contours of a common
vision shared by all will ultimately depend on Haitian
stakeholders placing the national interests above their
own aspirations and being flexible on the finer point of
the process.
The new Government unveiled on 24 November, the
most tangible result of those efforts to date, appears to
have somewhat appeased tensions, as evidenced by the
calm observed on 7 February, the day on which the late
2/15

18/02/2022

As we speak, gang violence continues to plunge
major urban centres into lawlessness and grief. Criminal
armed groups have a strong hold on the economic and
social lives of millions of children, women and men.
Their indiscriminate use of abduction and murder, as
well as sexual and gender-based violence, as a means to
terrorize local populations in the fight to extend their
territorial control is particularly abhorrent.
To stem that ever-growing wave of violent crime,
the Haitian National Police (HNP) has, with its
limited capacity, sought to improve the effectiveness
of its anti-gang operations, to adopt a more balanced
approach between prevention and repression and to
rely on an increased police presence in sensitive areas.
That approach has yielded modest temporary results in
zones such as Croix-des-Bouquets in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.
Yet an overstretched, understaffed and underresourced
police cannot, on its own, curtail the alarming rise
in gang-generated insecurity. To provide the HNP
with much-needed relief, the Government, Haiti’s
international partners and the United Nations have
jointly resolved to strengthen international support and
the coordination of assistance to the institution with a
view to ensuring its effective and structured long-term
development. In order to address the gaps that ail the
police, that newfound momentum — epitomized by the
imminent creation of a multi-donor basket fund — must
now translate into increased Government funding for
the force, as well as additional international financial
and technical support.
To be sure, the gang phenomenon cannot be
addressed through policing alone. A law-enforcement
approach that incorporates a greater control of the
illegal flow of weapons needs to be complemented by
socioeconomic projects and reintegration activities
aimed at generating employment and revenue in the
neighbourhoods most affected by the scourge of
gang violence.
The Haitian authorities have adopted a national
community violence reduction strategy premised on
such a holistic approach, and we commend their efforts
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

to ensure that it is swiftly and effectively implemented.
As a result of an initiative by the Ministry of Education,
several schools in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods
of Cité-Soleil and La Saline have been able to recently
reopen after years of closure, allowing thousands
of young people to resume their education. Those
successes offer hope that resolute and coordinated
Government actions will lead to the provision of
additional basic services in those communities as well
as to their extension to other areas. Our continued
support is crucial to the success of that effort.
Impunity represents another intractable phenomenon
that Haiti urgently needs to address. To date there has
been no progress in establishing accountability for
the 2020 assassination of Monferrier Dorval, the 2018
massacre in La Saline or the ones that occurred in BelAir in 2019 and 2020. Moreover, some seven months
after the ghastly assassination of President Moïse,
the national investigation into his murder has stalled,
a situation that fuels rumours and exacerbates both
suspicion and mistrust within the country.
The Haitian judicial system suffers from grave
structural weaknesses, as evidenced by the severe
challenges in renewing the terms of judges on time.
That cripples the ability of courts to investigate,
process and try cases. Modest signs of progress such as
the recent increase in the number of hearings held are
encouraging and should be supported. Nevertheless,
more action is needed to prepare for the entry into force
of the new penal and criminal procedure codes and to
ensure that reform in the judiciary can be sustained
over the long term.
The earthquake that destroyed parts of the southern
peninsula in August 2021 and killed 2,248 people
has added a new layer of complexity to an already
dire humanitarian situation. It is now estimated that
4.9 million people, or 43 per cent of the country’s
population, will be in need of humanitarian assistance
in 2022. Coming on the heels of a 21 January
ministerial-level meeting chaired by Canada, this
week’s international donors conference for the
reconstruction of the southern peninsula, which was
co-chaired by the Prime Minister and the Deputy
Secretary-General, who travelled to Haiti for the event,
provided an important opportunity to revitalize the
engagement of the international community in support
of Haiti and its population. I wish in that regard to
express our deep gratitude to Member States for having
collectively pledged some $600 million, which will

S/PV. 8969

serve to meet the initial needs outlined in the integrated
reconstruction plan.
Earlier this month, Haiti marked three consecutive
years without a laboratory-confirmed case of cholera.
That watershed moment, which represents a significant
step towards eliminating disease in Haiti, was
reached thanks to the strong leadership of the Haitian
authorities and the Haitian people, the unwavering
dedication of front-line workers throughout the country
and the partnership of the United Nations and so many
other bilateral and multilateral organizations. I truly
thank them.
While those collective efforts have succeeded,
overall the lack of impact and effectiveness of
development aid over many years in the country
requires us to collectively formulate a new approach,
one premised on a deeper coordination of international
efforts and a real partnership with the Haitian authorities
and Haitian actors.
For Haiti to emerge from the acute political and
institutional crisis in which is plunged, it is imperative
that all Haitian leaders resolve to engage constructively
with one another to steer the country towards a process
that will allow elections to occur. The international
community must also continue to engage with the
Haitian Government and other stakeholders not only
to support efforts to create the security and political
conditions necessary for the holding of national
elections but also to ensure that urgent structural
reforms are undertaken to tackle gang violence, address
impunity and corruption, strengthen the justice system
and transform the economy in a sustainable manner.
Now is not the time to let Haiti fall off the agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to those Council members wishing to
make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime for her briefing on
the situation in Haiti and for the tireless work done by
her and her team in Haiti. The United States commends
the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH) to help Haiti through this most
difficult period.
As the Secretary-General’s team conducts its
assessment of BINUH’s mandate, and as we look
forward to a renewal in July, the situation in Haiti
demonstrates just how vital the ongoing support of the

22-261453/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

18/02/2022

United Nations remains. Over the past two months,
the international community has demonstrated its
commitment to addressing Haiti’s security situation
as well as its political and economic challenges. In
December, the United States convened a senior-level
meeting with Haiti and its international partners. We
all agreed that concrete and rapid steps must be taken
to strengthen the Haitian National Police, and we all
agreed on the need for political dialogue among all
sectors of Haitian society. As members heard from
Special Representative of the Secretary-General La
Lime, that is essential to reaching agreement on a path
to free and fair elections when conditions permit.

We look forward to the release of the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment of the BINUH mandate in April.
We must build on our momentum to increase donor
coordination and cooperation and to support efforts to
improve the security situation in Haiti. BINUH serves
an essential and ongoing role in Haiti. Let us continue
to work together to provide the Haitian people with the
support that they need and deserve.

As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/117)
notes, Canada hosted a ministerial-level meeting on
Haiti in January, with 19 States and several multilateral
organizations in attendance. In a statement issued after
the meeting, Canada emphasized

The situation in Haiti could hardly be more
worrisome.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2022/117) and Ms. La Lime’s briefing leave no doubt
about the suffering of the Haitian people as a result of
the political, economic, humanitarian and human rights
crises facing them. At the same time, the resilience
of the Haitian people in the face of adversity and all
the efforts of United Nations personnel to fulfil their
mandate must be acknowledged.

“the importance of strengthening international support
and the coordination of international assistance”.
Just this week, the Haitian Government held a
reconstruction conference. We thank those countries
that participated and reiterate how crucial it is that
international contributions match Haiti’s critical needs.
All of those conferences and gatherings
demonstrate the international community’s concern for
and commitment to Haiti. Haiti does not stand alone.
The renewal of BINUH’s mandate will reaffirm our
shared commitment to stand with the Haitian people
as they work to address the ongoing political and
security crises.
There is much to be concerned about. Last
year’s gang activity grew rapidly. And as we heard
from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Haitians have been subjected to killings,
kidnappings, sexual violence and forced displacement.
Those responsible for these horrific acts must be held
accountable. The Haitian National Police requires
financial support; it requires equipment, training and
consistent leadership. That will ensure its continued
professionalization and strengthen its capacity to
tackle gangs and improve citizen security. But as the
Secretary-General’s report notes, policing alone cannot
tackle Haiti’s security problems. The international
community must continue broader efforts to support
the rule of law in Haiti. We must provide support not
just for law enforcement but also for the judiciary and
for community violence reduction initiatives to help
Haiti to create a functioning criminal justice system.
4/15

Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. La Lime for her briefing. We
welcome the representative of Haiti to today’s meeting
of the Security Council.

The security crisis in Haiti is alarming. In Portau-Prince, millions of people have suffered in one
way or another from violence caused by gangs that
control a significant part of the capital. Incidents of
sexual violence against women, girls and young men
are unacceptable. The displacement of thousands of
people by urban violence is truly serious, as is the
fragility and even the ineffectiveness of the Haitian
judicial system, which fails to provide justice for
victims, while subjecting prisoners awaiting trial to
deplorable conditions.
The multiple challenges facing Haiti require
comprehensive attention to the underlying root causes
of insecurity and violence, as well as tackling arms
trafficking, fighting corruption and building the rule
of law. Mexico will support the Haitian National Police
through training programmes on combating organized
crime, particularly anti-gang strategies, as well as
strengthening communities to try and build trust among
the population.
In addition, we believe that the formation of the
Provisional Electoral Council for the holding of free,
transparent and credible presidential and legislative
elections cannot be postponed. It is time for political
differences in Haiti, which are not few, to be resolved
at the ballot box.
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

A significant factor contributing to the humanitarian
crisis is the degradation of the environment, the
adverse effects of climate change and its impact on
food security — once again an undeniable example of
how environmental degradation exacerbates insecurity
and undermines peace. In that regard, Mexico will
implement the Sowing Life programme in Haiti, which
has been successful in our country and others and will
benefit more than 5,000 people in its first phase. That
project is in addition to the medical brigade deployed
last year, the more than 2,000 tons of food and medicines
sent and the graduate scholarship programme for
young Haitians.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) was the first special political mission
established under the Secretary-General’s peace and
security reform. My country recognizes that, given
Haiti’s multidimensional challenges, the BINUH
concept and mandate sought to address the root causes
that undermine stability and governance, and it has
made a significant contribution. However, resolution
2600 (2021), which we adopted unanimously last
year, requested that an assessment of the mission
be conducted. We trust that such an assessment will
provide concrete recommendations so that we, as
Council members, can take the necessary decisions to
render the United Nations presence in the country more
effective. It is indeed urgent that we do so.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative La Lime for her briefing.
Over the past four months, the crisis in Haiti has
continued to simmer. The internal political division
has further intensified. The constitutional referendum
and the presidential election are a long way off. Gang
violence remains rampant. The reform of the judicial
system has been slow, and economic difficulties and the
fiscal deficit have deteriorated, causing the widespread
concern of the international community and countries
of the region.
China calls on Haitian political leaders with a
heightened sense of urgency to earnestly assume the
responsibility of governing the country so that its people
can enjoy a decent and stable life at an early date.
A stable political structure is a prerequisite for the
resolution of the Haitian issue. It is ultimately up to the
Haitian people to resolve the issues facing the country.
Without a competent Government that is widely
recognized by its people, nothing else can be achieved.
All parties in Haiti should start an inclusive dialogue

S/PV. 8969

as soon as possible, reach an agreement on political
arrangements for the transitional period and find a
realistic and feasible electoral plan and timetable.
Gang violence remains the primary challenge to
the security situation in Haiti. We note with concern
that, over the past four months, kidnappings for
ransom have surged by 180 per cent year on year and
intentional homicides are up by 17 per cent year on
year. Solving gang violence requires treating both the
symptoms and the root causes. It is essential to improve
the professional capabilities of the police to protect
the safety of the people and effectively combat gang
activities. It is also crucial to cut off the channel for
gangs to illegally obtain weapons and funds and the
profit chain between the political forces and gangsters.
Alleviating the humanitarian crisis and stabilizing
the economic situation are urgent tasks facing Haiti.
More than 40 per cent of Haitians are in urgent need
of humanitarian aid. Some 4.4 million people face
food insecurity due to the impact of the earthquake
last August and 19,000 people have been displaced
by violence.
We take note of the international event for the
financing of the reconstruction of Haiti’s southern
peninsula held recently, and we hope that the
international community will continue to provide
humanitarian and economic assistance to Haiti.
At the same time, we should also note that Haiti has
not yet established an effective economic governance
system, resulting in the loss of massive tax revenues,
including customs duties, which greatly limits the
Government’s ability to provide basic public services.
Haiti must overcome the institutional barriers to
economic governance, which is a prerequisite for
sustainable development.
Last October, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2600 (2021), on the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH), requesting the Secretary-General to submit
an assessment report on the BINUH mandate to the
Security Council within six months. That provides an
important opportunity for us to review and reflect on
the work of the Office, update its mandate, based on the
changes on the ground and improve our assistance to the
Haitian people. Innovative ways should be explored to
help Haiti overcome systemic and structural obstacles
to peace and development, so that the Haitian people
will not miss out on peace and development once more.

22-261455/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

Over the years, the United Nations system
has provided Haiti with a considerable amount of
development assistance, but it has not had the desired
effect. Looking into the future, BINUH and the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
in Haiti should play a coordinating role to improve
communication among the Economic and Social
Council, UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank, among others, so as
to forge synergies.
China supports the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission in playing a greater role in the situation
in Haiti. The Security Council could invite the
Peacebuilding Commission to provide advice on
the situation in Haiti. Haiti is a member of the Latin
American and Caribbean family. Countries of the region
and regional organizations are the most knowledgeable
about Haiti’s national context and are in a prime position
to play a constructive role.
China supports the countries of the region and
regional organizations in playing a greater role
in promoting dialogue among the Haitian people.
We welcome the fact that countries concerned are
assisting Haiti in building police and judicial capacity
and combating drug and arms trafficking and illicit
financial flows. We also believe that countries of the
region should step up their efforts in those areas.
China stands ready to work with the members
of the Security Council and the parties concerned to
explore the best way to provide practical, effective
and sustainable support for Haiti, so that Haiti can
embark upon the road of independent development at
the earliest.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General La Lime and, through her, the
hard-working United Nations team in Haiti.
I would also like to welcome the representative of
Haiti to the Chamber today.
Unfortunately, the issues we are discussing
here today are not new for Haiti. As we have heard,
the suffering of the Haitian people continues at a
devastating level. I will focus on three areas today.
First, with regard to the continued deterioration
of the security situation in Haiti, the daily reality for
millions of Haitians is one of brutal gang violence
terrorizing the population, leading to fuel shortages,
the disruption of services, the stifling of humanitarian
relief, hunger, confinement, kidnappings and killings.
6/15

18/02/2022

Haitian women and girls are disproportionately affected
by the instability and violence. We are appalled at the
escalating sexual and gender-based violence, used as
an insidious tactic by gangs to control and instil fear in
the population.
The Haitian people deserve to see an end to impunity
for human rights violations and abuses and perpetrators
brought to justice. Instead, the consequences for those
who dare to draw attention to armed violence are
grave, as evidenced by the recent targeting and killing
of journalists and continued attacks on human rights
defenders. The climate of fear and intimidation created
by violence compounds the difficulties in addressing
the myriad of crises facing Haiti.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral outlined, it is critical that the security situation
improve. That would require prioritization and
resourcing for policing, including capacity-building
and confidence-building. Until then, Haitians across
the country will remain confined to their homes, unable
to fulfil their economic prospects or exercise their
political will.
Secondly, increased violence has exacerbated
vulnerability. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General noted, many are still reeling from
the devastating effects of the August earthquake.
More than 4 million Haitians face high levels of acute
food insecurity, while the economy is in free fall.
Without urgent assistance, the Haitian people will
continue to face desperate choices. We welcome this
week’s international conference in Port-au-Prince, at
which $600 million was raised. However, as Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed remarked during her
visit, significant humanitarian needs remain.
Without support, even more Haitians will make
heartbreaking calculations that a perilous journey
abroad is safer than staying at home. When they make
that journey, it is crucial that all be afforded their legal
protections under international refugee law. Safe, legal
and dignified channels for those escaping violence are
essential now more than ever before.
Ireland commends the resolve and dedication
shown by the humanitarian community to ensure
that aid reaches those who need it most. Ireland will
continue its consistent support to Haiti in the provision
of humanitarian, reconstruction and development
assistance. However, what Haitians really need is a
path to political stability, creating the conditions for
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

economic recovery and sustainable development. That
brings me to my final point.
National consensus is the only means by which the
political deadlock in Haiti can be broken. As we have
said previously, that consensus must be built on wide,
inclusive, participatory engagement, including with
civil society representatives. Durable solutions are also
required to guarantee safety and security for all those
who engage politically, in particular for women, so as
to ensure their full, equal and meaningful participation.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment
of Mr. Mourad Wahba to lead the assessment of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) and look forward to his report. Given
the enormous scale of the challenges facing Haiti, it is
right that we reflect on how the United Nations can best
support the Haitian people. The needs and aspirations
of Haitians must lead our consideration of the future
mandate for BINUH. That means looking at how we
can help bring stability and security to their daily lives,
capacity-building and supporting good governance,
while helping to fight impunity and protecting
human rights.
The international community has a responsibility
to stand with the Haitian people. Now is the time for the
United Nations not to step away, but rather to step up in
support of Haitian-led efforts to forge a path forward.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for
briefing us today and for her team’s hard work.
Last year, Haiti faced multiple crises that would
have shaken the core of any country. The handling of
those crises and much-needed sustainable development
in Haiti cannot be achieved without restoring
confidence in the political and judiciary system, based
on the rule of law. All political actors must commit to
an inclusive dialogue to resolve the current political
impasse and, as soon as feasible, organize new and
legitimate elections. An inclusive process, including
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
must continue if a Haitian solution to the political
situation is to be found. That situation could benefit
from a stronger international engagement with and in
Haiti, including a stronger United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH).
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/117), human rights violations and abuses,
associated with the armed violence in Port-au-Prince,

S/PV. 8969

are alarming and must be urgently addressed. In
particular, the reported use of sexual violence and
rape by criminal gangs, as a weapon to terrorize and
assert control, must stop. The gang violence continues
to displace affected populations. Women and children
make up the majority of those displaced. People with
disabilities are at particular risk. Norway calls upon the
authorities to do more to protect their citizens, ensure
that humanitarian workers have unhindered access and
swiftly implement the national community violence
reduction strategy.
The underlying root causes that have led to
today’s demanding situation for the Haitian people
must be addressed. Close coordination is key if we
are to succeed in our efforts to support more positive
developments in Haiti. We were pleased this week that
the Haitian Government and the United Nations were
able to mobilize a contribution from the international
community of $600 million for the post-earthquake
reconstruction of areas in the southern peninsula.
The world will continue to face increasingly
powerful hurricanes and the impact of climate change,
which will contribute to increased humanitarian
needs. We must do more to assist those countries that
are most affected. Haiti is clearly one of them. One
area of particular importance is building capacity to
implement the National Risk and Disaster Management
Plan 2019-2030.
Norway looks forward to the assessment of the
BINUH mandate. The assessment must be transparent
and based on an inclusive process with all partners,
including members of civil society. We need a reinforced
BINUH that is fit for purpose and ready to take on the
challenges on the ground. This is not the time for less
international engagement with and in Haiti. BINUH
and the United Nations have an even more critical role
to play in creating a more stable and prosperous future
for Haiti.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Helen La Lime for her comprehensive briefing. I also
welcome the presence of the representative of Haiti at
today’s meeting.
As we have seen in the past decade, recovery
from the multidimensional challenges in Haiti has
never been easy. The resilience of the people of Haiti
has been tested repeatedly by unpredictable political
developments and tragic natural calamities. Last year,
Haiti faced challenges on both fronts. The assassination

22-261457/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

of the President in July 2021, the devastating highmagnitude earthquake and the hurricane the following
August have all exacerbated the humanitarian crisis.
Since our previous meeting in October 2021
(see S/PV.8871), the political and security situation
has also remained volatile and tense. While Haiti’s
politics remain polarized, its leaders have been making
welcome efforts towards achieving consensus on the
political future of the country. In the current scenario,
dialogue among all political actors is the best possible
solution. The Haitian authorities have huge tasks ahead,
including the restoration of functional democratic
institutions, security and the rule of law.
We welcome the Prime Minister’s reiteration
last month of his commitment to dialogue with all
stakeholders, including the Commission for a Haitian
Solution to the Crisis, known as the Montana Group.
We take note of his statement that the next Head of State
will be chosen through democratic elections. It is critical
that we support those initiatives and encourage building
consensus on the transition, the constitution-making
process and the holding of elections.
The restoration of law and order has remained one
of the greatest impediments in Haiti. The persisting
gang-related violence, mainly in the capital, Port-auPrince, has further contributed to increasing insecurity,
on which the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral elaborated, as well. The capacity-building
of the Haitian National Police, coupled with other
initiatives, including prosecution and judicial reforms
to strengthen law and order, will be important. We
welcome the efforts being undertaken in that direction.
Despite the various challenges, the Peacebuilding
Fund projects related to community violence reduction
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
including
capacity-building
for
the
National
Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration, are progressing positively. We need
more such activities and initiatives under the auspices
of the Peacebuilding Fund in Haiti.
In conclusion, we look forward to the independent
evaluation of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH), expected in April, which will outline
the way forward. India has been extending assistance
to Haiti in times of need, commencing with the 2010
earthquake rebuilding efforts. We also extended
emergency financial aid to Haiti in the aftermath of
Hurricane Matthew in October 2016. Most recently,
during the coronavirus disease pandemic, we have
8/15

18/02/2022

donated essential life-saving medicines. India reiterates
its commitment to supporting the people of Haiti in
these challenging times and welcomes the constructive
work of BINUH.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Ms La Lime, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her briefing, and I also
welcome the presence of the representative of Haiti
among us.
Haiti is currently experiencing an extremely
serious crisis on several fronts. The political class is
being undermined by divisions and most institutions
are undergoing severe difficulties. Criminal groups
are terrorizing the population, and Haiti has barely
recovered from the August 2021 earthquake. The
situation is urgent. The Haitian authorities and the
international community must act.
I will address four points.
First, only dialogue can lift Haiti out of the current
political crisis. I therefore welcome the formation of
an inclusive Government in November 2021, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Ariel Henry. I call on all
political actors to build the consensus necessary for
the holding of elections by the end of the year. In order
to ensure their success, it is urgent to establish a new
Provisional Electoral Committee acceptable to all.
Secondly, gang violence must be stopped. These
criminal groups are committing an increasing
number of homicides and kidnappings with total
impunity. They are challenging the State’s authority
and plundering its resources, and the situation is
untenable. In the absence of security, neither elections
or socioeconomic development are possible. Priority
must therefore be given to devoting increased resources
to the Haitian National Police, which, of course, must
be irreproachable. France has stepped up its security
cooperation in combating criminal groups, and the
international support that was manifest at the 21 January
ministerial meeting, hosted by Canada, is an absolutely
positive sign in that regard.
Thirdly, we must return to the normal functioning
of institutions. Let us squarely look at the situation. The
Haitian judicial system is currently in disarray. Haiti
must complete its investigation into the assassination of
President Jovenel Moïse. Like widespread corruption,
impunity undermines confidence in the State and
destroys the social bond.
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

My last point is that the humanitarian situation
in Haiti is alarming. The August 2021 earthquake
aggravated an already precarious situation. Nearly
half of the Haitian population is currently in need of
humanitarian aid. There is therefore an urgent need to
strengthen humanitarian support, in particular food
aid. In 2022, France will contribute up to €6.5 million
to the humanitarian response plan in Haiti, and, at the
16 February donor conference, France announced that
the French Development Agency will contribute up to
€4.9 million for financing projects.
Before concluding, I wish to refer to the outstanding
work that the United Nations is doing in Haiti in an
extremely difficult context. The United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti is undergoing an assessment,
the results of which we are eagerly awaiting. Maintaining
a robust United Nations presence in Haiti is imperative,
particularly in the political and security arenas.
Haiti is a country that is a friend of France. Beginning
with a shared language, long-standing ties unite us,
and I take this opportunity to commend the work of
the International Organization of La Francophonie on
the ground. Together with the European Union, France
stands with the Haitians to help them find a way out of
the crisis that the country so desperately needs.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): The situation in Haiti
continues to be marked by instability and a persisting
crisis, with far-reaching consequences. Violence
remains widespread. Corruption is endemic. The
overall crime rate and the culture of impunity are
simply shocking. Haitians are being hit hard by the
deteriorating economic situation, which affects their
daily life and access to basic services.
Let me highlight the following key points.
First, addressing the widespread insecurity in
the country remains vital. Gangs and lawlessness
constitute a gangrene; they erode confidence, they
paralyse institutions and, as they are fed by chaos, they
generate more of the same. Therefore, restoring the
State’s authority is of critical importance — the starting
point for any meaningful projection of a path towards
normality. In that respect, every effort should be made
to further strengthen the Haitian National Police,
but, as we know, fighting crime and violence cannot
be successful without fighting endemic corruption.
Therefore, tailor-made assistance is needed to facilitate
judicial reforms to fight corruption and end the culture
of impunity that fuels it.

S/PV. 8969

Secondly, Haiti will not emerge from the vortex
of multiple crises without a clear and legitimate
path towards democracy. We welcome efforts by the
Haitian Government to foster unity among political
stakeholders in order to pave the way towards elections
and constitutional reform. We take note of the continued
outreach by Prime Minister Ariel Henry, including
with supporters of the Commission for a Haitian
Solution to the Crisis, known as the Montana Group,
several political groups, trade unions, the private sector
and civil society, to discuss the political situation in
the country.
The solution lies in inclusive national dialogue
with the involvement of all political, business and civil
society stakeholders. The international community
can and should help, but the resolution of the crisis is
in the hands of the Haitians themselves. Preparations
for elections must be accelerated. Inclusive, peaceful,
free, fair, transparent and credible elections must
be organized with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and the involvement of the civil
society actors, who, as we know, play an important
role in ensuring that the elections will be credible.
Credible elections restore legitimacy; they help create
functioning institutions to engage in vital reforms. It is
the first important step for the Haitian political class to
renew with the trust of people.
Thirdly, the international community has been
actively involved in Haiti, despite contrasting results,
but this should not lead to donor’s fatigue. We welcome
the outcome of the international donor conference in
support of relief efforts for the earthquake in 2021. The
important commitments made will help Haiti rebuild
after the massive destruction of the southern part of
the country. In this respect, everything must be done to
meet the humanitarian needs of all those in need.
Fourthly and lastly, we strongly support the work of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
and call on the Haitian authorities to work with the
mission and other United Nations actors to bring about
the urgent reforms the country needs in order to improve
political stability and good governance and create a
safer, democratic, just and more prosperous country.
We support in general the regular assessment of
peace operations to make sure that they stay relevant,
focused on the tasks and challenges at hand, and remain
effective and efficient. Therefore, we look forward to
the strategic assessment of BINUH in order to further
strengthen the Mission.

22-261459/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

We also need to hear more and directly from those
affected, from women and human rights defenders, in
order to make fully informed decisions.
Despite the grim situation, we cannot let fear and
uncertainty overshadow hope. We stand by Haiti and
Haitians in their struggle to face the challenges of the
current crisis.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Helen La Lime for her presentation and
welcome His Excellency Mr. Antonio Rodrigue,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
Witnessing the profound challenges that Haiti is
experiencing today, we would do well to remember
that it has overcome even greater odds in its turbulent
history. It is the first free nation to have been established
by slaves, who fiercely cast off their chains to inherit
what had been the richest colonial holding in the world.
Its heroic insistence on freedom and dignity marked a
resounding defeat of false racist hierarchies that had
fed the cruel and evil enterprise of slavery.
Humankind and all people of good conscience owe
Haiti the debt of high regard. We recall that history to
remember that liberation has a cost and that all free
peoples should recognize that sacrifice by honouring
and uplifting the descendants of those who have gifted
us liberty.
Haiti has rarely been allowed to overcome the
legacy of its glorious revolution, which defeated some of
the greatest military Powers of the eighteenth century.
It was blockaded and forced to pay onerous, prosperitydestroying reparations. It was also colonized. The
Haitian people have seemed to be punished from the
day their forefathers announced their freedom until the
recent past.
When we Africans look westwards, we see in
Haiti a shining beacon of our claim to equality and
our unrelenting demand for respect and dignity. We
stand with the people of Haiti and their enduring quest
to enjoy the prosperity and peace that should be the
product of liberty.
Our task today is to engage here in the Security
Council and in every forum to support the recovery
of Haiti’s security, its competent and democratic
10/15

18/02/2022

Government, and its securing of shared prosperity. We
do so in support of Haitian-owned and -led initiatives
to recover peace and security as foundations for
economic development.
The A3 highlight five key issues, namely, the
political situation, security, the rule of law, the economic
and humanitarian situations and the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
On the political situation, the A3 is concerned that
the continued polarization and divergences among
members of the political class has undermined progress
on an agreed way forward. We urge Haiti’s political
leadership, its professionals and members of civil
society to show they have the will to compromise in
forging a strong constitutional model and, linked to this,
to deliver credible elections that produce an inclusive
and competent Government. Africa has a strong
understanding of forging agreements in complex and
embattled circumstances. We urge them to make use of
Africa’s experiences and to be open to African efforts
to share them. We equally urge the African Union and
African States to seek to share our knowledge and good
offices with the people of Haiti in this moment of need.
The Constitutive Act of the African Union recognizes
the sixth region, which Haiti is part of; if we are to live
up to the role we must play for this region, then this is
the moment.
The A3 is deeply concerned by the worsening
security situation. We take note of the recent changes
undertaken in the police force, but much more needs to
be done as the force faces multiple challenges, including
the lack of appropriate equipment and expertise and low
morale. We welcome the ongoing efforts of BINUH and
other partners to strengthen the capacity of the Haitian
National Police, with a particular focus on anti-gang
operations. We urge the redoubling of these efforts
and the need for coordination and synergy between the
Haitian authorities and all partners.
We underscore the need to incorporate into the
support packages specialized training for the protection
of women and girls from sexual and gender-based
abuses. This should include the establishment of
mechanisms for the provision of psychosocial support,
especially to victims of such abuse.
To restore the rule of law, Haiti needs to resuscitate
the justice system. We encourage the Haitian authorities
to undertake comprehensive justice sector reforms with
the aim of addressing prolonged pretrial detentions,
the establishment of legal aid offices, the expediting of
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

court cases and the establishment of functioning court
registries. These measures are key to fighting impunity
and ensuring that those responsible for the perpetration
of emblematic crimes, including the assassination of
President Jovenel Moïse, are brought to justice.
It is critical that the link between politics, gangs
and illicit financial flows be broken. We urge the
Security Council and the international community
to crack down on transnational crime and moneylaundering, which incentivize the continuing influence
of criminal cartels on the political life of Haiti. There
should be no shelter anywhere for the criminal groups
and individuals preying on the people of Haiti.
With pervasive insecurity, political instability and
governance challenges compounded by global supply
shortages and natural disasters, Haiti’s economic
situation is in deep distress. The resultant high levels of
unemployment and limited social service delivery are
pushing many deeper into poverty and worsening the
humanitarian situation.
There is an urgent need to address the root causes
of poverty and precariousness in order to enable
sustainable reconstruction in Haiti. The country
continues to lose the precious manpower it needs for its
reconstruction. Young Haitians are leaving the country
by the thousands to flee a daily life that has become
unliveable owing to a lack of future prospects.
The A3 thanks multilateral and bilateral actors,
as well as non-governmental organizations, for their
actions to meet some of these humanitarian needs. We
also thank all those who participated in the 16 February
high-level international event for the reconstruction and
recovery of the southern peninsula of Haiti, following
the devastating earthquake on 14 August and Tropical
Storm Grace on 17 August last year.
We note that Haiti has received $14 billion in the
form of international support, including $7 billion from
the United Nations since 2004. The bulk of that aid
has been aimed at the emergency response. While that
is needed and understandable, the A3 calls for added
assistance to food security, infrastructure development,
justice and security sector reform, education and
disaster risk management.
The A3 reaffirm our support for the work of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti. We are keen
for its mandate to be reviewed so that it can provide
better support. We therefore welcome the appointment
of Mr. Mourad Wahba as the lead expert to carry out an

S/PV. 8969

independent strategic assessment of BINUH’s mandate.
We encourage him to consult widely and look forward
to considering his report and recommendations.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm our solidarity
with the great people of Haiti and our belief in their
resilience and ingenuity. A reborn, resurgent Haiti
can be won today through more determined efforts
by Haitian leaders in politics and civil society if they
determine that their obligations are greater than their
narrow interests.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Ms. Helen La Lime,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, for her valuable briefing, and I welcome the
representative of Haiti to this meeting.
The past months have been trying times for Haiti.
Recently hit by natural disasters, violence continues to
rise across the country and political differences remains,
in turn exacerbating the humanitarian, security and
political situation. The United Arab Emirates expresses
its total rejection of all acts of armed gang violence,
as they undermine peace efforts. Serious measures at
all levels are required to restore peace and stability,
including by strengthening and respecting the rule
of law.
The United Arab Emirates would like to highlight
three potential focus areas to support Haiti’s path
towards stability and prosperity.
First, inclusion is fundamental to success. It
is critical to broaden political representation and
inclusivity of all segments of Haitian society. We call
on all stakeholders to remain committed to constructive
dialogue and efforts to achieve national unity. In order
for those efforts to be sustainable, they must also
include the full, equal and meaningful participation
of Haitian women. Programmes focusing on women’s
participation and protection from violence, such as
those highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/117), can provide the necessary support to
ensure women’s political participation and protection.
Secondly, it is necessary to build the capacity of
national and local institutions to strengthen their role in
addressing the ongoing challenges, particularly in the
light of increased instability. We stress the importance
of continuing to strengthen the security sector during
the transitional process, in addition to addressing
increased violence from the activity of armed gangs

22-2614511/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

and combating corruption. We also stress the need for a
clear approach and support for the judicial sector.
Finally, a reduction of community violence requires
durable solutions, including through development
and humanitarian efforts. In that regard, recovery
and reconstruction programmes, such as communityled development initiatives, must continue to support
sustainable efforts in Haiti. Community violence
is amplified by the lack of opportunities, limiting
the ability to improve livelihoods and the success
of humanitarian response efforts. We believe that
the recent international conference on the southern
peninsula will support reconstruction efforts in Haiti,
and we look forward to continuing support in Haiti, as
it contributes to the stability of the country.
In conclusion, we await the upcoming independent
strategic assessment report. We welcome the
appointment of Mr. Wahba and appreciate his efforts.
We reiterate, however, that a coherent Haiti-led and
-owned response to the situation in Haiti is the key
for the nation’s security and prosperity. The United
Arab Emirates continues to stand in solidarity with the
Haitian people and reaffirms its support for the work of
the United Nations in its efforts to help achieve peace
and stability.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to convey
my appreciation to Special Representative Helen La
Lime for her comprehensive briefing. I also welcome
the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador
Antonio Rodrigue.
It is fitting to take the floor to comment on recent
developments in Haiti and on the current work of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
Brazil’s commitment to Haiti is unwavering. It is not
an overstatement to say that Haiti is extremely close
to Brazilian hearts. Our long-term involvement in
international efforts to help Haiti and our openness
to receive Haitians in vulnerable situation are proof
of that.
During the time that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti was in place, we deployed
tens of thousands of blue helmets, as well as the Force
Commander to the peacekeeping operation, throughout
the 13 consecutive years of the Mission.
Today we have once again received a bleak and
disconcerting report, notwithstanding some bright
spots. Such a dire situation compels us to collectively
reflect on what we need to do differently and to think
12/15

18/02/2022

creatively so that the international community can
truly start making a significant impact in improving
the situation on the ground. From our perspective, we
consider that the United Nations presence in Haiti has to
be reassessed and re-engineered with a comprehensive
and integrated approach that takes into account the
economic, political and social dimensions of the crisis.
Haiti has to break the perverse, reinforcing cycle
of poverty, criminality and political violence. That can
only be achieved through a system-wide strategy that
enables enhanced cooperation between the Council
and other United Nations entities primarily responsible
for economic and social development. In that context,
we may wish to explore mechanisms to strengthen
cooperation and coordination with the Economic
and Social Council and even with the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to benefit from its bridging role,
as mentioned by the representatives of China and
India. The Peacebuilding Commission was created
precisely to fill a gap in the United Nations system,
with the mission to act as a catalyst to support efforts
in consolidating peace and promoting development in
countries emerging from conflict.
It is unavoidable that we embark on an in-depth
discussion on BINUH’s mandate, scheduled for renewal
in July. We are therefore looking forward to receiving
the Secretary-General’s recommendations, to be issued
in April, after the independent evaluation in progress
is concluded.
Regarding the current political situation in Haiti,
we hope that the Government will be successful in
bringing the main political forces together over a
plan to reconstruct the political institutions of the
country, a necessary step for elections to safely take
place. There will be no solution to this multifaceted
crisis if a broad political consensus does not emerge
among all stakeholders, which would allow for the
return of institutional normalcy to Haiti. In that regard,
we welcome and encourage the Prime Minister’s
efforts to build consensus on the path forward in an
inclusive manner.
We welcome the renewed impetus and strengthened
international coordination for providing international
cooperation in key areas for Haiti’s development, such
as providing the Haitian police equipment and human
resources and helping to fund the reconstruction
of Haitian infrastructure. In that regard, Brazil
committed funds for the reconstruction of Haitian
infrastructure affected by last year’s earthquake
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

during the International Event for the Financing of
the Reconstruction of the Southern Peninsula of Haiti,
held two days ago. We are confident that we can curb
the multidimensional Haitian crisis with the decisive
leadership of the Haitian people and the help of the
international community.
In conclusion, let me remind my fellow Council
members of the fundamental United Nations principle
to leave no one behind, which I am sure we will be able
to uphold when evaluating our next steps regarding the
Haitian crisis. I reassure our friends in Haiti that Brazil
is not oblivious to their suffering and that they may
count on our continued support and solidarity.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative La Lime for her briefing
this morning and for all the work she and her team
are doing.
I would like to make three brief points today.
First, the complex security, health and economic
challenges currently faced by Haiti can be resolved only
by unified support for Haitian-led solutions. In that
regard, the United Kingdom remains firm in its belief
that support to the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) remains critical, especially with regard
to the mission’s ongoing efforts to facilitate a unified
approach to those multifaceted challenges. We look
forward to the independent assessment of BINUH’s
mandate as we approach its renewal in July.
Secondly, the persistent political gridlock is deeply
troubling, as is the continued impact it is having on
the Haitian people. We encourage efforts under way
to secure political consensus for a pathway to free,
fair and credible elections and for all sides to work
constructively in support of a peaceful, democratic
solution for the Haitian people. It is incumbent upon all
of us, as Haiti’s international partners, to do likewise in
supporting a Haitian-led solution.
Thirdly, we are concerned by the deteriorating
security and human rights situation, particularly the
increase in kidnappings, indiscriminate criminal
violence and instances of human trafficking. The United
Kingdom will continue to support work with both the
Government of Haiti and the international community
to address those challenges. Criminal armed groups and
perpetrators of human rights abuses not only jeopardize
the lives of Haitians, but risk undermining the prospect
of real political progress.

S/PV. 8969

The assassination of President Moïse was an
abhorrent act and we maintain our call for the
perpetrators of that crime to be brought to justice.
We remain deeply worried by the humanitarian
situation in the country. The coronavirus disease has
compounded economic and health threats, which were
exacerbated further by the devastating earthquake
last year. That has particularly impacted women and
children, increasing their vulnerabilities and the threats
to their economic and health welfare. We therefore
welcome the outcome of the donor conference this week.
Finally, the United Kingdom encourages all actors
to work constructively and cooperatively with the
Haitian authorities to find solutions to the root causes
of those crises and to support the development and
advancement of the Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her briefing
on the situation in the country and the work of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti.
Over many months, tensions in Haiti have escalated
and are a source of grave concern. We are convinced that
the root cause of such tensions is the lack of progress
in the internal dialogue between political forces and
society, which has led to the de facto paralysis of the
legislative branch. That, in turn, has affected the State’s
ability to effectively address urgent day-to-day tasks,
above all guaranteeing the safety of the population. As
a result, criminal elements have become increasingly
active, and the situation as a whole has been compounded
by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Today, Haiti is in a state of profound crisis, marked
by rising political instability, criminal gang activity,
civil unrest and sever economic, energy, migration
and humanitarian problems. There is a power vacuum
at all levels, with Government structures that lack
authority, a paralysed judicial system and ineffective
law enforcement agencies.
We are witnessing the efforts of Prime Minister
Ariel Henry’s Government to try to reach a compromise
between the various social forces to stabilize the
situation in the country and launch reform processes.
However, it is premature to talk about progress.

22-2614513/15

S/PV.8969

The question concerning Haiti

Against that backdrop, we are also seeing alarming
reports that Haiti is being flooded with small arms,
which, as we know, are not manufactured in the
country. The only possible way for those small arms
to enter the country is through seaports, over which
the Government must regain full control. Otherwise,
the issue of rampant gang activity will transform from
one of a range of security threats into a political factor,
which will be impossible to ignore.
We note with regret the lack of significant
progress in the investigation into the assassination of
President Jovenel Moïse in July last year. There are also
concerning reports of possible foreign involvement in
that crime, which the United Nations Secretary-General
rightly referred to as an attack on democracy. Those
responsible must be duly punished.
The complex of problems that have accumulated
in Haiti must be resolved urgently, starting with the
principal issue, namely, political stabilization. That can
be achieved only through dialogue based on existing
legislation, which must lead to elections and increased
trust and support from the general public. If that is does
not occur, the country will run the risk of falling into
an abyss, and reconstruction and development will be
delayed for many years.
We encourage Haitians to swiftly engage in an
internal dialogue to find a solution to the crisis. The
United Nations mission must not only assist in that
regard, but also make such a dialogue an absolute
priority. Port-au-Prince needs responsible international
assistance in order to prevent further divisions within
Haitian society and allowing the situation to spiral into
a regional humanitarian crisis.
Russia, together with its colleagues in the
Security Council, will continue to work to ensure
that international assistance provided through the
United Nations results in a genuine normalization of
the situation in Haiti, strengthening the country’s
sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): I am
delighted to have the opportunity to address the
Security Council today as it considers the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) (S/2022/117), pursuant to
resolutions 2476 (2019), establishing BINUH, and 2600
(2021), renewing its mandate until 15 July 2022.
14/15

18/02/2022

However, before I begin my statement, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February.
I wish you and the other members of the Council
every success in the important task of ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her enlightening
briefing on developments in the situation in Haiti and
on the events that have taken placed since the previous
report (S/2021/828) was issued, including progress
made and the challenges that lie ahead.
I also listened carefully to the statements made
by the members of the Council and taken note of their
observations and pertinent remarks. On behalf of Prime
Minister Ariel Henry, allow me to thank the Council
for its attention to the situation in my country, which is
just one of many in various parts of the world that are
undergoing crises.
I wish to take this opportunity to once again
convey the gratitude of the Haitian people for the wave
of solidarity shown by the international community last
Wednesday, which allowed us to mobilize $600 million
by way of pledges for the reconstruction of Haiti’s
southern peninsula, which was dealt a heavy blow last
year by a devastating earthquake.
As members are no doubt aware, the current situation
in my country is marked by the dysfunction of all of our
democratic institutions; we need to get those back on
track. The heinous assassination of the President of the
Republic only made things worse. Our judicial system
is weak and has not proved capable of shedding light on
that tragedy at a time when the Government is calling
for justice to be done for the President and his family.
We no longer have a Parliament capable of playing the
role assigned to the legislative branch.
It is imperative to work to resume as quickly as
possible the smooth functioning of our institutions;
that is a prerequisite for the return of lasting peace and
stability to the country. The Government is working
tirelessly to build sufficient consensus to put the
country once again on the path towards democracy.
Since Prime Minister Ariel Henry took office as the
Head of Government, he has been anxious to meet with
all sectors of Haitian society to reach agreement on
peaceful and effective governance during the interim
period. Within the framework of that agreement, he
succeeded in bringing together political opponents
who, a few months ago, were bitter rivals; civil-society
22-26145

18/02/2022

The question concerning Haiti

actors; and a wealth of grass-roots organizations.
Today he continues to seek to broaden the consensus
by continuing dialogue with all Haitian citizens who
agree to grasp the hand of brotherly friendship that he
is holding out to them.
We are looking to put in place the structures vital
to organizing a people’s vote for the adoption of a
new constitution and the convening of free, fair and
democratic general elections. The Government has
established a timeline of activities, which, if all goes
well, should allow the reins of power to be handed
over to officials elected by the Haitian people at the
beginning of next year.
However, there is a major constraint that poses
a serious threat to the whole process. I refer here to
insecurity, which may destroy all efforts made to date.
Armed gangs are sowing terror in several regions of the
country and in various neighbourhoods of the capital.
It is inconceivable to contemplate the convening of
elections without having first restored order and State
Authority throughout the national territory. That is a
pressing demand on the part of the whole of the Haitian
population as well as a Government commitment.
To date the Haitian National Police, with its scant
resources, has garnered some success. Schools which
were no longer able to function in neighbourhoods
controlled by gangs have reopened their doors and
now welcome thousands of children. Oil terminals
which had been blocked by gang members for several
weeks are once again operational. The list of successes
could be longer, but we must recognize that a great
deal remains to be done to allow normality to return.
Suppression alone is not enough. Every time the
police retakes control of a neighbourhood, it is vital
to mobilize all resources necessary to allow the State
to once again provide basic services to the people. We
require increased support for the specialized agencies
of the National Police.

S/PV. 8969

The Government is resolved, and our police officers
are determined, to hunt down gang members and to take
them off the streets. However, they are extremely short
of weapons, ammunition and appropriate equipment,
which the restrictive measures currently in force are
preventing us from obtaining. Our police officers also
require training and tailored support to allow them to
effectively confront the situation in the country.
In that regard, we have with interest followed the
assessment called for by the Council of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
We hope that BINUH can be better tailored to the new
realities in the country, including the deterioration of
the security situation, with the violence perpetrated
by armed gangs. For too long, my country has been
weathering this chronic instability, which disrupts
the economic life of the country, hinders investment,
discourages tourism, keeps the people in abject poverty
and pushes young people towards illegal immigration.
We need to return hope to all and offer prospects of
a better future. Without an improvement in the living
conditions of the people, without massive investment,
without the creation of stable, well-paid jobs, our
efforts will be in vain. My Government is determined
to create such a stable and safe climate, which is vital
for a lasting normalization of the situation. Here we
also need the support of friendly countries.
In conclusion, I hope that the international solidarity
noted last Wednesday with respect to the reconstruction
of the southern peninsula will once again be shown so
as to allow for the restoration of security. Once again,
I thank the Council for devoting time to an analysis of
the situation in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

22-2614515/15
