S/PV.7389

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7389th meeting

Monday, 23 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Yi/Mr. Wang Min/Mr. Cai Weiming .. . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Linkevičius
Mr. Aman
Mr. McCully
Mr. Wali
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ybañez
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mrs. Rodríguez Gómez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Reflect on history, reaffirm the strong commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations
Letter dated 3 February 2015 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/87)

15-04838 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504838*

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Reflect on history, reaffirm the strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations
Letter dated 3 February 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/87)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General and the
ministers and other representatives who are present
in the Chamber. Their participation in this debate
reaffirms the importance of the subject matter under
discussion today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

2/103

23/02/2015

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/87, which contains a letter dated
3 February 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the People’s
Republic of China for organizing today’s discussion
on reaffirming commitment to the Charter in this year,
in which the United Nations marks 70 years since its
founding. The seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations finds an Organization with major achievements
to its credit, multiple crises on its agenda, and
tremendous opportunities ahead. The United Nations
was founded to prevent another world war, and it has
succeeded in that. Despite the recurrence of genocide
and repeated outbreaks of armed conflict, the past
seven decades would surely have been even bloodier
without the United Nations.
Peoples’ lives are better in other ways, too. In most
parts of the world, people are living longer, healthier
lives. The empowerment of women, the advancement
of international law and the spread of democratic
governance have helped to improve our collective wellbeing. The world is starkly different than when the
Charter’s drafters gathered in San Francisco in 1945.
The membership of the United Nations has nearly
quadrupled. New Powers have emerged. Globalization,
urbanization,
migration,
demographic
shifts,
technological advances, climate change and other
seismic developments continue to remake our societies
and transform international relations.
Yet the aspirations of “we the peoples” enshrined
in the Charter remain just as valid, valuable and vital.
The Charter is a living document, not a detailed road
map. It is our compass, enshrining principles that have
stood the test of time. At the heart of the Charter is
a commitment to the prevention of armed conflict
through the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
protection of human rights. Collective security is the
core purpose of the Organization. Unlike in 1945,
however, we no longer have a full meeting of minds
on what that means. We need to reflect on what has
changed, and fortify our sense of unity. Decades of
preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding — gains and setbacks alike — have
helped us to sharpen our efforts to promote peace and

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

head off brewing crises before they become deadlier
and costlier for all concerned.
The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
lies with Member States. The Charter is very clear on
this point, yet in too many instances Member States are
still falling short. Our shared work is based on consent
and respect for the sovereign equality of all Members
of the United Nations, which the Charter recognizes as
a basic principle. Early action to prevent conflict and
protect human rights helps to strengthen sovereignty,
rather than challenge or restrict it. We must ask
whether, for example, earlier efforts to address human
rights violations and political grievances in Syria could
have kept the situation from escalating so horrendously.
A major obstacle to United Nations human rights
action has been a concern among Member States that
such action may harm national sovereignty. In reality,
it is serious violations of human rights that weaken
sovereignty. Such abuses kill and displace people,
divide communities, undermine economies and
destroy cultural heritage. They silence the Government
officials, parliamentarians, civil servants, judges and
others who lead national institutions that are essential
to sovereignty.
The primary goal of United Nations action on
human rights is to support all these actors. Doing so is,
most fundamentally, a support to national sovereignty.
A conceptual shift in how we understand United
Nations human rights action could have a positive
and, indeed, transformational effect on the role of the
Security Council in peace and security. We must be
willing to act before situations deteriorate. This is both
a moral responsibility and critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We cannot afford
to be indifferent.
Let us also recognize that the exercise of sovereignty
brings with it important responsibilities. Governments
earn, sustain and strengthen their sovereignty by being
accountable to their people, upholding human rights,
ensuring the rule of law and practicing inclusive
governance. Moreover, governing responsibly is not
just a domestic challenge; it means recognizing our
interconnectedness and being a good regional and
global citizen.
On so many issues, from climate change to commerce
and communications, from environmental degradation
to public health, the distinctions between the national
and the international are falling away. Terrorism and

S/PV.7389

extremism have emerged as serious transnational
threats. At last Thursday’s Washington, D.C., meeting
on violent extremism, I highlighted the need to
respond decisively and to combat extremism without
multiplying the problem and with full respect for
human rights. Sovereignty remains part of the bedrock
of international order, but in today’s world the less
sovereignty is viewed as a wall or a shield, the better
our prospects will be for protecting people and solving
our shared problems.
We should use this year’s observance of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations to
seriously reflect on our common enterprise — on peace
operations, peacebuilding, women’s empowerment,
disaster risk reduction and much else. We should also
seize this year’s opportunities to take transformative
action on sustainable development and climate change.
In all these efforts, we should bear in mind that the
three opening words of the Charter make clear who is
the driving force behind the United Nations — “We
the peoples”. Let us reaffirm our duty to serve those
peoples with all our creativity and will. Let us reaffirm
our commitment to each other in the great cause of
living together in dignity and peace for all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the victory of the World War against fascism and the
founding of the United Nations. It is an important
year for countries all over the world to celebrate, and
represents an historic opportunity to reflect on the
past and look to the future. China, which has holds
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
has proposed convened this open debate in order to
join hands with all countries to draw lessons from
history and chart the course for the future. Drawing
on lessons from history means reaffirming the solemn
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
sparing succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetimes has brought untold
sorrow to humankind. Charting a course towards the
future means joining hands and building a new type of
international relations centred on win-win cooperation
in order to achieve the lofty goal of living together in
peace with each other as good neighbours.

15-048383/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Seventy years ago, the great victory in the world
anti-fascist war was won. As a result of arduous
struggle, justice prevailed over evil and peace was
restored in the world. In that unprecedented calamity
of human history, China was an important force in the
world anti-fascist alliance, as well as the main theatre
in the East. Together with other countries, China
endured great national sacrifice and made a significant
historic contribution to the final victory. Let us pay
tribute here to all the heroic men and women who laid
down their lives to uphold peace, dignity and freedom
for humankind.
The victory won 70 years ago has changed our
world profoundly ever since. In the process of peoples’
reflecting on the past and envisioning the future, the
United Nations came into being and ushered in a new
chapter of solidarity among humankind and progress
in international relations. We will always remember
that, on 25 June 1945, the San Francisco Conference
unanimously adopted the Charter of the United Nations,
which set out an ambitious blueprint for the peoples of
the United Nations to come together to build a better
world.
The Charter affirms the strong determination of the
international community to prevent war and maintain
lasting peace. At the outset, the Charter defined
the purposes of the United Nations as maintaining
international peace and security, which embodies the
world’s deep reflection about the two World Wars and
the great yearning of all countries to be free of war, free
and want. For 70 years, the Charter has inspired one
generation after another to make unrelenting efforts
towards the lofty cause of world peace.
The Charter defines the basic norms governing
contemporary international relations. It clearly sets forth
the principles of sovereign equality, non-interference in
internal affairs and respect for territorial integrity. It
also advocates that disputes be settled through peaceful
means, that countries should refrain from the use or
threat of force and that threats to security should be
removed through cooperation. Those basic norms serve
the fundamental collective interests of all countries and
peoples. Although enshrined in the Charter 70 years
ago, they still have great relevance today and continue
to play an indispensable role in maintaining world
stability and tranquillity.
The Charter puts in place safeguard mechanisms
to prevent war and preserve peace. It identifies the

4/103

23/02/2015

rights, responsibilities and duties of United Nations
agencies and Member States. It authorizes the Security
Council to assume the primary responsibility for the
upholding international peace and security. And it
provides that coercive measures must have a mandate
from the Security Council and that collective security
mechanisms shall replace traditional military alliances
and the outdated law of the jungle.
The wheels of history continue to roll forward. Time
flies and 70 years have passed. It is true that humankind
has made significant progress in the cause of peace and
development, but the beautiful vision set forth in the
Charter is yet to be fully realized. Although world war
has been averted, local wars and various conflicts have
been incessant and non-traditional security threats such
as terrorism crop up one after another. Although the
world economy has grown markedly, the gap between
the haves and the have-nots remains prominent, and
new global challenges, including climate change,
continue to emerge. Although multilateralism has
become the prevailing trend, inequality and a lack of
democracy continue to exist in international relations,
while the norms that govern international relations are
violated from time to time. In addition, although the
historical facts have long been made clear on the war
against fascism, there are still some who are reluctant
to recognize the truth and even attempt to overturn the
verdict and whitewash past crimes of aggression.
Today, 70 years after its establishment, the Charter
of the United Nations remains as relevant as ever. Not
only should we stay true to the spirit of the Charter,
we also need to act in accordance with the trends of
the time and in line with practical needs, so as to add
new dimensions to the Charter and confer upon it
new dynamism and vitality. Over the past 70 years,
China, a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Security Council, has
always been steadfast in upholding the spirit of the
Charter, supporting the role of the United Nations and
safeguarding world peace and stability. Not long ago,
Chinese President Xi Jinping put forward the vision
for a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core. The idea is built on the purposes
and principles of the Charter and, more important, it
enriches it with new dimensions. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the following principles for developing
international relations in the twenty-first century.
First, we should maintain peace and prevent
conflict. Some regions in the world today are still

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

plagued by turbulence and conflict. The sensible way
out of way out of that is to continue to observe the
purposes and principles of the Charter, as well as the
sanctity of the United Nations and the Security Council.
In China’s view, any unilateral move that bypasses
the Security Council is illegal and illegitimate. The
Council needs to take more precautionary measures to
forestall conflict and act in a timely manner to stop war
in order to restore peace and promote reconstruction as
early as possible.
Secondly, we should opt for cooperation and not
confrontation. We live in an increasingly globalized
world in which the spread of information technology is
growing with every passing day. Facing the mounting
global challenges, countries are left with no choice but
to join hands and meet challenges together through
cooperation. China calls upon all countries, major
countries in particular, to rally behind the need for
greater international cooperation. The old mindset of
confrontation should be discarded and consultation and
cooperation among parties should be encouraged, if
we are to address the major issues affecting world and
regional peace and development.
Thirdly, we should ensure that justice and not
hegemony prevails throughout the world. The call of
the time is for greater democracy and the rule of law
in international relations. No country in the world is
entitled to impose its will on others or to topple the
legitimate Governments of other countries. China
believes that all countries are equal regardless of their
size or wealth. All countries’ sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity should be respected. Their
choice of a development path and social system should
be upheld. International law and norms governing
international relations should be genuinely honoured
and the diversity of the world’s civilizations should be
respected.
Fourthly, we should work together with a win-win,
not a zero-sum, approach. In today’s world, countries
are more interdependent than ever, with their interests
increasingly intertwined. Antiquated thinking such as
the Cold War mentality and zero-sum games should
long ago have been relegated to the trash bin of history.
China advocates a new thinking of win-win and all-win
cooperation, as well as a new concept of communitybuilding for shared interests and a common destiny. We
call upon all countries to come together to share rights
and obligations and uphold justice while pursuing
interests. In that way we will usher in a new world in

S/PV.7389

which the interests of individual countries and those of
others and of the wider international community can all
be properly safeguarded.
Today we are in the midst of the traditional Chinese
spring festival, which is the best time to plan for the
entire new year to come. I hope that today’s open debate
will serve as prelude to our joint commemoration of
the seventieth anniversary of the victory in the world
anti-fascist war and the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. May the spirit of the
Charter shine upon the Earth and may the vision of
win-win cooperation flourish across the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to start by conveying my gratitude to
Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, for
having organized today’s debate. The theme proposed
for discussion today is a very timely one on the eve of
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, and it allows us to critically assess the state of
international relations and discuss ways of overcoming
its accumulated systemic problems.
The Charter of the United Nations is the fruit of the
great victory over Nazism and remains the cornerstone
of the entire international system. Its list of purposes
and principles and the rules internationalt contains
represent a substantial source of international law, the
basis for the code of conduct of States on the world
stafe and the foundation for the ever-growing system of
international agreements and treaties.
Of course the United Nations is not perfect, but
as Dag Hammarskjöld said, it was not created to take
humankind to heaven, but to save it from hell. The
Charter of the United Nations set out for the first time
the principles for an operationally viable mechanism for
global governance on the basis of agreement among the
positions of leading States. In other words, it enshrined
key elements for a polycentric world order. For the
first four decades, the United Nations operated under
difficult conditions of bipolar confrontation. At the
same time, after the end of the Cold War, no objective
reasons remained to prevent the Security Council

15-048385/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

from becoming the effective platform for elaborating
and crafting the collective will of the international
community. Unfortunately, the path to implementing
that objective has turned out to be a great deal more
complex and tortuous than it seemed it would be a
quarter of a century ago.
We have before our eyes many examples of
violations of the fundamental principles of the United
Nations, such as the independence and sovereign
equality of States, non-interference in their internal
affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Suffice
it to recall the bombing in Syria, the occupation of Iraq
under obviously false pretences — the consequences of
which continue to take a heavy toll on the population
of that country — and the brazen manipulation of the
Security Council’s mandate that led to the destruction
and ongoing chaos in Libya. All of those were the result
of attempts to dominate global affairs, to rule over
everyone everywhere, to use military force unilaterally
and to push and advance singular interests.
Such approaches are in no way in keeping with the
principles on which the United Nations is based, and
ignore the clear and increasing threat of the spread of
hegemonic economic and political might. In the search
for an illusory global dominance, unsavory methods
are employed, including mass pressure on sovereign
States and attempts to impose one’s own decisions and
political, economic and ideological standards on them.
For those not wishing to play ball, various methods are
employed, including regime change, as was the case
with the open support for the unconstitutional State
coup in Ukraine a year ago.
Persistent efforts have been undertaken to turn the
Security Council into a body that would rubberstamp
the decisions of the leader, and as that is simply not
working, they are attempting to move the Security
Council away from elaborating policies on major issues
within its competence, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. In doing so, the lessons
of the unilateral use of force from the very recent
past are being ignored. Those actions have plunged
the Middle East and North Africa into instability and
chaos and, to a large extent, created a breeding ground
in which extremists thrive.
The sanctions mechanisms established pursuant to
the Charter are the exclusive purview of the Security
Council. Unilateral restrictive measures and attempts
at the extraterritorial use of national legislation are

6/103

23/02/2015

nothing more than the manifestation of an archaic
way of thinking. They have led to an increase in
confrontations and tensions in international affairs and
complicated the joint quest for solutions to emerging
problems.
An element that is seriously poisoning international
relations is the unfolding war for the use of international
media, the Internet and social networks. I am
convinced that the freedom of expression and thought
is not something that should justify the manipulation
of information, brainwashing and efforts to undermine
States and their policies, or that should be used to fan
the flames of religious enmity.
The time has come to respond to a simple
question: do we want to see the Security Council as
an effective, influential instrument for the maintenance
of international peace and security, or are we prepared
to allow it to become a forum for propagandistic
confrontation. In the latter case, the Council will be
excluded from the search for international solutions.
That will have a negative impact on other international
regional platforms and will further weaken our
prospects for resolving current problems.
We believe there is a need to immediately take
decisive measures to eliminate double standards
from global policy and allow the Security Council
to resume its role as a leading body in the search for
collective solutions based on respect for the cultures
and civilizations of today’s world and for democracy in
international relations.
We must all recognize that people have the right to
independently decide on their future without external
interference. In that respect, I propose that we think
about strengthening and adopting relevant provisions set
out in what was adopted in 1970, namely, the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. In doing so, we
should focus in particular on the fact that support for
unconstitutional coups is unacceptable.
We must reach agreement on how we are going to
achieve, on the basis of the Charter, a joint management
of risks in the context of an increasingly complex
system of international relations. At the beginning
of the 1990s, the Secretariat prepared a guide on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States. Perhaps
the time has now come to update that publication to

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

take into account the experience that has been gained
since then.
Positive results will be achieved only when
members of the Security Council pool their efforts
to find consensus positions. It is on that basis that
we were able to resolve the main issues surrounding
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria and to
elaborate measures to counter the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. A few days ago, upon Russia’s
initiative, the Council adopted resolution 2199 (2015),
which is aimed at suppressing the financing of terrorist
groups through the proceeds of the illegal oil trade.
Recent examples in this regard include the deployment
of new peacekeeping presences in Mali and the Central
African Republic. We are now closely tackling another
hotspot issue in Africa: suppressing the terrorist
threat posed by Boko Haram. We expect that useful
recommendations on how to render the United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective will result
from the Secretary-General’s special high-level group.
On the whole, it would be useful to list the global
challenges and threats that can only be effectively
countered jointly. Among the main priorities on that
list is an issue that has become a huge threat, namely,
terrorism, especially in the Middle East and North
Africa and spreading in the direction of Southern Africa,
Asia and Europe. Unilateral actions in that respect are
without any great prospect. That much is clear. The
problem must be resolved within the framework of the
United Nations and on the basis of its Charter. We are
against attempts to move the counter-terrorist fight out
of the intergovernmental arena and to enforce plans
of action that have been elaborated in limited formats
upon the international community. I hope that today’s
debate will serve as a serious discussion on the future
of our universal Organization as the most important
mechanism for governing international relations today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mrs. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
convey warm greetings to you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council, as we know how committed the
People’s Republic of China is to peace, justice and
development for humankind. I also convey to you and
the Secretary-General, on behalf of the President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolás Maduro

S/PV.7389

Moros, our commitment to continue to move ahead,
historically and constitutionally, towards social justice,
the maintenance of international peace and cooperation
through solidarity and respect for peoples’ selfdetermination and the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States.
The matter that brings us here today is more
relevant than ever in a world that presents challenges
that call into question peace and security. We would
like to recall that, on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the United Nations, a declaration was
adopted that prohibits intervention in the internal affairs
of States and declares respect for the sovereignty and
independence of States. Furthermore, on the occasion
of the Organization’s twenty-fifth anniversary, a
declaration was adopted that proclaimed that the only
manner in which we can achieve the purposes of the
United Nations is if States can actualize themselves in
full sovereign equality.
I would like to pause here, because we do know — and
the international community can bear witness to this
fact — that unilateral actions, which are manifested
through ongoing warfare, including economic, media
and financial warfare, seek to subject peoples, with
the sole objective of seizing natural resources and thus
satisfying the hegemonic desires of foreign Powers. It
is with much amazement and concern that we recently
heard statements by warmongers and those who would
twist our arms that confirmed — and we would like to
condemn this here today — the fact that violations of
international law and the purposes and principles that
inspire the Organization and its founding Charter.
The so-called fight against terrorism has resulted
in more terrorism.
Terrorist acts have also undermined the human
rights of millions of citizens. We call for a peaceful
settlement of conflicts, in keeping with the spirit of
the United Nations and as set out in its Charter. The
citizens on the streets of our countries and in some
regions often do not know whether they will be the
victims of a terrorist attack or fall victim to supposed
violent acts against those terrorist organizations.
I should like to draw attention to statistics from
the Stockholm International Institute on global
military expenditure, which in 2013 alone reached
the astronomical figure of $1.747 trillion. Even more
shocking, 37 per cent of the funds allocated to military
expenditure are concentrated in just one country. We

15-048387/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

wish to draw attention to the relationship between
that military expenditure and the true achievement of
international peace and security.
We can say that, fortunately, Venezuela is a part of a
region that is considered a zone free of violence, where,
furthermore, we have innovative mechanisms for
integration and interrelation that are based on respect
among States and for the sovereignty of States, respect
for the self-determination of peoples and respect for
the territorial integrity of nations. We would recall that
we are the region that has the lowest level of military
expenditure in the world. We support disarmament
in all its expressions and have been declared the first
region free of nuclear weapons.
Today we call once again for a multilateralism
that is based on public international law and on the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. We also
reaffirm the legitimate right of the State of Palestine to
be a full-fledged member of the Organization, on the
basis also of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and international law. We therefore condemn
the fact that in the twenty-first century there still exist
antiquated or new forms of colonialism, or any form of
discrimination. Even among these foreign Powers, we
can today see serious cases of racial discrimination.
For that reason, we embrace once again the spirit of
the late Hugo Chavez Frias, our former President, who
proposed that the United Nations be reformed so as to
be more democratic, so that all developing countries can
discuss sensitive matters such as international peace
and security democratically within the Organization.
I would recall further what President Nicolás
Maduro said when he spoke during the most recent
general debate of the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.8).
He called on the United Nations to adapt its institutions
in such a manner as to promote the sovereignty of
peoples, if we wish to truly achieve much-wished-for
peace and a world that is safe and free of violence.
I should like to reiterate the words of the late
President Chavez, speaking here at the United Nations:
“Well, we shall fight for Venezuela, for Latin
American integration and for the world. Here in
this room, we declare our infinite faith in man, who
longs for peace and justice in order to survive as a
species. Simón Bolívar, our liberator and the guide
of our revolution, swore that he would not rest until
he saw America free. Let us not rest in body or in

8/103

23/02/2015

soul until we have saved humanity.” (A/60/PV.6,
p. 20)
I would also paraphrase Gandhi, who said that there
is no road to peace; peace is the only possible road.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): New Zealand
congratulates China for this initiative. We agree that
this is the right time for the Council to undertake a
measure of serious self-examination and to assess
where we are performing well and where we are not.
We agree that the Council needs to do much better.
That is clearly the view of United Nations Members.
With others around this table, New Zealand has just
experienced the invigorating process of seeking support
from Members to win election to the Council. We have
not been left in doubt as to the desire of Member States
to see the Council lift its game.
The Council is charged with responding to threats
to international peace and security. Yet in relation to
too many of those current threats, the Council has dealt
itself out of its proper role. Where it is involved, it
has often been too late. The Council has a completely
inadequate focus on conflict prevention and a huge
focus on peacekeeping. Peacekeepers are hampered
and sometimes endangered by poor mandates and
inadequate resourcing. Too many of the cases on the
peacekeeping agenda have become part of a revolving
list of routine items rather than serious problems that
we really expect to solve.
These challenges to the Council’s ability to live
up to its mandate in relation to international peace and
security are longstanding and complex — some would
say intractable. But we believe that it is within the
Council’s reach to make real progress.
As we move towards the seventieth anniversary of
the establishment of the Council, we should listen to
the United Nations membership, including the smaller
members, which are often not heard. We should hear
their disappointment and their frustration. We should
resolve to use this anniversary year of the Council to
take action.
We believe that there are three simple areas in
which the Council could take action this year.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

My first point is that the use of the veto or the threat
of the veto is the single largest cause of the Security
Council being rendered impotent in the face of too
many serious international conflicts. Whether we are
talking about Syria or the Middle East peace process,
the veto’s impact today far exceeds what was envisaged
in the United Nations Charter — to the huge detriment
of the Council’s effectiveness and credibility.
We congratulate France on its initiative on the
voluntary retirement of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities. We urge the permanent members to use this
anniversary year to find a way to make progress. While
it is difficult, the future credibility of the Organization
depends on it.
My second and related point is the Council’s lack
of preventive action under Chapter VI, which is again
partly the result of the pervasive impact of the veto.
Conflict is costly in terms of human lives, reconstruction
costs and lost opportunities for development. There is
something wrong when we are spending over $8 billion
per year on peacekeeping but virtually nothing on
the responsibility to prevent situations escalating into
intractable conflict.
My third point is that we must recognize and address
a major weakness in relation to peacekeeping. We
cannot send peacekeepers into dangerous environments
without adequate mandates and resources. The review
of peace operations being led by former President
Ramos-Horta will set the scene for the Council to
address that issue this year.
The 15 of us at this table can do more. We can solve
these issues. We must solve them. The perception of a
failure to act impacts negatively on the reputations of
both the Council and the United Nations itself. It is time
for us to confront the root causes that have seen the
Council avoid the challenging task of conflict prevention
simply because the politics and the diplomacy have
been too difficult.
New Zealand is ready to work with fellow Council
members to make real progress in addressing these
issues. Only then will we, the Council, have earned
the right to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of this
body being conferred the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Foreign Minister of Malaysia.

S/PV.7389

Mr. Aman (Malaysia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to congratulate you and the Chinese
delegation on China’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing.
Malaysia is pleased to note that under China’s
presidency thus far, the Council has taken some
important decisions and had productive discussions
on a number of issues and situations around the world.
I understand that discussions on a number of very
challenging situations are ongoing, and I wish the
Council success in its deliberations. I also take this
opportunity, Mr. President, to wish you a belated happy
Chinese New Year, and I hope the Year of the Golden
Sheep brings much success, happiness and prosperity
to one and all.
The concept note (S/2015/87, annex) circulated
ahead of our discussion today outlined five broad
thematic areas. In my view, a full discussion of the
themes and issues related to them would certainly not
be possible today, given the time constraints. That being
the case, I intend to focus on just a few key issues, with
a view to contributing to the wider discussions.
First, Malaysia welcomes today’s debate and
believes it affords a timely opportunity for the Council
to take stock of its achievements so far and to reflect
on the challenges it faces in its continuing mission of
maintaining international peace and security. Such
reflection, in our view, is both necessary and urgent,
given the increasingly complex and multidimensional
nature of the new and emerging threats and challenges
to international peace and security that we face as a
global community and must address together. Almost
70 years after the Council was established, it seems
clear that the threats and challenges it faces in 2015 are
different from those it faced earlier and perhaps equally
complex, if not more so.
From a historical perspective, Malaysia holds
the view that the Council has a mixed record in
terms of discharging its Charter-mandated roles and
responsibilities. During the Cold War period, the
Council appeared paralysed by numerous conflicts
that were fought around the world, many of which
were ideologically motivated proxy wars. We recall the
frustration and despair felt at the seeming powerlessness
of the Council and the United Nations to act in the face
of atrocities perpetrated by the likes of the Khmer

15-048389/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Rouge and former regimes in Latin America, as well
as the crimes against humanity witnessed in Bosnia
and Rwanda, among others — not to mention the still
desperate situation in Palestine, which has remained
unresolved for almost as long as the Council and the
United Nations have been in existence.
The exuberance and, some say, the triumphal
optimism demonstrated when the Soviet bloc collapsed
in the early 1990s nurtured nascent hopes that a new,
multipolar system would succeed the previous bipolar
order. Fast-forward to the present day, and we see that
the continuing military and economic preponderance
of certain States over others continues to dominate
and shape international discourse and policymaking at
the macro level — although we should note that that
preponderance appears to have been both bolstered
and, to a certain extent, constrained by the advent of
globalization.
Globalization, particularly seen in terms of the
widespread reach and use of communications and
information technology and transportation, has
undoubtedly had a multiplier effect in terms of States’
abilities to reach out and benefit not only their own
people but also others elsewhere. In Malaysia’s view,
these positive gains must be preserved and further
built on by all States. In that context, it is worth noting
that later this year the United Nations is expected to
discuss and decide on, among other things, a package
of sustainable development goals aimed at further
improving the well-being of our peoples. While
globalization has undeniably brought about positive
developments and advances in many different areas,
there are those who would pervert, manipulate and
misuse advances such as those in the fields of science,
medicine and communications and information
technology in the service of a darker, more destructive
agenda.
In Malaysia’s view, the rise of non-State
actors — terrorists in particular — who seek to harness
the very features that characterize our interconnected,
interrelated and globalized world and use them to sow
terror, hatred and chaos is one of the defining and
urgent challenges that the international community
must address today. Events and developments across
the globe in recent years have illustrated the virulence
of terrorists and terrorism and how quickly they can
become malignant. Whereas in the past terrorism was
employed in pursuit of political or ideological goals,
the new breed of terrorist is no longer content with

10/103

23/02/2015

such aims. They now seek to control territory and
populations, perhaps with a view to attaining equal
status with other States.
Such ambitions are against the purposes and
principles laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations. Beyond the terrorists’ brutal and inhumane
actions, their attempts to establish so-called States
run counter to Charter principles, including those
of friendly relations among States, refraining from
the use of force, and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, among others. In view of such
a direct challenge to core United Nations principles,
all States must renew their commitment to acting in a
coordinated and concerted manner to counter it. The
threat of terrorism is not one that any of us can hope
to overcome on our own. In that connection, we note
the success of the recent Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism hosted by the United States. Malaysia is
also encouraged to note the pioneering steps taken by
the African Union and the members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission — Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria — with Benin to operationalize a multinational
joint task force to counter the threat posed by Boko
Haram. The actions of those countries merit the
international community’s full support and stand out
as an affirmation of Charter principles, including those
laid out in Chapter VIII.
In focusing on the seemingly disparate issues
of globalization and terrorism and how they could
intersect and, unfortunately, have intersected, I have
sought to highlight the fact that while the nature of
the threats to international peace and security, and our
understanding of them, has clearly evolved over time,
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations remain relevant and applicable.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, Malaysia emphasizes
the need for the Council to meet the increasingly
complex and multidimensional threats to international
peace and security. In Malaysia’s view, the Council’s
continuing ability to be flexible and adaptable is key
to ensuring its effective and efficient discharge of
its Charter-mandated roles and responsibilities. We
hold the view that certain aspects of the Council’s
work — including its transparency and accessibility,
especially for non-members and stakeholders — could
be improved.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
commitment to continuing to uphold the purposes and

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

principles enshrined in the Charter and to working
closely and constructively with Council members,
partners and stakeholders to that end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Foreign Minister of Lithuania.
Mr. Linkevičius (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and to wish you,
Mr. President, and all of us a Happy New Year of the
Golden Sheep.
On 24 October 1945, the United Nations came into
existence in response to the unspeakable horrors of the
Second World War, which left the indelible scar of the
Holocaust on the conscience of humankind and caused
as many as 80 million deaths. Addressing the United
Nations Conference on International Organization
in San Francisco earlier that year, President Truman
stressed that with ever-increasing brutality and
destruction, modern warfare, if unchecked, would
ultimately crush all civilization. He said,
“We still have a choice between the alternatives:
the continuation of international chaos, or the
establishment of a world organization for the
enforcement of peace.”
When the Charter of the United Nations was
signed on June 26 1945 by 50 nations, Lithuania was
not among them, owing to Soviet occupation. While
others were celebrating the fall of Hitler’s monstrous
regime and engaging in the creation of a new world
order, Lithuania’s future was being hijacked by Stalin’s
totalitarian grip. During Stalin’s rule, up to 300,000
Lithuanians were deported, exiled and locked up in
Soviet gulags in the most remote parts of Siberia, the
Arctic Circle and Central Asia. Farmers, teachers, public
servants, housewives and entire families were rounded
up, barely given time to collect their belongings, and
hoarded onto cattle wagons. Many died of starvation
and diseases along the way. Most were never to see
Lithuania or their families again.
My people were not the only ones affected. At least
14 million people of various nationalities were sent to
Soviet gulags from 1929 to 1953, with a further 7 to
8 million deported and exiled to the most remote areas
of the Soviet empire. Induced famine and starvation,
including the Holodomor in Ukraine, were used to
subdue those whom Stalin’s regime considered its
enemies.

S/PV.7389

While we pay our tribute and respect to the
sacrifice of the Allied forces that defeated Hitler, we
also remember all of those whose lives were taken by
all the totalitarian regimes of the twentieth century.
Five decades later, Lithuania broke free from
captivity. Next month, Lithuania will celebrate
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the restoration of
independence — the longest period we have ever
been free in modern time. In the context of Russia’s
attempts to rewrite history and reverse the transitions
of the 1990s, the twenty-fifth anniversary is even
more precious. It also reminds us that the international
community should not lower its guard. The United
Nations came into existence in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to ensure,
by the acceptance of principles and the institution of
methods, that armed force shall not be used, save in
the common interest. What we are seeing in Europe
today, however, is Russia’s military might being used
in violation of the sovereign rights of States.
To small countries in particular, respect for the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
international legal norms is paramount. We do not
have the tanks, Grad missiles, Tornados or the multiple
rocket launchers and heavy weaponry, the likes of which
are ravaging the eastern part of Ukraine as we speak.
Respect for international law and the principles and
norms enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is
our first line of defence.
It is therefore particularly disturbing to see these
norms and principles and the Charter itself being
violated by a permanent member of the Security Council.
The exclusive status of the five permanent members
was granted so that they could act as custodians of the
higher interest of peace, that common interest of which
the Charter speaks so clearly. It is not for Russia to
pressure or wage war against its neighbours. Indeed,
70 years after the end of the Second World War, Russia,
which suffered tremendously from that war, should
know better than to risk international peace and
stability for the sake of redrawing Europe’s borders by
violence and force.
From eastern Ukraine to Moldova’s Transnistria,
to Georgia’s Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions, a
pattern exists of Russia’s interference in the sovereign
affairs of neighbouring States. For a year now, Ukraine
has been under attack by Russian commandos and

15-0483811/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/02/2015

mercenaries, supported by tanks, heavy weaponry,
equipment and supplies.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.

A year ago, as Crimea was being annexed by force
and falsehood, Lithuania called for the first Council
meeting on Ukraine. The Council has since held
at least 30 meetings on the situation in Ukraine, but
little has changed on the ground. Even as we speak,
Russian proxies continue to violate the latest ceasefire
agreement, in violation of resolution 2202 (2015).
Russian arms and Russian humanitarian convoys
continue to flow across the borders into the militants’
hands. The geographical area of violent provocations
is expanding beyond the ceasefire line, as seen from
yesterday’s terrorist bombing attack in Kharkiv.

Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for inviting
me to participate in it. I also thank your delegation for
the excellent concept note (S/2015/87, annex) provided
to guide our discussion. Let me also commend the
Secretary-General for his well-informed briefing.

Thousands are dead and millions displaced as
Russia continues to stoke incitement and hate against
the Ukrainian people, whose only fault is their desire
to choose a European path of development. The
anti-Ukrainian rhetoric is disturbing. Only because the
Ukrainians wanted a clear break from the corruption
and cronyism of the past, have they been branded as
fascists. The peaceful protests in the Maidan, whose
anniversary was marked this past weekend, has been
referred to as an extremist coup. Let us be clear. The
desire of a nation to decide its own future is not a crime.
The acceptance of European values is not a crime.
The Kremlin’s propagandistic manipulation of the
fascist card, which has been used from time to time, is
irresponsible and highly dangerous, especially as part
of efforts to whitewash the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, all States, without exception, must
recommit unequivocally and clearly to the values
enshrined in the Charter and to the norms and principles
of international law. Anything less — especially attempts
to redraw today’s international borders — would
constitute a betrayal of the memory of those who
brought us peace 70 years ago at the cost of their lives,
and betrayal of our future as humankind.
To quote President Truman in his address to the
San Francisco Conference exactly 70 years ago:
“We must not continue to sacrifice the flower of
our youth merely to check madmen, those who in
every age plan world domination. The sacrifices of
our youth today must lead, through your efforts, to
the building for tomorrow of a mighty combination
of nations founded upon justice — on peace.”

12/103

As we look forward to celebrating this year the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, reflecting on history and reaffirming our
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations becomes not only
a desirable exercise but, indeed, an obligation. As
rightly noted in the concept note, the United Nations
has endured many trials and traversed an extraordinary
journey. Despite those trials, the United Nations has
remained an indispensable instrument for the good of
humankind. We cannot envisage a world without it.
The Charter, as the primary instrument binding
on all Member States, has stood the test of time. Its
pre-eminence as an international treaty is affirmed
by Article 103, which places the obligations of
Member States under the Charter over and above their
obligations under any other international agreement
or treaty. Despite its pre-eminence, however, we have
oftentimes seen cases where the Charter has played a
secondary role to national political expedience, where
international law has been interpreted in accordance
with the national interest and objectives have been
pursued not in compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
Nigeria firmly believes that there can be no
substitute to Charter principles, especially concerning
State sovereignty and all its ramifications under
international law. Respect for State sovereignty and
territorial integrity forms the very foundation of the
United Nations and remains at the core of the operating
principles of international law. We cannot dispose with
that for any reason, and we shall continue to defend it
as the most elemental obligation of all States to protect
and advocate.
The purposes of the United Nations as stated in
the Charter are as relevant today as they were in 1945,
when the world was just emerging from a disastrous
war. For the United Nations to achieve its purpose of
maintaining international peace and security, human
rights and sustainable development, all Member States

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

must show a strong commitment to acting on the
international stage in a manner that does not undermine
or diminish the effectiveness of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Acts of aggression and other hostile acts inimical
to international peace and security remain veritable
threats to the aspirations of the Charter. Where disputes
arise, it is essential that Member States use exclusively
pacific means to resolve them. That is the only path
to achieving solutions that will endure. Dialogue and
negotiation offer more reassuring guarantees of lasting
peace than the use or threat of use of force.
The Security Council, as the principal organ
of the United Nations, is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and is therefore in a unique position
to promote the peaceful resolution of disputes. The
Council should explore all avenues for achieving that.
It should also remain open to collaboration with other
global players, including regional and subregional
organizations that have a significant role to play in the
pacific settlement of disputes.
It is important to reiterate that all United Nations
States Members should respect the sovereignty of other
States and refrain from actions that may infringe upon
it. Sovereign States under international law are meant to
have control over their domestic affairs without the fear
or threat of external interference. That is a hallmark
of political independence and it must be respected by
all Member States. It is a breach of that principle that
has been responsible for so many of the incidents of
conflict and instability around the world.
Contemporary international relations are becoming
increasingly complex, with multiple overlapping
dimensions. That sometimes leads to competition and a
clash of interests among States. Against that backdrop,
the way to minimize the risk of conflict in the conduct of
international relations is for States to act in accordance
with international law at all times. Experience shows
that attempts to distort international law on the basis
of national interests can generate tension and even lead
to conflict between States. Nigeria therefore enjoins all
States to respect their obligations under international
law. Mutually beneficial cooperation leading to
development, peace and security should be preferred
over and above competition irrevocably.
In a world that is fast becoming singular by virtue
of scientific and technological advances, accelerated

S/PV.7389

means of travel and instantaneous communication, the
development and prosperity of all countries and peoples
should constitute the foundation of our common security.
We are convinced of the need for all countries to have
a fair chance to develop and improve the lives of their
citizens. As we reach the target date for the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), deep disparities still exist
between the global North and the global South. Those
disparities can be seen across a broad range of indices,
including life expectancy, infant and maternal mortality,
per capita income, access to health care, access to clean
drinking water and in many other areas. Clearly, more
needs to be done to promote development in the global
South. The United Nations with its agencies, funds
and programmes is in a unique position to lead that
effort. Indeed, the Charter recognizes the need for the
Organization to promote international cooperation in
solving international problems, including problems of
an economic nature. It is appropriate, therefore, that the
United Nations is leading the global effort to elaborate
the post-2015 development agenda, the sustainable
development goals and the successive frameworks to
the MDGs.
Allow me once again to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the critical issue of the pre-eminence of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is Nigeria’s hope that, as we
steadily and assuredly move the United Nations upward
to loftier heights, we will ensure that its ability to solve
global challenges, particularly those of peace and
security, will be enhanced and made more effective.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish
to thank Minister Lavrov, Minister Rodríguez
Gómez, Minister McCully, Minister Aman, Minister
Linkevičius and Minister Wali for participating in this
debate. Above all, I thank Minister Wang Yi for coming
to the United Nations to preside over this important
discussion.
The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
viewed the purposes and principles of the United Nations
as “a test for the effectiveness of the Organization”.
It is a testament to their enduring relevance that, as
we gather in the Council nearly 70 years later, the
same purposes and principles continue to guide the
Organization and provide that crucial measure of our
collective effectiveness.
As many here know, the very first words of the
Preamble to the Charter are “We the peoples of the

15-0483813/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations”. It is all too easy in our debates in the
Council and across the United Nations to lose sight of
the people whose rights and welfare are dramatically
affected by the degree to which we fulfil the Charter’s
ambitious mandate. To recommit ourselves to the
purposes and principles is to recommit ourselves to the
people, individuals in every one of our States, whose
basic dignity the Charter is meant to defend and uphold.
I should like to highlight three ways the United Nations
and its Member States can and must improve our
effectiveness in working together towards that noble
and necessary aspiration.
First, the Security Council must play the robust
role set out for it by the Charter to maintain or restore
international peace and security, and it must take actions
when circumstances demand it. Yet, too often the
Council has not lived up to that primary responsibility.
Consider Syria. When the Al-Assad regime launches
deadly attacks on peaceful protesters, when it tortures
tens of thousands of detainees in its prisons, when it
employs openly starve-or-surrender tactics that inflict
a devastating toll on civilians, amid all of that, divisions
among Member States continue to prevent the Council
from taking action to stop the regime from attacking
civilians or even speaking in one voice to condemn the
violence and call for meaningful accountability. As a
result, we have let down the people at the heart of the
Charter.
Secondly, Member States shall “fulfil in good faith
the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the
Charter”, including the obligation to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Council and must “give the
United Nations every assistance in any action it takes
in accordance with the Charter”. We have shown the
ability to leverage those obligations to good effect as
arms embargoes in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are making it harder
for armed actors to get the weapons they have used to
commit atrocities. Other measures, like the ban on the
trade in illicit charcoal from Somalia, are limiting the
funds that violent extremist groups like Al-Shabaab
are using to fuel their campaigns of terror. But it is not
enough for us to adopt mandates and resolutions, we
must be willing to exercise the political will and take
the action needed to actually preserve international
peace and security.
Today, we empower United Nations peacekeeping
missions with more robust mandates than ever before
to protect civilians and monitor human rights. When

14/103

23/02/2015

those mandates are contested, however, we must take
appropriate action to defend them. Unfortunately, the
Council was silent when the Sudanese Government
denied United Nations peacekeepers unhindered access
to the town of Thabit, North Darfur, thereby preventing
the United Nations from properly investigating possible
human rights violations following allegations that
Sudanese soldiers had raped more than 200 women and
girls in October. Instead, the only time the peacekeepers
were permitted to reach Thabit, Sudanese military and
intelligence officials refused to let them interview
alleged rape victims in private and, in some cases,
recorded the interviews.
Ensuring respect for the work of the United
Nations entails acting in good faith in accordance
with the principles of the Charter. Yet notwithstanding
the foundational obligations of Member States to
respect sovereignty and territorial integrity, Russia
today is training, arming, supporting and fighting
alongside separatists who have brutally seized
Ukrainian territory — a blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and an assault on its
neighbour’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity — one that has already cost some 5,700 lives
and forced the displacement of more than 1.7 million
Ukrainians.
Thirdly, in dealing with States that flout the United
Nations principles, and their international obligations
more generally, the United Nations must come up with
more effective ways to pressure them. That includes
States that brutally repress their own people, behaviour
that in and of itself can threaten international peace
and security. Consider the recent actions of the United
Nations with respect to North Korea. In March 2013,
the United Nations Human Rights Council established
the Commission of Inquiry on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which not only thoroughly
documented the regime’s horrors, but also brought
them into public view by holding open hearings with
victims and experts. Based on the Commission’s
findings, the General Assembly adopted resolution
67/181, roundly condemning the regime’s systematic
abuses and encouraging the Security Council to
consider appropriate action to ensure accountability.
When the Security Council met in December to discuss
North Korea’s human rights crisis for the very first time
(see S/PV.7353), many members, including the United
States, echoed the General Assembly’s call.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is true that the regime’s prison camps continue
to hold between 80,000 and 120,000 people in ghastly
conditions. Nonetheless, by shining a light on the
unspeakable violations being perpetrated every day
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, United
Nations action is helping to galvanize broader pressure
on the regime to end abuses that were ignored for far
too long.
The situation in North Korea reveals a fundamental
lesson learned many times over since the Charter was
adopted. Widespread human rights violations can
themselves pose a threat to international peace and
security. We must not ignore connections between the
way Governments treat their own citizens and the way
they interact with other States and the norms of our
shared international system. North Korea, for example,
has repeatedly threatened nuclear attacks against States
that criticize the way it treats its own people. In Syria,
violations perpetrated by the Al-Assad regime were
instrumental in the dramatic rise of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups, which
are now wreaking havoc far beyond that country’s
borders. Moreover, the violence in Syria has led
nearly 4 million people to take refuge in neighbouring
countries, placing a massive and destabilizing strain on
those Governments.
Whether in Syria or elsewhere in the world, when
a country locks up its political opponents instead of
resolving differences through dialogue, or when it
attempts to silence its critics, as some Council members
are doing, it both violates its Charter commitment to
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and it will
not bring about the stability that is so important to the
lasting economic and social progress we all wish to
see. Rather than locking up one’s opponents, making
ridiculous allegations and pointing fingers at foreign
Powers, respecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as the Charter provides, is the foundation for
peace, security and prosperity.
As we strive to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations, we must guard against attempts to
manipulate the purposes and principles of the Charter
in an effort to prevent the United Nations from tackling
the global challenges it was designed to confront and
defending the rights of individuals it was meant to
champion. Yet some seek to distort the purposes and
principles by asserting, for instance, that human rights
violations have no relation to international peace and
security, or that the sovereignty of nations precludes

S/PV.7389

United Nations engagement on those issues. But as
President Obama said before the General Assembly a
few years ago,
“sovereignty cannot be a shield for tyrants to commit
wanton murder or an excuse for the international
community to turn a blind eye” (A/68/PV.5, p. 16).
Sovereignty did not give the Nazis licence to massacre
Jews 75 years ago. It did not give a Hutu extremist
regime licence to slaughter Tutsis two decades ago. And
it does not and cannot be allowed to shield Governments
that commit atrocities today.
If we, the people of the United Nations, are to
recommit ourselves to the purposes and principles of
the Charter, we must see them as the drafters intended
them: as a blueprint to unite us in advancing the safety,
security and human rights of people across the world,
and not as an instrument to divide us and obstruct
that crucial effort — people like the Syrians in East
Ghouta, more than 200 of whom have been killed in
the past two weeks by bombs dropped by the Al-Assad
regime; people like the democracy and human
rights activists whose efforts to promote freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly have
been stifled by the growing global crackdown on civil
society, with over 50 countries proposing restrictive
measures on civil society efforts in just the past two
years; and people like the Ukrainian children and
elderly who were trapped in Debaltseve, left to cower
in basements while separatists, with Russia’s weapons,
training and blessing, pummeled the city with rockets
and mortars after having agreed to a ceasefire. If we
keep such people at the heart of our efforts, we will
more effectively live up to our shared responsibilities
and the shared vision that the drafters embodied in the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to first warmly congratulate you personally, President,
on the People’s Republic of China’s organization of this
high-level open debate. This is not a mere formality;
Spain welcomes the fact that the Chinese presidency of
the Council has afforded us all an opportunity to speak
on an essential issue that lies at the heart of our work.
We are called on to reflect together on pertinence of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the light of 75 years of experience, which
projects, like any human endeavour, both light and
shadow.

15-0483815/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would also like to express our gratitude for the
concept note before us (S/2015/87, annex), which is clear,
positive and courageous. It constitutes a motivating
guide for spreading our wings and abandoning the
difficulties of daily life, and gives us the perspective
necessary to turn a vital and indispensable common
goal into a reality — that of shared prosperity in a
safe and peaceful world. Your invitation is neither a
theoretical nor an academic exercise, which would be
inappropriate in this organ. It is about reaffirming the
commitment of each one of us to the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations with a
view to creating an atmosphere conducive to this year’s
commemoration of its seventieth anniversary.
The simple and direct questioning of the concept
note deserves a clear answer. Spain is firmly committed
to the purposes and principles of the San Francisco
Charter. We consider them to be as valid today as they
were in 1945. The principles are the bases on which the
ongoing action required to realize the purposes is built,
because the purposes are not goals that, once achieved,
have been overcome. Instead, they require a sustained
effort to which we are all called to contribute. The
purposes are a daily challenge.
The purposes and principles should be read in
conjunction with the Preamble of the Charter, which,
with its catalog of inspiring values that guide the
actions of the United Nations, constitutes a sort of
ethical heaven. The triangle composed of the Preamble,
purposes and principles is an indivisible whole that
has not aged over time, as would a daguerreotype, but
instead has gained in resolution and validity.
The founders of the United Nations, with their
first-hand experience of the ravages of war, declared
themselves determined to preserve succeeding
generations from that scourge. To that end, they
charted a programme — a code of conduct that requires
constant reaffirmation. The seventieth anniversary of
the Organization is an ideal opportunity for all Member
States to renew the vows proclaimed in the Preamble
of the Charter and to express our commitment to its
purposes and principles. Spain encourages us all
to solemnly commemorate this occasion through a
universal declaration that reaffirms the validity of this
essential core of the Charter: the Preamble, purposes
and principles.
Although the foundation of the United Nations
edifice is solid, as is the land on which the United
Nations is built, the world in the second decade of the
16/103

23/02/2015

twenty-first century has little do with that which arose
from the ashes of the Second World War. We live in
a much more mobile, complex and uncertain scenario
than that which prevailed after the last World War
times. The United Nations system has evolved from its
origins in order to meet the challenges of a constantly
changing world. It is also up to us now, one of the
future generations to which the founders referred, to
update the instruments that strengthen the roots, values
and purposes based on Article 2 of the Charter in
contemporary international society.
The 70 years that have passed were far from an
upward and straight path. It is true that humankind
has not been subjected to a new world war, with the
consequent threat to the survival of the planet. However,
the fact remains that local or regional conflicts have
erupted incessantly and more frequently. Far from
being satisfied, we must admit that, far more often
than we would like, our efforts have been frustrated.
We have not been able to prevent foretold conflict. We
have not always been able to facilitate or impose the
cessation of hostilities in instances where two parties
in conflict have resorted to the use of arms. We have
failed to consolidate fragile truces, and fires have
been rekindled from the ashes of violence, engulfing
countries and entire regions.
We must improve our performance in conflict
prevention, and the Organization has plenty of means
at its disposal to do so. The General Assembly,
Security Council and Secretariat can undoubtedly
establish guidelines for joint action that, respectful
of the principles of the Charter, can more effectively
serve the purpose of maintaining peace. Spain firmly
believes in the need to strengthen the instruments of
conflict prevention. The promotion of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue through the Alliance of
Civilizations and the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue; the development of mediation mechanisms,
such as that we are promoting in the Mediterranean
with Morocco, assisted by other friendly countries such
as Slovenia and Jordan; and the western Mediterranean
water strategy we are leading with Algeria are
multifaceted samples of our active participation in the
field of conflict prevention and mediation. The common
denominator of these initiatives is a determined effort
to create effective channels and mechanisms for
cooperation, understanding and tolerance, and to stop
fanaticism and violence.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The maintenance of peace must be based on a system
of relations among States and organizations based on
legally binding rights and obligations, whose ultimate
goal is the rule of law. There is no peace without respect
for the law. The United Nations system has been able
to gradually channel the yearnings and aspirations of
the members of the international community, including
smaller States. These wishes and aspirations are
increasingly being reflected in a legal system that is
evolving towards the realization of the rule of law at
the global level, based around the cornerstone of the
Charter of the United Nations as its cornerstone and
with full respect for the equality among the Members
of the Organization. This equality derives from the
principle of sovereignty, whose legitimacy rests, in
the words of Kofi Annan, in a conception of a States
as “instruments at the service of their people, and not
vice versa”, and in an interpretation of sovereignty
that is faithful to the original meaning of the word,
which evokes a superior, not absolute, power. Since the
adoption of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, United Nations Members have made progress
in integrating human rights as an essential element that
informs and strengthens the exercise of sovereignty.
The San Francisco Charter established the
International Court of Justice and, decades later, the
Rome Statute heralded the creation of the International
Criminal Court. Other good news along the path of
these seven decades include the institutions created and
multilateral agreements signed in the field of human
rights and in international humanitarian law; the gradual
rise in conventional instruments of disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control; the development
and codification of international law enhancing lawful
security; and the progressive eradication of impunity
for mass atrocities and crimes against humanity.
We can go farther still. A certain amount of utopia
is necessary to make the world move forward. In this
spirit, we would like to highlight that the use of the veto
is one of the most significant obstacles to the practical
realization of the purpose of maintaining international
peace and security entrusted by the Charter primarily to
the Security Council. We are aware that the veto is part
of the constituent agreement that lies at the origin of the
San Francisco Charter. However, rigidly preserving an
arrangement that, as experience has shown, badly needs
updating does not resolve the underlying problem — the
lack of legitimacy of vetoes of draft resolutions seeking
to remedy large-scale killings and open spaces for just
and lasting peace solutions.

S/PV.7389

Given this belief, we support the French initiative
proposing a code of conduct whereby the five permanent
members of the Council would commit to refrain from
using the veto in cases where the commission mass
atrocities has been proven. We view that proposal, which
has also been supported today by New Zealand and
which has the advantage of not requiring amendment
to the Charter, to be a substantive way of advancing
towards the goal of eliminating a privilege whose
abuse harms the system and weakens its authority. In
that regard, I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union, in particular with regard to what it has to say
about the importance of respect by all members of the
United Nations of the principle of territorial integrity,
an idea which is taken up in the concept note issued by
the presidency.
In conclusion, 2015 can and must be an historic year
in the life of the Organization. The new development
agenda, the climate conference and the review of
peacekeeping operations are milestones that demand
responsibility and courage. In this context, the adoption
of a universal declaration renewing the commitment
of its Members to the values, purposes and principles
of the San Francisco Charter on the occasion of the
seventieth anniversary of its entry into force would
serve to breathe new life into a body that has aged
significantly and that needs to drink again from the
fountain that gave it reason for being.
If the twenty-first century is to be better for
humankind than the twentieth, it will depend on
the wisdom and will we can muster. We want and
need to build, on the basis of the solid foundations
of the Charter, a future that is more democratic and
better protects human rights under a more robust and
effective international legal order. This is an arduous
and inspiring task, which we owe it to our children and
future generations to achieve. Spain can be counted
upon in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Secretary of State for External Relations of
Angola.
Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this important debate.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, the end of the Second
World War and the victory of our peoples over fascism.

15-0483817/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

The twentieth century was marked by two World Wars
that brought untold sorrow to humankind. The worst
of human nature surfaced in utmost brutality, in a time
in which intellectual thinking, cultural refinement and
scientific progress had achieved unparalleled heights in
the history of humankind, leading to the establishment
of a new type of relations among the nations and peoples
of the world. The United Nations was the response to
the grim realities of the past. The Charter embodies
the international community’s conception of this new
type of relations, including the end of colonialism
and the right of all peoples to self-determination and
independence.
The Preamble of the Charter outlines how the
peoples of the world should live in peace and harmony.
It makes far-reaching declarations of purpose by
embodying a comprehensive programme for maintaining
international peace and security. The peoples of
the United Nations expressed their determination
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war — a declaration that, unfortunately, remains far
from fulfilled. The United Nations has nonetheless
played a crucial role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, by promoting friendlier relations
among nations and cooperation in solving international
problems, and in codifying international law as the basis
for the peaceful coexistence of States — an objective of
international relations in which the United Nations has
attained remarkable success.
In
today’s
world,
as
armed
conflicts
proliferate — mainly intra-State conflicts, due to
political, social or economic exclusion, to religious,
racial or tribal intolerance, or to sheer disrespect for
basic human rights — the United Nations is faced with
the necessity to adapt its strategies for the maintenance
of peace and security. In fact, we say with regret that in
the 70 years of its existence, the United Nations has not
been able to realize the vision of its founders — to save
future generations from the scourge of war — since
war and violent conflict continue to be part of the daily
lives of millions of people.
The peoples of the United Nations reaffirmed
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations, large and small. Those are
fundamental precepts for maintaining international
peace and security. Since the foundation of the United
Nations, and under its impulse, the world has witnessed
outstanding advancement in this respect. Many

18/103

23/02/2015

countries have made remarkable civilizational progress
in promoting the value and dignity of the human person
and conferred equal rights to men and women, while
processes of national emancipation from colonialism
and regional integration have tended to harmonize
relations between large and small nations.
The United Nations remains the main rampart for
the protection and promotion of human rights. Its work
promoting respect for human rights and the codification
of international human rights law is a significant
contribution to this important fight for human dignity
and, consequently, for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Another issue on which the peoples of the United
Nations put special emphasis is establishing conditions
for maintaining justice and respect for obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international
law. The Charter established the principles that make up
the foundation of contemporary international relations:
respect for State sovereignty and territorial integrity,
peaceful settlement of international disputes, and
non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs.
However, these principles, which are enshrined in the
Charter, are violated time and again, with countries
continuing to interfere in other countries’ internal
affairs, violating the Charter and thus threatening
international peace and security.
The promotion of social progress and better
standards of living in larger freedom are fundamental
instances determined by the peoples of the United
Nations. Indeed, endemic poverty, social and economic
exclusion and the denial of fundamental freedoms
constitute today an explosive cocktail and a real threat
to peace and security. Development, well-being and
democracy are pillars of peaceful and inclusive societies.
The nexus of peace and development is central in the
building of inclusive and peaceful societies, which
are crucial elements for the maintenance of peace and
security.
The peoples of the United Nations also decided
to practice tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours. However, of all the
proclamations contained in the Charter, this one has met
with the most failure. In current conflicts — intra-State
and asymmetric — intolerance and hatred are directed
against others for being different, against the neighbour
because of differences of race, tribe, clan, religion or
even gender. Intolerance has become a deadly threat
to peace. This feature is present even in affluent,
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

democratic and participative societies, which have great
difficulties in tolerating and integrating communities of
different origin. That gives rise to dangerous situations
that are real threats to peace. Terrorism today — the
most egregious form of intolerance — together with
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters should
be a wake-up call to us all as to how we manage the
integration of communities of foreign origin.
The peoples of the United Nations also pledged
to unite in the maintenance of international peace and
security, thus giving the Organization the necessary
leverage to act in crisis situations that represent threats
to peace and security by conferring on the Security
Council the primary responsibility to act on their
behalf in carrying out its duties. This demonstration
of confidence in the Security Council means that its
decisions must not be based on partisan or private
interests, but correspond to the real objective of
attaining peace based on consensus and consent
by the international community. It follows that the
Security Council is accountable to the entire United
Nations membership, which is a commitment that, in
our view, calls for a reform of the Council to make
it more democratic in its methods of work and more
representative in its membership. It also calls for reform
of the veto power and for the review of the Council’s
relationship with the wider United Nations membership.
The peoples of the United Nations demand that
armed force not be used save in the common interest,
which is a proclamation that barely corresponds to the
realities of contemporary international life. Too often,
threats of the use of force, actual use of military force
out of common interest and unilateral military action
based on inaccurate assessments and miscalculations
account for wider consequences for many countries and
the international community at large. Member States
should accept, apply and adhere to the United Nations
principles and operational methods to ensure that force
should be used only in situations of imminent threat to
peace and after all options for peaceful settlement have
been exhausted.
Finally, in their proclamation, the peoples of the
United Nation pledged to employ the international
machinery for the promotion of the economic and
social advancement of all peoples. The contemporary
and multifaceted world in which we live calls for a
multilateral approach and greater unity of purpose
among Member States to tackle global challenges.

S/PV.7389

This is the cornerstone for ensuring lasting peace and
prosperity for present and future generations.
As a peace-loving country and member of the
Security Council, Angola greatly values the action of
the United Nations. In this connection, it is important
to mention the decisive role played by the Security
Council in condemning and isolating the apartheid
regime, which was a major source of conflict in
Southern African and a serious threat to international
peace and security. Through its actions, the Security
Council significantly contributed to the fight for justice,
equality and social progress of the peoples of Southern
Africa and to their struggle to put an end to apartheid
and colonialism in the region.
Forty years ago, Angola was in the front line in
applying Security Council resolutions concerning the
struggle against apartheid and for the emancipation of
the peoples of Southern Africa. It paid a very high price
in terms of loss of human lives and material destruction,
having had to face the apartheid regime’s military
aggression for many years. We value the important
contribution by the international community and the
pivotal role of the Security Council in that process.
We commend the vital role the United Nations plays
in ensuring that Member States uphold the principles
and purposes stipulated in the Charter. The United
Nations has our full support in the work of promoting
cooperation in maintaining international peace and
security and in being the central forum for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of our common
goals.
In conclusion, we wish once again to commend the
initiative of the presidency of China in giving us this
opportunity to discuss and take stock of our action in the
Council at this time when the international community
is facing challenges that are comparable to those it
faced 70 years ago. We therefore wish to reflect on and
seek new ways to deal with those growing threats.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s debate and for chairing
it in person. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful briefing this morning.
Seventy years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations established the three founding pillars of the
United Nations system: peace and security, human
rights, and development. Since 1945, these pillars have
provided a framework for the Security Council to tackle
challenges our predecessors could never have foreseen.

15-0483819/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

But these three pillars remain relevant today, and that is
testament to their enduring value.
Inter-State conflict remains a threat to international
peace and security, as Russia’s illegal annexation
of Crimea and destabilization of eastern Ukraine
graphically demonstrate. But threats are no longer
confined to disputes between nation States, as the
United Nations founders first conceived. These threats
now exist irrespective of borders, in deep-rooted ethnic
and religious divisions, in violent non-State actors and
terrorists, and where Governments fail to abide by the
rule of law and disregard the human rights of their
citizens. These threats now undermine the sovereignty
of States in a way we have never seen before. If left
unaddressed, legitimate grievances can quickly turn
to violence and disorder. We must recognize that
preventive action and support from this Council can
bolster sovereignty by helping States to address these
issues. We must utilize all the tools at our disposal in
order to do so.
Peacekeeping is one such tool, and is a strong
example of the flexibility of the Council in implementing
the Charter of the United Nations. There is no mention
of peacekeeping in the Charter, and yet today there are
over 120,000 military and civilian personnel keeping
the peace and protecting civilians on four continents,
many in partnership with the African Union or the
European Union. This year, we have the opportunity
to further improve United Nations peacekeeping. The
peace operations review will consider more effective
protection of civilians, including better prevention
of sexual violence. On this fifteenth anniversary
year of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, we must recognize the
disproportionate effect of conflict on women and the
important role of women in peacebuilding.
Over the past 70 years, as the Secretary-General
spelled out, respect for human rights has become
increasingly central to maintaining international peace
and security. Last year, resolution 2171 (2014) affirmed
that patterns of human rights violations and abuses can
act as early warning signs for impending or escalating
conflicts. As we look ahead to the next 70 years,
we must embrace a reconception of international
security that recognizes that human rights are integral
to the Council’s work on conflict prevention. The
consequences of not doing so can be seen in Aleppo,
in the camps of Yarmouk and in the rise of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. When individual States

20/103

23/02/2015

can no longer ensure respect for human rights, they
put their countries at risk of conflict and international
peace and security are threatened. In these instances,
the Charter is clear about the Council’s responsibility
to intervene in matters that would normally fall within
domestic jurisdiction.
Ending impunity for human rights violations and
abuses is also paramount to help reconcile communities
and aid the settlement of disputes. No one can be above
the law, and the International Criminal Court and the
International Court of Justice have important roles
to play. The United Kingdom has long accepted the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice, but is the only permanent member of the
Council to have continuously done so. We urge others
to follow suit.
We have an historic opportunity this year to
tackle the causes of poverty through the post-2015
development framework. We support an agenda that
will leave no one behind and will respect the equal
rights of men and women. Enshrining those principles
in the framework can only further our work on human
rights and, in the long-term, ensure fair and inclusive
economies and societies.
The United Kingdom is proud to be investing 0.7 per
cent of our gross national income in overseas aid. We
are the only Group of 20 country to do so. As my Prime
Minister David Cameron has said, this aid fosters a
golden thread of development that allows countries to
prosper and to avoid conflict. It helps create inclusive
institutions, open societies and economies, and maintain
the rule of law. The perils of not doing so can be seen in
the events of the Arab Spring, the aftermath of which
still undermines international peace and security today.
Let me conclude with the words of former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He argued that
“we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights” (A/59/2005, para. 17).
The United Kingdom fully endorses those words. The
three pillars of the Charter are greater than the sum
of their individual parts. They support each other, and
success in one fosters success in the others. We cannot
pick and choose which pillars the Council supports, nor
can we focus on to the detriment of the others. To do so

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

would be to ignore the lessons of the past 70 years and
to invite future conflict.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to welcome you, Sir, and to thank China
for convening this important meeting on maintaining
international peace and security and the commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations . I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the issue.
Since the adoption of the Charter nearly 70 years
ago, the United Nations has played a major role in
steering multilateral diplomacy and shaping results in
various aspects of inter-State relations, not to mention
its role in focusing the debate on major issues related
to human development. One could easily say that, to
a large extent and in spite of numerous challenges and
mixed results along the years, the United Nations has
succeeded in living up to the principles and purposes
for which it was created, as embodied in the Charter.
The world would not be the same without the United
Nations.
The real challenge, however, is now ahead of us,
for the threats facing us are ever growing and ever
changing in nature. They necessitate new answers. The
world of today is not what it was after the Second World
War. It is still plagued by the scourges of wars and
their aftermath, and by internal armed conflict; by the
existence of 50 million refugees and displaced persons;
by the fact that 20 per cent of the Earth’s population
living in poverty; and by lack of proper health care,
education and sanitation for large segments of the
world’s population. The list is long and the picture is
grim. We could add the re-emergence of a new form
of terrorism that is based on warped ideologies and the
brainwashing of persons to commit the most heinous
crimes, while resorting to illegal and organized crime
of all kinds.
Is this the world the founders imagined when the
seeds of the United Nations were planted 70 years ago?
Violations of international law, including normative
rules, are committed on a daily basis. Mass atrocities
and grave violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights are committed every day. The
question we need to ask is: How can the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations still
be pertinent to today’s’ challenges, and should they
continue to be the bases for preserving our peace and
security and our common human values?

S/PV.7389

The answer is that if we deviate from the core
principles and goals of the Charter, the world will be
more prone to conflict and war than it is now, and we
will risk losing the achievements of humankind at all
levels. This is hard to imagine but very true. Our ability
to fight and contain threats to peace and stability will
also be compromised. We should keep this in mind
when we debate the value of the United Nations and its
principles and purposes. It is important to stress that the
interpretation and implementation of those principles
and purposes should take into account the current
trends in international relations and the developing
nature of threats and changes faced by the international
community.
Sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-interference should always be respected,
and the United Nations and its Members and organs
should work to maintain their integrity. In the same
vein, the rights, dignity and prosperity of the human
individual should be our goal, too. The Charter of the
United Nations indeed starts with “We the peoples of
the United Nations”, and its Preamble makes it clear
that one object and purpose of the Charter is ensuring
respect for fundamental human rights, the dignity and
worth of the human person, and the equality of men and
woman and of nations. The rights of States and persons
should not be mutually exclusive, and the United
Nations should strive to respect that principle.
However, it is important to state that the organs of
the United Nations have the duty to react when there
are grave violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. Sovereignty and non-interference should not shield
States or their officials who commit atrocities against
their own and other peoples from action on the part of
the Organization based on the Charter’s provisions.
That is where the Security Council has to play a pivotal
role, and where it has failed to do so at times. The
Council has in many situations not taken the muchneeded action whereby millions of lives could have been
saved — whether it was the slow and timid response to
the genocide in Rwanda and the atrocities in the Balkans
or the inaction in the face of the savagery in Syria or,
not least, the tolerance towards the continuous crimes
being committed against the people of Palestine.
Democracy in international decision-making
relating to peace and security is crucial, and I
thank China for bringing that up in its concept note
(S/2015/87, annex). In the Security Council we need
to try to ensure that the common interests of the

15-0483821/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community prevail over the individual
interests of its members. The current Council structure
has to be adapted in order to ensure that the democratic
vision and the functions of the Council are fulfilled in
accordance with the letter and the spirit of the Charter.
If we in the Council continue our current methods of
dealing with crises, especially those that involve mass
atrocities, we risk losing our exclusive and leading role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, Chapter VII of the Charter has
been resorted to quite often in the past 20 years,
especially to impose sanctions. The method by which
such sanctions are adopted is the least transparent and
democratic — quite often set in place in less than a
week or two and without proper consultation with all
the relevant actors and without regard for their longterm consequences. We now face a situation in which
respect for sanctions regimes is being undermined due
to their voluminous nature, as States are either unable
and unwilling to implement them or part thereof. That
is just one aspect of the imbalance in the imposition
of enforcement measures, but a crucial one, especially
in the light of the emerging asymmetrical threats the
world faces from global terrorism and non-State actors.
An effective response means a carefully studied process
where all stakeholders are involved before measures are
taken, including under Chapter VII. It is also important
that stakeholders study the root causes of the conflict
and the best way to contain or prevent it, and not deal
with all conflicts with one mould and with the same
tools.
Respect for international law and the rule of
law remains a crucial element in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Accountability needs
to be reinforced, and the rule of law in international
relations need to be treated as constant and not as
relative. Unfortunately, States are led by their own, not
common, interests. That will not change. But we can
change the prevailing belief that the application of the
law should be based on economic or military power.
The United Nations and its organs therefore have to
work towards accountability for international law
violations, increasing the visibility for such violations
and promoting a culture of checks and balances.
In the same vein, the United Nations should work
actively with States to promote international law, and
not just by hosting ceremonial treaty events, acting
as depositories of treaties and endlessly debating
legal issues in the Sixth Committee without taking

22/103

23/02/2015

any action. The Security Council also has a role to
play in promoting the law. It should start with itself,
by highlighting that any action it takes is based on
international law and not just its determination that a
situation may endanger or threaten peace and security. It
also has to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes,
especially through judicial and arbitration processes.
Chapter VI has been rarely used in the past decades,
and a change in that approach, along with increased
cooperation with judicial and investigative bodies, will
send a message that the Council indeed considers the
rule of law as paramount.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I should
like to commend the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February for having organized
this debate. I also welcome Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, as
well as all the other Ministers present here today. I
thank as well the Secretary-General for his important
briefing.
When the States victorious in the Second World
War met in San Francisco in 1945 to establish the
United Nations, their hope was to envision a peaceful,
just and egalitarian world. In spite the shortcomings
at the time the Charter of the United Nations was
conceived and the changing realities of our world, the
hopes of that time remain alive today. Although the
vision set out in 1945 for a future world may diverge
from current reality, as you, Mr. President, pointed out
in your concept note (S/2015/87/annex), our world today
is still characterized by a trend towards multipolarity,
economic globalization and the desire for peace and
security. As several speakers have indicated, this
new reality undoubtedly requires a new look into the
strategies undertaken by the United Nations.
The maintenance of international peace and security
nevertheless reamains the primary objective of the
United Nations and the international community,
especially given the great suffering being endured by
civilians owing to the proliferation and intensity of
conflicts as well as the new terrorist momentum. This
situation should more than ever lead the international
community to commit to the purposes and principles
of the Charter with renewed importance. In that regard,
the Millennium Declaration, adopted by Heads of State
and Government in 2000, recognizes in the purposes
and principles of the United Nations not just a universal
value, but rather an eternal one. However, while the
aspiration to peace remains the main concern in the

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

world, today as it was yesterday, achieving it has become
more difficult with the passing of 70 years since the
establishment of the Organization. In that regard, we
are quite justified in questioning the effectiveness of
the Security Council in tackling these issues. However,
the reasons for this are well known— and they are not
irreversible.
It is worth recalling, if only to lament the fact,
that in today’s world, characterized by inequality and
underdevelopment, injustice, disregard for human
rights and a lack of respect for the rule of law, at
both the national and international levels, one cannot
hope for peace that is in keeping with our ideals. All
of our countries, developing and developed, all share
responsibility for this situation. The sometimes abusive
recourse to force and the right of the veto at the Security
Council diminishes to zero the efforts of the Council
and prevents it from achieving its objectives. The world
still remembers the failures of the Organization in
resolving the Palestinian issue and in preventing and
managing mass crimes, such as in Rwanda, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and other more recent examples, such as
in Syria.
Today we can all agree that it is as a result of United
Nations action that the world has not experienced
another major conflict. Of course, it should be possible
to do better by pooling our efforts and to obtain from the
Security Council a more cohesive and comprehensive
strategy to harness the strengths of its members to
restore peace in the world, rather than acting in a
case-by-case manner. Furthermore, in line with the
Charter, the Council should seek peace and security
first and foremost through the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as well as through preventive action. Former
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali already set out the
outlines for such action. It is the ability to work to that
end that will open up a path towards implementing
reform of this body.
Given the nature of current regional conflicts,
the Security Council should be able to better
strengthen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, above and beyond the periodic exercise
in consultation, so as to lend the necessary financial and
technical support to assist them in facing the situations
they face.
The primary objective of the United Nations is to
maintain international peace and security. That has
not yet been achieved, but the principles upon which
it is based have experienced various transformations

S/PV.7389

and changes, becoming today fundamental rules for
peaceful relations among States. The principles of
non-interference in domestic affairs, the non-use of
force in international affairs, the sovereign equality of
States, respect for territorial integrity and for human
rights and the rights of people to decide on their own
future are all enshrined in the 1970 Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which today
serves to strengthen their universal nature.
Furthermore, thanks to the international
community’s firm support for peoples’ right to selfdetermination, the United Nations has served as
the framework for all new States’ independence.
Despite the tendency of certain States to interfere in
the domestic affairs of others, the use of force is no
longer a preferred approach to resolving disputes in
international relations. The United Nations, which
remains an unparalleled forum for multilateral
development cooperation, is also striving, together
with regional subregional organizations and through its
Secretariat, to offer a better framework for mediation
and contributes greatly to developing international
justice processes for the peaceful resolution of various
disputes around the world.
In conclusion, no State today can question the
legitimacy of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. They have become universal, and their
standing is such that the entire international community
has supported them, as confirmed recently at the 2005
World Summit of Heads of State and Government.
Finally, as far as my country is concerned, we will
remain true to the ideals of the Organization. We would
like to reiterate our commitment to respect for the
Charter and the faithful implementation of international
law for a peaceful, just and equitable world.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the People’s Republic of China for having
organized this debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
The purposes and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter establish the fundamental basis
for peaceful coexistence among States. They are the
backbone of the political and legal values that structure
the international system, and we must continue to guide
cooperation among States on these bases — even more
so in a diverse and asymmetrical world such as ours.

15-0483823/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the light of the upcoming commemoration
of the seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Charter, we would like to state that its purposes and
principles are assets to the international community
and should guarantee the universal application of the
rule of law and global governance. Those principles
will form a comprehensive corpus that is customary,
universal, non-derogable and as a whole enforceable,
as recognized in General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) and international jurisprudence. Under these
principles, selectivity is not possible.
Against that backdrop. international law, which
has undergone significant developments, demands
adherence to the integrity of the founding principles
of the Charter, which must be upheld even in the face
of new realities, when the goal of helping to establish
stability, peace and security is stake. Consequently, even
when employed in the service of necessary evolution,
such legal principles as the sovereign equality of States,
good faith compliance with international obligations,
States’ territorial integrity and political independence,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force should not be affected. The constitutional nature
of that set of principles should not be relativized,
since it would affect the very essence of stability and
coexistence among States.
The Charter is an instrument for peace, security
and development, and respecting it involves
recognizing that the dignity and welfare of people are
an integral part of respect for fundamental rights. Our
country firmly believes that systematic human rights
violations and crimes against humanity, including
ethnic cleansing, genocide and war crimes, call for the
international community to express legitimate concern,
as it has the duty to give effect to the instruments and
mechanisms in place. In that context, its is with a sense
of responsibility that we reiterate that the principle of
non-intervention cannot be a barrier that prevents the
international community from ruling on situations
where fundamental rights are violated.
In an interconnected world, where ethical
development is crucial to addressing pressing issues
of global policy, we cannot remain indifferent to acts
that are repugnant to human consciousness, which daily
challenge Governments and international institutions
to act. The responsibility to protect is a concept that
has legitimacy and, as such, should be incorporated
into the international law and institutions with which
the international community has been endowed. The

24/103

23/02/2015

Security Council has recognized that in successive
resolutions, including resolutions 2150 (2014) and
2171 (2014). Through those resolutions, the Council
has emphasized that the responsibility to protect can
be instrumental in preventing and combating serious
international crimes such as genocide.
The Council must take all the steps necessary to
facilitate the search, in accordance with international
law, for frameworks through which to prevent conflicts
and act on them in a legitimate and appropriate manner
when appropriate. Today we recognize that international
law has evolved from being aimed at coexistence to being
aimed at cooperation, as evidenced in the obligations
and instruments on those subjects. We must rise to the
challenge of enhancing those elements that enable us to
continue to build an international regulatory structure
that adequately reflects the purposes and principles of
the Charter in our current circumstances.
In that context, the policy and legal imperative that
the United Nations, and in particular the Council, must
continue to promote is key. The Council, taking into
full consideration the role of regional organizations
under Chapter VIII, must act in a manner consistent
with those purposes and principles.
A, analysis of the root or immediate causes of the
destabilizing processes and crises that today seriously
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security cannot therefore depart from the teaching
of the universal principles expressed in the Charter.
Neither terrorism, arms proliferation, internal armed
conflicts nor piracy, among other threats, may serve
to justify a departure from the founding treaty of the
system.
I wish to conclude my statement by recalling that
the Council has recognized that the three pillars of the
United Nations — peace and security, human rights, and
development — are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. Chile has promoted inclusive development
as a transformative mechanism for dealing with the
underlying causes of conflict, and we find strength
in our conviction that it is not possible to separate the
concept of the precepts and principles of the Charter and
international law, which must prevail as the structural
political and legal values of the global order.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing a
debate on a topic that is dear to us and which seeks to
engage all our energy. Your presence helps us in that

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

respect, Mr. Minister, and while the French Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Fabius, was not
able to attend this debate, I know he welcomes your
initiative, which is a very useful one in the lead-up to
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.
Some 70 years ago, at the end of the Second World
War, the San Francisco Conference ended with the
enthusiastic adoption and signing of the Charter. That
moment was celebrated as a key moment in history.
When we read that text together, let us not forget that
even its words are imbued with the trauma of the war
and its atrocities. The United Nations is determined to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
as stated in the preamble to the Charter, and its primary
goal, as reaffirmed in Article 1, is the maintenance
peace and international security.
I wish to respond to the invitation of the Chinese
presidency and to state here, as President Hollande did
on 25 September 2012, that to be a permanent member
of the Council means “making the commitment to take
action to promote peace in the world” (A/67/PV.6, p. 44).
The maintenance of international peace and
security is not the only goal affirmed by the Charter
of the United Nations. Its Article 1 also sets out two
essential pillars of the Organization, namely, the
development of friendly relations between peoples
and international cooperation in solving international
problems by promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all.
France identifies strongly itself with these values,
and I should like to recall that on 31 January 1964, as
we were forging bilateral relations between France and
China, General de Gaulle stated that, most importantly,
it is possible that in the context of the immensity of
global processes, it is by promoting relations among
peoples that we will serve the cause of humankind, that
is to say, the cause of wisdom, progress and peace.
On its path towards lasting peace, the international
community bases itself on points of reference that
include its values, one Organization and respect for the
principles of international law.
The note submitted by the Chinese presidency
(S/2015/87, annex) rightly stresses the need for
respect for international law and the importance of
the rule of law. These collective standards are aimed
at constraining force in accordance with the principles
set out in Article 2 of the Charter. It is essential to
do everything possible to settle disputes by peaceful

S/PV.7389

means, and France underlines in this regard the key role
of the International Court of Justice in the strengthening
of the international rule of law and recognizes the
contribution it has made through its many advisory
opinions. Through its work, it helps us understand
that the rule of law cannot be applied in a vacuum but
must be interpreted in the light of the realities of the
international community in order to remain fruitful.
It is this living practice that has allowed the Charter
to remain relevant. It shows that the United Nations has
been able to adapt to changes throughout the world that
have given rise to new challenges and new crises. An
example here is the indispensable tool of peacekeeping
operations, initially not provided for by the Charter.
However, now we have more than 120,000 personnel
members, as part of 16 operations, working daily for
the maintenance of peace. France fully contributes
to this effort, with 7,800 French soldiers engaged in
peacekeeping operations. Our meeting today is also an
opportunity to pay tribute to them and to restate our
concerns regarding their security in the performance
of their duties.
Increasingly, regional organizations, whose
contributions the Charter anticipated in its Chapter
VIII, play a pivotal role in collective security. France,
as a member of the European Union, recognizes their
value and welcomes the decisive role played by the
African Union in crisis resolution in Africa.
The maintenance of international peace and
security has become a more complex undertaking in
increasingly fragmented and unequal societies, at a
time when globalization allows terrorism to claim more
victims and inflict more suffering, ignoring borders
and destabilizing entire States. Upon the seventieth
anniversary, we will not be able to forget the Syrian
tragedy and its more than 220,000 victims, whose
memory cries out for justice, and many other mass
atrocities.
We are facing unprecedented challenges. Mass
crimes offend the global conscience and the memory of
the sentiments that inspired the drafting of the Charter.
It is when our responsibility to protect civilians fails
that we the peoples of the United Nations are tested.
It is in the face of such tragic failures in terms of
collective security that France emphasizes the role of
the International Criminal Court in ensuring that the
victims of mass atrocities, not satisfied solely with
confronting their past, can help us to build a better
future.

15-0483825/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

But France also wishes to help prevent such
tragedies. Without waiting for Charter reform, France
proposed a restriction on the use of the veto in the
Security Council in case of mass atrocities, which would
represent a major step. It is our duty to demonstrate the
extent to which a permanent seat in the Council is a
responsibility rather than a privilege or a manifestation
of some longing for status.
As set out in Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council, in discharging its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must act in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. Be that as it may, France remains
convinced that the best possible protection against
conflicts will remain economic and harmonious
development and respect for human rights. The Council
itself has repeatedly recognized that creating the
most favourable conditions possible in all areas of the
international arena in itself ensures and contributes to
the maintenance of international peace.
Let us not forget that, despite all the tragic events
that have taken place, considerable progress has been
achieved in the areas of education and health, for
example. Nor can we forget the efforts undertaken
under the auspices of the United Nations to protect our
planet. The year 2015 will be marked by a major event
to be held in Paris at the initiative of France: the twentyfirst Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which is
to lead to an ambitious global agreement to protect our
climate. Let us also recall the universal acceptance
of the Geneva Conventions last year to mark their
150th anniversary, as they create the conditions for
peace for succeeding generations.
Values and respect for the rule of law — here it
behoves me to speak of our Organization, which has
been able to reform itself in the past. France actively
backs Security Council reform, as recent crises have
made more pressing the need to make the Organization
more effective and more representative of global
balances, so as to fully discharge its mission of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Recent crises have shown just how essential the
United Nations and its founding text remain. I thank
you, Mr. President, for having allowed us to reaffirm our
common commitment at a time when our Organization
is faced with challenges that only the cooperation that
you have called for can address.

26/103

23/02/2015

The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I would like to appeal to
speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation may be provided properly.
I wish also to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia): It is my great honour and
gives me great satisfaction to take part today in this
very important open debate, initiated and organized
by China as President of the Security Council. I take
this opportunity to thank China and you personally,
Mr. Foreign Minister, for making it possible for us, in a
year when we are marking 70 years since the adoption
of the Charter of the United Nations, to reconsider once
again and recommit and rededicate ourselves to the
respect and safeguarding of its principles.
The purposes and principles of the United Nations,
as enshrined in the Charter, continue to be just as
valid and important today as they were at the time of
the Charter’s adoption. The expectations of saving the
world from the scourge of war, respecting the dignity
of each and every human person and ensuring justice at
all levels are not less now than they were 70 years ago.
We firmly believe that these goals can be achieved
only through strengthening international cooperation
in all fields, based on the principles of the sovereign
equality of States; refraining from the use of force;
non-interference in the internal affairs of States; respect
for territorial integrity and the pacific settlement of
disputes, and through mutual respect and the honouring
of differences.
I take this opportunity to reiterate, on behalf of the
Republic of Serbia, its commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations and the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The principles of the
Charter of the United Nations are the jus cogens of

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

contemporary international public law, and their full
implementation is a precondition for the rule of law.
The Republic of Serbia strongly supports strengthening
the role of the United Nations in maintaining peace and
security and respect for international law. The principal
organs of the United Nations can execute their basic
functions effectively only if they are carried out to the
benefit and on behalf of all Member States; they can
be effective only if decisions are made in harmony
with the principles of the Charter, and specifically
those of territorial integrity and non-interference
in States’ internal affairs. The Republic of Serbia
supports the efforts being made to assess the work of
all the organs and bodies of the United Nations and find
ways and possibilities for improving them, especially
the Security Council’s work and effectiveness in
maintaining international peace and security and
finding a unanimous response to the most complex
security challenges and threats we face.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has pointed out
on a number of occasions, the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations is a historic
chance for all Member States to contribute to fulfilling
our common goal — making the world better, more
developed and more just. In that regard, I would like to
reiterate the main principles that guide the Republic of
Serbia in its foreign policy. They are the safeguarding
of the international multilateral world through respect
for international law and the rule of law; the primacy
of the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue;
and the achievement of greater mutual respect and
understanding among peoples.
We also honour those principles in our current
position as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In
that capacity, I would like to point out today that the
partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations
is vital to the maintenance of long-term peace and
security in the geographical space between Vancouver
and Vladivostok. Cooperating with the United Nations
enables the OSCE to make progress in dealing with
both existing and emerging challenges. That approach
is firmly grounded in the OSCE’s 1999 Platform for
Co-operative Security and the principles reaffirmed
in its 2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration. As
security challenges continue to evolve, the nature of
OSCE cooperation with the United Nations must evolve
as well, becoming more pragmatic and action-oriented.
Especially in times of economic hardship, enhancing

S/PV.7389

synergies and finding new ways of working together that
capitalize on the relative strengths of both organizations
are critical. Effective, pragmatic cooperation that builds
on the respective mandates and strengths of the United
Nations and the OSCE is a key objective of the OSCE’s
proactive approach.
The sole road to peace and prosperity leads through
mutual cooperation, respect and honour, a convincing
example of which we have been embarked on since
the difficult and challenging years of the 1990s and,
more recently, in Kosovo and Metohija. Tolerance of
every kind, especially religious tolerance, is key to
overcoming the increasingly ruthless problems that
today’s world regrettably faces. In my view, respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each and
every State lies at the core of respect for international
law and the rule of law, and the solution to any crisis is
not military intervention but dialogue alone. A sovereign
State cannot emerge by cancelling the existence and
sovereignty of another. The right of a country’s citizens
to security, or indeed any of their rights, should never be
realized by violating the fundamental rights of others.
We strongly support the position of China as
President of the Security Council that we should
continue to work as a matter of priority on promoting
peaceful ways of settling disputes, as provided for in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. We
believe that coercive measures should be used only as
a last resort and only in cases when international peace
and security are genuinely threatened or breached. The
dialogue being conducted right now between Belgrade
and Pristina with the facilitation of the European Union
demonstrates in the best possible way our resolve and
full commitment to normalizing relations and achieving
a lasting and sustainable political solution for Kosovo
and Metohija.
Unfortunately, crises are multiplying around the
world, as is the number of people in need of help. We
should therefore all feel called on to make the United
Nations stronger and more efficient, primarily through
contributions by all its individual Members. The
Republic of Serbia is proud of its leadership position in
South-Eastern Europe and of the fact that it ranks seventh
in Europe based on its participation in and contribution
to United Nations missions. As representative of a
country that has peacekeepers deployed in eight United
Nations missions, I would like to emphasize that the
security of the crafters and implementers of global
peace must be one of our priorities.

15-0483827/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the time when the United Nations was taking
shape, ignorant of future threats and challenges, the
world was full of hope that the wounds of two world
wars would heal. We have inherited what has come to
pass over those 70 years and see it as a guideline and
impetus in our endeavour to ensure that history, in its
darkest form, is not repeated. In order to uphold the
ideals that have guided us all these years, each and
every one of us should invest our best efforts to bring
about a better world than the one we have inherited. To
that end, we firmly believe in the future of the United
Nations and the historic role and mission of proactive
multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your timely initiative in holding today’s debate.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.
At the same time, I would also like to make a statement
in my national capacity.
This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War and of the founding
Member States’ signing of the Charter of the United
Nations, in their quest to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. To that end, they set out clear
purposes and principles that for 70 years have remained
a cornerstone of international relations. Remarkably, it
was the Ukrainian representative who led the committee
that worked out that crucial part of the Charter so long
ago in 1945. Seventy years later, the world order based
on the noble purposes and comprehensive principles of
the United Nations Charter is under major attack.
The Russian Federation has blatantly violated the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. It has used every possible means ranging
from interference in Ukraine’s internal affairs to direct
military aggression and partial occupation of Ukrainian
sovereign territory, and from political and economic
coercion to a massive propaganda assault. It is not an
exaggeration to say that Russia has unleashed a fullscale hybrid war on Ukraine. It is horrifying that such
flagrant violations have been committed by a permanent
member of the Security Council, which bears a special
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Russia ignores the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and does not respect its political and
legal obligations emanating from other international

28/103

23/02/2015

agreements, including the Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances to Ukraine. To justify its actions,
it hides behind barefaced misinterpretations of the
relevant documents and its related commitments.
As we prepare to mark the anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations and its principles,
we must do everything possible to ensure that the
Organization remains a key player in maintaining
international peace and security. To that end, three
actions are necessary.
First, we must make all possible efforts to uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is essential to reaffirm their universal and
unconditional validity as a basis for peaceful relations.
Secondly, we must elaborate mechanisms to verify
compliance with the United Nations principles against
clear benchmarks. It is unacceptable to see gross
violations masterfully misinterpreted, concealed or
merely denied, and thereby ignored. Historically, many
hopes have rested on the bona fide adherence of Member
States to the rules. Yet an old diplomatic adage, “Trust,
but verify”, has at times proved especially fitting.
Thirdly, we must ensure that States that violate United
Nations principles are brought to justice. The concept
of international responsibility should be reinforced
with a clear set of sanctions on the infringers. It is the
only way to restore trust and order in the world.
It is clear that reform of the United Nations is
absolutely necessary to address its limitations. If the
Organization had been upgraded, Ukraine would not
have to pay a blood tribute now. However, the reform
process will take time, whereas the drastic situation in
the eastern part of Ukraine, which Russia has turned
from fertile fields into scorched land, requires an
immediate response. As we prepare to commemorate
the victory of the Second World War, we must do
everything possible to curtail Russia’s growing
militarism and expansionism and avert its defiance of
international law.
The Russian side ignores the recent Minsk
agreements outlining comprehensive measures towards
a political settlement. In particular, Russia and its
proxies in eastern Ukraine have not only disregarded
the ceasefire that was designed to trigger the entire
Minsk package, but have also undertaken an offensive
on the town of Debaltseve and have continued attacking
other Ukrainian towns and villages. Militants and their
Russian masters have blocked the activities of the

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which was vested with
the special authority to monitor the ceasefire and
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line.
We cannot afford to lose more servicemen, whose
death toll has already exceeded 1,500. We cannot
tolerate our innocent civilians continuing to die under
the constant shelling by terrorists and Russian regular
forces. We cannot stand by while Ukrainian citizens in
the occupied areas are deprived of the basic conditions
of normal life and subjected to abuse of their rights.
We cannot watch while the Minsk agreements are
continuously violated as Russia persists in transferring
the most sophisticated offensive weapons into the
eastern part of Ukraine and in turning Ukraine into
a shooting range. We cannot accept that Russia has
turned Crimea into an isolated military camp and its
residents into pariahs.
Lastly, we cannot accept that some are still behaving
as if nothing is happening and as if there are no red
lines for aggression. In that regard, we are considering
requesting the United Nations to deploy a mission,
possibly a peacekeeping operation, to Ukraine. That
initiative would not supersede the Minsk agreements.
To the contrary, we view such operation as an
indispensable instrument to ultimately help implement
the agreements and restore peace. We expect that the
Member States of the United Nations and, above all,
the Security Council, will support such a request for
assistance. In our view, it will be a crash test of the
United Nations ability to maintain international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Gargash (United Arab Emirates): I thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the universal and indispensable
Organization, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its
commitment to the core principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and takes this opportunity to reflect
on how best to collectively equip the United Nations
to deal with the ever-more complex challenges before
us. The pressure of these challenges is fracturing the
global security order and being exploited by non-State
actors. Today more than at any time in recent history,

S/PV.7389

we need a strong and effective United Nations and
Security Counci. In that context, the United Arab
Emirates would offer the following observations.
First, it is vital that the Security Council consult
and coordinate with concerned States, even when
dealing with fast-moving, complex situations. Reform
of these working methods will make the Council more
effective and ensure that the full range of perspectives
of those countries most affected is considered.
Secondly, Article 52 of the Charter of the United
Nations states:
“The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements”.
Neighbouring States have the most to gain from the
peaceful resolution of a security crisis, and everything
to lose from protracted conflict. The role of regional
organizations as an essential component of the
international security system must be further utilized
and supported by the Security Council.
Mr. Wang Min took the Chair.
Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, greater
consideration must be taken of the human cost of
protracted debates and inaction. For example, the crisis
in Syria has forcibly displaced close to 11 million
people — 3 million beyond its borders and 7.6 million
internally. Additionally, the suffering inflicted on the
Palestinian population, within Palestine and in the
diaspora, remains one of the gravest injustices in the
Arab region and has ramifications for the entire world.
In many parts of our region — especially in Syria,
Iraq and Yemen — current challenges have further
highlighted the need for legitimate, international
engagement. On a positive note, we would like to
commend the Security Council, and Jordan and the
United Kingdom in particular, for their efforts to
consult and involve the Gulf Cooperation Council in
the drafting of resolution 2201 (2015). Implementation
is now the priority challenge in Yemen, and the United
Arab Emirates stands ready to assist in this critical
task. The United Arab Emirates also reaffirms our
commitment to the legitimate Government headed by
President Hadi Mansour, calls for the release of Prime
Minister Bahah from house arrest, and urges a return to
the political process that was derailed through the use
of force by the Houthi militias.

15-0483829/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

With regard to Libya, the United Arab Emirates was
horrified by the recent atrocities and by the ongoing
terrorist attacks plaguing Libya and neighbouring
countries. We extend our full support to the endeavours
of Special Representative Bernardino León. There
is an urgent need for a political agreement. However,
a political strategy must be accompanied by a robust
posture that ensures that extremism and terrorism
do not take advantage of the ongoing international
mediation. That is why the United Arab Emirates
unconditionally endorses the draft resolution steered
by Libya and Egypt to lift the arms embargo on the
legitimate Libyan authorities. That is a necessary
step for the legitimate Libyan Government and the
House of Representatives to exercise their sovereign
power and secure regional stability. Any delay will
seriously impact the situation on the ground and send
a dangerous signal to the militant groups responsible
for the atrocities. The risks of militants gaining control
of Libya’s significant resources and utilizing them to
export their extremist activities across borders are a
clear and present danger, not only for our region but
for the world. Our resoluteness as the international
community is required, or we will face a much more
complicated and dangerous situation in Libya.
We should also note where the international
community is making progress. Last week, the United
Arab Emirates was one of 60 countries to attend the
Summit on Countering Violent Extremism, hosted by
the United States White House, where the anti-Daesh
coalition confirmed it had made strategic advances on
the ground. At the United Nations, Security Council
efforts, including resolution 2199 (2015), sponsored by
the Russian Federation, to cut off the financial lifelines
of these groups, and resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), on combating the flow of foreign fighters, are
significant.
Further normative developments to inhibit the
transmission of extremist messages — for example,
through social media — are also encouraging. As
President Barack Obama announced at last week’s
Summit, the United States, in collaboration with the
United Arab Emirates, will establish a new digital
communications hub to work with religious leaders,
civil society and community leaders to counter terrorist
propaganda. Those efforts have been vital in the global
campaign to tackle the threat of extremism. Next, we
must focus on cooperating to eliminate the root causes
of extremism. In the United Arab Emirates, we are

30/103

23/02/2015

building a national model of moderation, tolerance and
unity. We believe that our model is a contemporary
counter-narrative to extremism and a clear refutation of
the brutal and false message of extremists.
The challenge of countering extremism requires an
urgent, global, coordinated and multi-stakeholder effort.
There are many important United Nations initiatives in
place, particularly with regard to counter-terrorism,
but there is now a critical need to support effective,
State-led policy interventions to counter extremism
through social, economic and political means and on
multiple levels. I am pleased to announce today at
the Security Council that the United Arab Emirates
is launching a diplomatic initiative aimed at building
international cooperation and facilitating dialogue
through a contact group on countering extremism.
This strategic effort will focus on developing and
disseminating concrete solutions and best practices
in countering extremism. The progress made through
the contact group will complement and reinforce the
efforts of the anti-Daesh coalition and support the
United Nations to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law, as
enshrined in the Charter.
Let me conclude by congratulating China on its
successful stewardship of the Security Council during
its presidency.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We should like to congratulate
China on its presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We appreciate the briefing given to us today by
the Secretary-General. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral to elaborate the briefing into a report that can
be given to world leaders when they meet later this year
for the seventieth anniversary summit on the founding
of the United Nations. We acknowledge the very useful
concept note (S/2015/87, annex) circulated by the
Chinese delegation for today’s open debate.
First, the Security Council has taken the lead in
referring to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations while attempting to maintain
international peace and security. It is a matter of concern
for those of us who are not privileged to sit permanently
in the Council that the Council’s invocation of those
purposes and principles appears selective, to suit the
national interests of powerful Member States. The

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council’s decisions on issues not directly linked with
maintaining international peace and security cannot
encroach upon the jurisdiction of the General Assembly,
where all of us are equally represented.
Secondly, we endorse tackling global challenges
together in a cooperative manner, especially to
implement our development agenda. The very nature of
those challenges, which are increasingly transboundary
in nature, requires concerted action. Terrorism is a
good example — it directly threatens development,
especially in many developing countries. However,
concerted action by the Council to implement its
landmark decisions, including resolution 1373 (2001),
which imposes counter-terrorism obligations on all
Member States, is absent. Counter-terrorism sanctions
regimes, especially set out under resolution 1267
(1999), are administered ambivalently and opaquely by
the Council. The listing of the perpetrators of the most
heinous of terrorist crimes is subject to the whims of
powerful Member States. Even brazen public violations
of the sanctions regime by listed individuals and entities,
far from attracting punitive measures, do not even elicit
the Council’s mildest censure. That inaction is a serious
deviation from the responsibilities given to the Council
by the Charter, with dangerous consequences.
Thirdly, we are glad to see the concept note
acknowledge the need to take into account the views
of troop-contributing countries while formulating
peacekeeping mandates. We deeply regret that the
Council has so far repeatedly violated, and in fact
diluted, the clear provisions of Article 44 of the
Charter, which explicitly requires the Council to invite
the Member States contributing troops that are not
members of the Council to participate in the decisions
of the Council. That has seriously compromised the
objectives of peacekeeping.
Fourthly, we endorse the call to give priority to
the peaceful settlement of disputes while using the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. The festering
situations in Africa, West Asia and, lately, Europe
are vivid illustrations of the Council’s inability or
disinclination to use those provisions. We are convinced
that only through an inclusive political dialogue process
can any lasting peace and security be sustained. The
Council must invest more time, energy and resources
into implementing Chapter VI of the Charter.
Finally, it is ironic that calls for democracy
and the rule of law are being made in a Council that
itself embodies the undemocratic stranglehold of

S/PV.7389

the privileges of a few, forged by a wartime alliance
that no longer exists. The logic of democracy and the
anguished faces of human suffering across the world
call for urgent action to reform the Council. We must
do so this year if we are to learn the right lessons of
history.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening and presiding
over this very important meeting.
I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the
five Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and my own country, Sweden.
Seventy years ago, with extraordinary foresight,
our nations did something remarkable, and to this
day unrivalled. In the service of coming generations,
we reaffirmed the core principles of human rights
to protect humankind from the scourge of war. We
decided to unite our strengths to maintain international
peace and security and not use armed force, save for the
common interest. That was the purpose for which the
United Nations was created.
Today, that is still our task and common goal. Today,
that is still what needs to be respected by all — respect
for the sovereignty of the country that faces external
aggression or occupation of its territory, respect for
the dignity and worth of any human person who is
denigrated and denied his or her human rights. Today,
however, that task is more challenging than ever. We
live in an interconnected world, where what happens in
another’s country will eventually effect what happens
in mine. Conflicts can be inter-State, but more often
intra-State and multifaceted. Transnational threats, such
as terrorism, organized crime and global pandemics,
show that security threats are no longer confined within
borders. Now more than ever, collective threats need to
be dealt with collectively. Based on the norms of the
Charter, we need to act through prevention, mediation,
regional cooperation and, as a last resort, force. To be
effective, those efforts require the active involvement
of women as well as men.
Our ability and willingness to act decisively and
collectively leave much to be desired. We have conferred
on the Security Council the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. We have
agreed that the Council acts on our behalf in carrying
out its duties. We therefore expect individual Council

15-0483831/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

members to always act in the spirit of the Charter, to
never to give way to any threat, and to never abuse the
trust we have vested in them by using their Council seats
to pursue national interests. Our faith that this spirit
will prevail, despite the many challenges against it, is
what motivates us Nordic countries in our unwavering
support of the many peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities mandated by the Security Council. It is also
the guiding light whenever we take a seat at the Council
table and assume our share of the responsibility.
When stating the principle of sovereign equality
of all Member States, and in that regard particularly
mindful of the security and territorial integrity of
small and medium-sized States, the founders of the
United Nations never intended sovereignty to be an
excuse for the international community to avert its
eyes from flagrant atrocity crimes. The principle of
sovereignty, therefore, must have a dimension of human
security — for men, women and children — as well as
for the security of States. Those are the standards and
norms that underpin the Charter of the United Nations
and that should underpin our collective security
today. Those are the standards to which Trygve Lie,
Dag Hammarskjöld and their successors tried to hold
the world. As the nature of today’s conflicts tells us,
nothing else will do.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank you
for organizing this timely debate and for composing
a sensible concept note (S/2015/87, annex). We deeply
appreciate the Chinese proposal to reflect on the norms
and values enshrined by the Charter of the United
Nations. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his instructive presentation.
The seventieth anniversary of the Allied victory
in the Second World War and of the founding of the
United Nations, to be celebrated this year, will coincide
with a vital juncture for the Organization and for the
international order as a whole. As the concept note
presented by China correctly points out, the world has
undergone profound and complex changes over the past
decades. The rise of economic globalization and the
emergence of a multipolar geopolitical environment are
but two of the major trends that define the age we live
in.
New challenges have materialized that cannot
feasibly be solved by any single country, for they are

32/103

23/02/2015

truly global in nature. At least two of those challenges
can be considered unifying elements capable of
contributing to the enhancement of a world order
centred on cooperation, with the United Nations at its
core. I am thinking of the fight against terrorism and
the challenges posed by climate change. Members of
the United Nations are aware that we can succeed in
those two daunting tasks only by joining forces, and we
are all ready to do so through inclusive processes that
abide by or promote universally applicable laws and
understandings. If we are serious about promoting the
principles and purposes of the Charter in the twentyfirst century, upholding multilateralism is not just
desirable; it is the only responsible course of action.
As we consider the shortcomings in the present
world order, which some authors are starting to refer
to as “disorder”, the lessons of history should guide
us. Two hundred years ago, the Congress of Vienna
sealed the replacement of a unipolar European
moment with an innovative system of plurilateral
consultations — a context that can structurally be
compared to our current transition towards multipolarity,
even if the circumstances are obviously very different.
Those arrangements established in Vienna preserved
a certain stability in Europe for almost a century, but
became subject to irreversible stress under the strain
of rising nationalism, regional conflicts, economic
hardship, all compounded by political shortsightedness
and complacency.
A generation later, another ambitious endeavour
in favour of collective security, the League of Nations,
rose from the ashes of the Great War of 1914-1918. Many
of its legal and moral tenets, such as the prohibition
of war and the obligation to abide by international
law, are still with us today. Sadly, the League was
undone by its limited membership and by the absence
of enforcement mechanisms, the result being that an
even worse catastrophe ensued in the Second World
War. As a result of their inability to adapt to shifts in
geopolitical trends and to develop more legitimate and
efficient mechanisms for dialogue and diplomacy, both
the Concert of Europe and the League of Nations failed
to prevent devastating conflicts.
We must not allow the Organization to follow a
similar path. In shaping a new cooperative multilateral
order, attuned to multipolarity, either the United
Nations will be at the centre of that order, or there will
be no order. Unfortunately, alarming signs of systemic
failure can already be noticed. The existing order is

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

being corroded by disrespect for the United Nations
Charter, flawed strategies that privilege the use of
force and disregard the role of diplomacy, old-fashioned
notions of spheres of influence, and misplaced concepts
of morality that aggravate humanitarian crises under
the claim of protecting civilians.
A certain measure of hope can be derived from the
fact that multilateral frameworks for cooperation have
been recently improved or even created in a variety
of areas. Key examples include the replacement of
the Group of Seven by the Group of 20 as a leading
forum for cooperation on economic and financial
issues, the creation of the Human Rights Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission, the establishment of
universal membership to the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme, and the
creation of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development, as recommended by the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development. A certain
measure of reassurance can also be derived from the
fact that there is unity around certain key objectives,
while the body of international law, as well as the
mechanisms for cooperation established since 1945,
receive considerable attention from Governments, the
media and civil society.
When it comes to peace and security, however,
the international community has yet to update its
structures of governance. Moreover, the current system
is being tested not only by contemporary challenges
and crises, but also by unilateralism and seriously
flawed responses. An eloquent illustration of this state
of affairs is presented in the article published by Alan
Kuperman in the March/April edition of Foreign Affairs
on the current Libya debacle. This worrisome pattern
of dysfunctionality resonates outside this building, as
perceived by The Elders, chaired by former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan. As The Elders rightly emphasized
in a recent statement presenting four proposals to build
a better and fairer United Nations system,
“all institutions must adapt to cope with new
circumstances — and today’s circumstances are
very different from those of 1945”.
It is therefore urgent for us to ponder the high
price of inaction, reflect on history, reaffirm the strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and rise to the challenge
our Heads of State and Government entrusted to us in
the 2005 World Summit outcome document (resolution

S/PV.7389

60/1), which called for early reform of the Security
Council.
Brazil shares with a large number of delegations
the conviction that the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations provides an opportunity, which cannot
be missed, to achieve a concrete outcome to the crucial
matter of updating our collective security framework.
Let us echo the political will, the foresight and the
tenacity displayed seven decades ago by the founders
of the United Nations. If we seek to reaffirm the
principles and purposes of the Charter and to foster an
international order based on justice and cooperation,
we must revitalize the Security Council. Only then will
the Organization be truly fit for purpose and able to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): First of
all, Sir, I would ask you to kindly convey our warm
welcome to Foreign Minister Wang Yi, as well as our
utmost pleasure at seeing him chairing this open debate
of the Security Council. His presence in this organ is
reflective of China’s unwavering commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations. Pakistan would also like
to pay its respects to the large number of ministers who
have gathered here for this very important debate.
The true value of any blessing in life can be assessed
only in its absence. We therefore find wisdom in your
initiative to celebrate the United Nations Charter while
reflecting on history. The world before 1945 bore the
scourge of the two World Wars and their devastation,
the horrific internecine conflicts of the eighteenth
century and the associated travails of humankind. We
must therefore keep remind ourselves of the lessons
learned from the international conflicts that preceded
the Charter of the United Nations. While our quest for
absolute peace has yet to be fulfilled, since the adoption
of the Charter, humankind has never had the kind of
relative peace, prosperity and development that it has
today.
This year in the history of the United Nations
is not just for celebrations; it is a time to remind
ourselves of and reflect on the values that strengthen
the Charter of the United Nations, a time to renew our
commitment to the sovereign equality of States. We
must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, peaceful settlement of international disputes
and non-interference in internal affairs of States, and

15-0483833/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/02/2015

we must refrain from the use of force or the threat to
use force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of States.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

On the basis of these principles, Pakistan remains
committed to the maintenance of international peace
and security. As the leading troop contributor to the
United Nations, with over 8,000 troops and boots on
the ground, Pakistan is committed to global peace and
security, which is evident from the sacrifices that we
have made. More than 140 Pakistani troops have laid
down their lives and countless others have suffered
injuries. We continue to stand firmly by United Nations
peacekeeping efforts.

We should like to thank the Chinese presidency of
the Security Council and you personally, Mr. President,
for providing the Council and the United Nations as
a whole with this unique opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. This debate also gives us
the opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of those
who sacrificed themselves in the hope of a free and
democratic world, established on the universal values
and principles that also inspired the foundations of the
European Union.

The Charter places special emphasis on resolving
international disputes by peaceful means, through
dialogue and consultations. The Security Council
should therefore make frequent recourse to the tools
available to it under Chapter VI and should employ
Chapter VII measures only as a last resort. Its actions
should therefore conform to the purposes and principles
of the Charter as provided for in Article 24.
The Charter also promotes the universal application
of international law. The Security Council, through
its uniform actions, must lead by example and exude
credibility. Its use of force should be consistent with
the Charter principles of collective security. It should
make optimum use of the International Court of Justice.
Long-standing disputes and situations must be resolved
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. Let me
emphasize that the fulfilment of the inalienable rights
of all peoples, especially the right to self-determination,
would pave the way for uniform implementation of all
resolutions.
We fully agree that there is a need to uphold
democracy and the rule of law in international relations.
All Members of the United Nations, irrespective of
their size and population, have an equal stake in the
making of international order, and their participation
should therefore be on an equal footing. Lastly, with
this spirit in mind, let us resolve to pursue our goals
towards collective security and common development
through a win-win situation of cooperation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania,
34/103

In the concept note (S/2015/87, annex), you remind
us, Sir, of the core promise of the founders of this
Organization: to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. But preventing future wars was not
the only undertaking of the signatories of the Charter
70 years ago. The very same preambular passage of the
Charter also stresses their determination to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small; to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained; and to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom. In its very first paragraphs, the Charter thus
defined the three pillars of this Organization: peace and
security, human rights, and development.
The Security Council obviously has a very specific
role with regard to the first of these pillars, due to
its primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
the European Union also believes that the Security
Council has its own specific responsibilities with regard
to the other two pillars. The Security Council itself has
underlined this fact in a number of landmark statements
and resolutions. In May 2009, the Council welcomed a
statement by the African Union that unconstitutional
changes of Government can pose a threat to peace
and security. In July 2011, the Council expressed its
concern that possible adverse effects of climate change
may, in the long run, aggravate certain existing threats
to international peace and security. And in April 2006
and again in November 2009, the Council noted that
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law in

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.
The European Union and its member States believe
that the Council can in particular make its own key
contribution to the protection of fundamental human
rights as one of the core purposes of the United
Nations. In particular, it has the important power to
refer situations in which genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes have been committed to the
International Criminal Court, as well as by deciding on
targeted sanctions.
The Charter calls on all Members of the Organization
to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State. The European
Union and its member States are deeply committed to
this core principle of the United Nations, which the
Chinese presidency has also highlighted in its concept
note. We firmly believe that there is no place for the
use of force and coercion to change internationally
recognized borders in Europe or elsewhere in the
twenty-first century. In this regard, the European
Union recalls General Assembly resolution 68/262
and remains strongly committed to upholding the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
The concept note prepared by the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council rightly underlines
the centrality of international law as well as of the
rule of law as foundations of this Organization and of
international relations in general. The Charter itself is
one of the cornerstones of international law. Respect
for the principles of the Charter and international law
is also one of the guiding principles of the European
Union’s international action, as set out in the Treaty of
the European Union.
Abiding by the rule of law is essential for the
peaceful settlement of international disputes. We
attach great importance to all the various instruments
described in Article 33 of the Charter. In recent years,
particular attention has been paid to mediation.
At the same time, we would like to emphasize
the role of judicial mechanisms in the prevention and
resolution of legal disputes. We strongly support the
role of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations for the peaceful
settlement of disputes among States. We recognize
the importance of its advisory opinions, and we call

S/PV.7389

upon all States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance
with its Statute.
We also see the linkages between the rule of law
at the international and domestic levels. As former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan already put it in his
report,“In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all” (A/59/2005), some
10 years ago: “I strongly believe that every nation that
proclaims the rule of law at home must respect it abroad
and that every nation that insists on it abroad must
enforce it at home” (ibid., para. 133). This is a position
the European Union fully shares.
Finally, let me say a short word about the contribution
of regional and other organizations to the realization
of the purposes of the Charter, This was the subject
of another milestone thematic debate of this Council,
also under Chinese chairmanship, in January 2010
(S/PV.6257). The presidential statement agreed at that
time (S/PRST/2010/1) recognized the important role
that regional and subregional organizations can play
in the peaceful settlement of conflicts, as well as in
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding, inter
alia.
In another presidential statement, agreed in
February 2014, the Security Council specifically
recognized the European Union’s comprehensive
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security, as well as its commitment, and that of
its member States, to international peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and financial
and logistical support (S/PRST/2014/4). We see this
statement as an encouragement to further develop and
deepen our cooperation with the United Nations, but
also with other regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.
Chapter VIII of the Charter bears testimony to the
fact that the founders of the United Nations foresaw
some of the advantages that the cooperation with
regional arrangements could provide. We now have
a much clearer picture of the huge contribution that
regional and cross-regional cooperation and integration
can make to international peace and security, the rule
of law, human rights and sustainable development, by
no means only in Europe, but also in many other parts
of the world. This is a new dimension of international
relations that can substantially enrich the work of the
United Nations in our collective efforts to reaffirm,

15-0483835/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

defend and realize the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement just made by the representative of the
European Union.
In our own national statement, I would like to start
with a quotation: “He who closes his eyes to the past will
be blind to the present.” These words were spoken by the
recently deceased German President Von Weizsäcker in
1985 at the fortieth anniversary commemoration of the
end of the Second World War. Today, 30 years later, his
words have not lost their relevance.
The Second World War — unleashed by Nazi
Germany — cost millions of lives and laid waste
to countries around the globe. While the world was
burning, visionary leaders set out to establish the
United Nations to free humankind from the scourge of
war and to replace the law of force with the force of
law. As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations this year, it is only right to pay tribute
to the founding mothers and fathers of the principles
they enshrined in the Charter. We therefore welcome
the initiative taken by the Chinese presidency to call for
today’s open debate.
My country became an United Nations Member
State only in 1973. For us, it was far more than a mere
formal act; it was the culmination of our journey
towards rejoining the world community. The people of
Germany and its successive Governments had set out
on this road with a clear vision — that it was in our best
interests to be firmly anchored in collective security
systems; that in an increasingly interdependent world,
one can gain only by also giving; and that this approach
requires strong ties with our neighbours and partners
that transcend traditional sovereignty.
That is what lies at the core of the historic project of
European unification, and it is what inspires and drives
our foreign policy today, including our multilateral
diplomacy here in New York. Having learned the
lessons of the past, Germany today is willing to take on
more responsibility in the world, within a multilateral
framework and with a clear emphasis on diplomacy,
peaceful settlement of conflicts and civilian crisis
prevention.

36/103

23/02/2015

The goals and principles of the United Nations
Charter remain as valid as they were in 1945. Peace,
human rights and development are no less important
now than they were 70 years ago. But the world has
changed since then and so have the ways and means
by which the international community is striving to
attain these goals. Over the past decades, the United
Nations system has demonstrated its ability to adapt
to new realities and meet emerging challenges. It has
expanded its toolkit to respond to the new nature of
armed conflict. There is also a growing understanding
that human rights should know no borders and that
those responsible for the most egregious violations
must be held accountable.
Lastly, the world has come to understand that global
sustainable development is a common responsibility.
In a world of finite natural resources, no country can
prosper at the expense of others. On all these issues, the
United Nations provides a proven framework to reach
global solutions. Its unique legitimacy and ability to
meet new challenges must therefore be safeguarded.
The foregoing also requires that the structures and
institutions of the United Nations are willing and able
to live up to their tasks. Reviews of the peacekeeping
architecture, the peacebuilding framework and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have been
initiated. We welcome and actively contribute to these
reviews and processes. Only when seen together in a
holistic and comprehensive understanding of peace,
security and development will these reviews make the
United Nations fit for its eighth decade.
Voices that call for a similar commitment to update
the United Nations peace and security architecture with
the Security Council at its core are growing louder. We
share the view that it is high time to consider whether
the Council’s structure — largely unchanged since
1945 — allows it to effectively address the challenges
of today’s world.
As much as has been achieved over the past
decades, serious challenges remain. One of the biggest
challenges to the international legal order remains the
blatant violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine
through the illegal annexation of Crimea, which we
will not recognize. This is an attempt to redraw borders
through the use of force. We are deeply worried by
reports of ongoing violations of the agreed ceasefire. The
Security Council underlined the importance of the full
implementation of the Minsk Agreements in resolution

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

2202 (2015) last week, which we fully support. We call
on all sides to stop fighting and remove heavy weapons
as agreed. We think that deliberations in the Security
Council could benefit greatly from cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
On other matters, chlorine gas has been
systematically and repeatedly used as a weapon in Syria
by the Assad regime. Radical extremists — from West
Africa to Iraq, from Paris to Copenhagen — threaten
the values enshrined in the United Nations Charter
and pervert the teachings of Islam. As a result of the
proliferation of conflicts, the world is confronted with
the largest refugee crisis since the Second World War.
Climate change is threatening not only livelihoods,
prosperity and security in numerous Member States;
if unmitigated, it may threaten the very existence of
humankind.
The response to those threats and challenges
cannot be to revert to old patterns of statecraft based
on spheres of influence, to pursue national interests
in a zero-sum logic or to simply close our eyes — or
our borders. History has shown that humankind is best
served when cooperation trumps confrontation and
when the strength of the law prevails over the law of
the strongest. That recognition led to the creation of the
United Nations 70 years ago, and it is still valid today.
We need a strong United Nations at the centre of global
governance. Building a stronger United Nations is our
collective duty. We owe it to our citizens and to those
who 70 years ago said “Never again”.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba considers this to be a very timely debate on this
subject as we approach the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations and the adoption
of its Charter. The year 2015 also marks the seventieth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and
of the nuclear bombing of the cities of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, which were horrific chapters in the history of
humankind that should not be repeated.
Realizing the right to peace requires eradicating the
threats that conspire against that common desire. The
consecration of altruistic purposes and principles in the
Charter is not enough. It is essential that Member States
and other international actors strictly adhere to such
principles in their conduct. Flagrant violations of the
Charter of the United Nations, including interference
in the internal affairs of other States for the purpose of
hegemonic domination, acts of aggression, wars over
natural resources, neocolonialist practices in foreign

S/PV.7389

policy, the unfair and exclusionary current international
order, the inequality and selfishness resulting from
neoliberal capitalist globalization, discrimination and
xenophobia, and the denial of peoples’ right to selfdetermination constitute serious violations of the right
to peace.
The purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
are violated when States resort to the use and threat
of the use of force and to serious actions taken
against the sovereignty of other nations, including by
implementing unilateral coercive measures. While it is
true that sustainable development cannot be achieved
without peace and stability, it is truer still that there
will be no peace or stability without development and
there will be no peace or security if millions of people
are condemned to hunger, poverty and hopelessness.
The Security Council has an important role to fulfil
in relation to the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security and promoting respect
for the purposes and principles of the Charter. It must
perform its functions in accordance with the powers
that were conferred upon it by the Charter of the
United Nations. The members of the Security Council
should be the first to give priority to peaceful solutions
and exercise a clear, effective and resolute resistance
against the recourse to war. They must take advantage
of any opportunity that might save lives. They should
not be standard-bearers for the philosophy of regime
change, which is a clear attack against peoples’ selfdetermination.
As clearly confirmed by the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, the non-use or threat of the use of force, selfdetermination and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States constitute the basic foundation of
international law and a prerequisite for the peaceful
coexistence of nations, sustainable development and
the promotion and protection of all human rights for all.
The rule of law in international relations is
incompatible with unilateralism and economic,
commercial and financial policies and measures
contrary to international law. The rule of law at the
international level is also violated when actions are
carried out to impose regime change, intervene in the
internal affairs of States or incite internal conflicts

15-0483837/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

in sovereign States under foreign agendas aimed at
hegemonic domination and influence.
Seventy years after its foundation, the United
Nations must be strengthened and the Security Council
democratized, to make them standards of transparency,
democracy and participation by the entire international
community in the resolution of pressing global problems.
A revitalized General Assembly is also needed to take
the central role in the realization of the right of peoples
and of every human being to a just, democratic and
equitable international order that supports the efforts
of States in the construction of a sovereign future that
each nation decides for itself.
Cuba wishes to reaffirm the unwavering commitment
of the Cuban people to the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular its purposes and principles, and reiterate
its vocation for peace in this forum. The historical
leader of the Cuban revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, said
that the struggle of peoples for their sovereignty and
independence is the fight for peace. Cuba has fought for
peace, fighting the exploitation of man by man. Cuba
has fought for peace to defend its sovereignty.
Cuba will continue to contribute with its modest
resources and all its energy to the well-being of
peoples, especially those most in need. It will remain
committed to supporting international cooperation
for the achievement of sustainable development with
inclusion and in defence of international peace and
security.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for leading the work of the Security
Council for the month of February. I also welcome the
statement made by the Secretary-General at the start of
this debate.
The issue before us is particularly timely, as we
are approaching the celebration of the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations,
and as we face multiple crises that are typically very
different in nature and that show the evolving nature of
the threats to international peace and security. While
the environment is changing, the fundamental pillars
on which the Organization is based are still today as
important and relevant as they were 70 years ago.
As described in the concept note prepared by China
(S/2015/87, annex), respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States and the peaceful settlement
38/103

23/02/2015

of international disputes are the cornerstones on which
international law and international relations are based.
These are not empty concepts that are devoid of meaning
in today’s world. They are values and principles that
underpin a system where States — whether large
or small — can live and work in a cooperative, free,
independent and democratic manner, in a secure
environment and for the benefit of their respective
people and humankind in general.
That is why we should avoid expansive and
malleable interpretations that are designed to
undermine and distort the purposes and principles of
the Charter and make them irrelevant; otherwise, we
would be prioritizing a system in which might makes
right, the diversity that we all have is ignored, and the
freedom of societies to determine their own destinies is
curtailed. In that context, Colombia endorses the notion
expressed by China in the concept note, where it says
that,
“Equal and democratic participation must
be upheld in the establishment of international
rules. In particular, small and medium-sized
developing countries, which make up the majority
of the membership of the United Nations, should
participate on an equal footing in the establishment
of international rules related to peace and security.”
Moreover, after almost 70 years of experience, we
must once again recognize that, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, there is no general
recipe that is applicable to all cases. We have seen a
gradual trend within the Security Council to address
cross-cutting thematic issues, which has the potential
to simplify the approaches taken to issues that, owing
to their nature, need to be addressed on a case-bycase basis. We must avoid generalized approaches and
measures that do not reflect specific contexts and do
not recognize the diversity of factors that should be
considered in determining whether or not the Security
Council should consider a situation.
Since the time the Charter of the United Nations
was negotiated, Colombia has promoted cooperation
with regional organizations and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, placing particular importance
on the implementation of Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter. Over these 70 years, the greatest successes
of the United Nations in general and of the Security
Council in particular include some cases in which we
have worked with regional organizations, emphasizing
policy coherence, a common vision, uniformity in the
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7389

interpretation of international norms and certainty
with respect to achieving our common objectives. That
is one of the main reasons to reaffirm the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, in particular of
Chapter VIII, as these represent the underpinning of
our common action of cooperation and our unity of
purpose.

our efforts. At the same time, we must recall that
those principles reflect more fundamental values. The
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
such as sovereign equality, territorial integrity and
non-intervention, are not goals per se; they are the tools
that we use to realize our values of preventing war and
protecting humanity.

While there are differences in the membership,
structure and methods of work of the United Nations and
the many regional organizations, it has been repeatedly
shown that these entities have a privileged position, with
unique access to key actors and exceptional knowledge
and experiences with respect to the situation in their
region. Thus the Charter recognizes their importance
as privileged forums for the settlement of disputes and
their importance as strategic partners in the activities
of the Security Council.

But in reality, we sometimes witness principles
being invoked for reasons of political convenience.
Future historians looking back at today might take note
of the struggle of the United Nations to overcome such
constraints and remain true to the underlying values of
the Charter. We also need to be wary of another kind
of challenge to the values of the Charter, one that can
come from attempts to disregard the lessons of history.

The language of the Charter is clear; it gives
priority to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
avoidance of coercive measures, using them only as a
tool of last resort. We must work on mechanisms and
working methods that allow for the full implementation
of Chapter VI and the development of modalities that
give priority to the use of different means of settling
disputes peacefully, in an inclusive, impartial, objective
and depoliticized way.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate and to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February.
Looking back on the road we have travelled in the
70 years since the launch of the United Nations, the
purposes and principles of the United Nations have
been a guiding light in the building of a more peaceful
and prosperous international community.
The current global security environment, however,
is a far cry from what it was after the Second World
War. Various challenges of a wide-ranging nature
have evolved quickly. Conflicts are much more
complicated in terms of their causes and forms, as
we see in non-State-actor-related security issues,
intra-State conflicts, transnational violent extremism
and cybersecurity threats, to name but a few.
In the face of these diverse challenges, the principles
of the United Nations Charter should continue to guide

Peacekeeping operations are a case in point. While
respecting principles such as national sovereignty, the
concept of peacekeeping operations is being evolved to
bring peace and protect civilians. We believe that the
Secretary-General’s comprehensive review on peace
operations will be another milestone in this regard and
look forward to contributing to building on this review.
Some other important initiatives by the SecretaryGeneral, such as Human Rights up Front and the opendoor policy, demonstrate the growing nexus between
security and human rights.
Last but not least, our quest for a more responsible
and effective United Nations would not be complete
without joint cooperation in bringing the necessary
reform to the Security Council, the primary tool in our
collective efforts to maintain peace and security.
Such reform should be future-oriented and
membership-driven instead of expanding the exceptional
status introduced to settle a World War 70 years ago.
Our common goal is a more accountable and more
functional Security Council. To achieve this, we have
to reduce the possibilities for inaction and increase
the potential for action. The Republic of Korea will
continue to contribute to this process.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
A quick look at the list of crises that the Council has
dealt with this month alone shows clearly that despite
our collective international achievements in terms of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
much remains for the United Nations to do in order to
fulfil the mission that was entrusted to it 70 years ago.

15-0483839/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

That is why we would like to thank the delegation
of China for this opportunity to take the floor during
this open debate on the challenges we face in terms of
preserving succeeding generations from the scourge
of war and, above all, to discuss the lessons learned
and what actions can be taken in order to complete our
work.
Collective security is based on respect for the
sovereignty and legal equality of States and the selfdetermination of peoples. Observance of these principles
has undoubtedly made it possible to avoid a new world
war, but we are convinced that the maintenance of
international peace and security requires all, not just
some, Member States to work together in order to
achieve these objectives with greater efficiency and
effectiveness.
The changing nature of armed conflicts and the
new threats we are facing in the twenty-first century
remind us daily of the relevance of the purposes
and principles of the Charter and of our collective
responsibility to respond to traditional threats and to
the new challenges being posed by non-State actors,
which, through atrocities one more cruel than the
other, violate the basic norms of international law and
threaten structurally human rights and the rule of law.
Mexico believes that there can be no lasting peace
without justice. The effective prevention of armed
conflicts requires also a collective effort to strengthen
the rule of law both nationally and internationally.
It is a prerequisite for ensuring the development
and emergence of more just and inclusive societies.
Development and the rule of law are two sides of the
same coin.
Given the fact that Latin America is the region
that resorts most often to the International Court of
Justice, it is clear that the Mexican State recognizes
the fundamental role of the Court as well as that of the
International Criminal Court in terms of strengthening
of the rule of law. That is why we take the opportunity
of this open debate to remind the permanent members
of the Security Council of the need for them to accept
the mandatory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in order to encourage other States to strengthen
their commitment to international justice.
As several speakers who have preceded me have
pointed out already, the current international scenario
requires reflection, analysis and a discussion of the
innovative mechanisms that are needed to improve

40/103

23/02/2015

the responsiveness and efficiency of the Organization.
Mexico believes that every effort aimed at maintaining
international peace and security and strengthening
the responsibility to protect should be accompanied
by the promotion, respect for and fulfilment of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We have a
collective duty to strengthen prevention and cooperation
mechanisms in order to support and assist Governments
unable to meet their primary responsibility for
protecting their peoples, and we should fight to create
tight bonds between the responsibility to protect and
preventive diplomacy. As a founding Member of the
United Nations, Mexico considers it essential that we
discuss, reach consensus on and implement reforms
that reflect what we have learned over the past 70 years
and, without undermining the guiding principles of
the Organization, move towards a more transparent,
democratic and effective structure.
Without comprehensive reform of its structure and
working methods, the Security Council runs the risk of
falling into irrelevance, exacerbating the problems we
have to deal with and undermining the principles and
purposes that sustain our collective security mechanism.
Both in our national capacity and as a member of the
Uniting for Consensus group, we are working to arrive
at realistic and achievable commitments that address
the paralysis that often prevents timely action on the
part of the Security Council, while at the same time
strengthening its democracy, legitimacy, transparency
and accountability. Reform of the Security Council
cannot be achieved by granting new privileges to a
minority of States wishing to further their national
interests to the detriment of the membership as a whole.
Our goal should be to strengthen multilateralism, not
avoid it. Mexico believes that the Charter’s institutional
arrangements cannot contradict the goals it promotes,
and has therefore joined France in developing a code of
conduct that would encourage restrictions on using the
veto in situations involving war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide.
We share the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group’s conviction that greater
inclusiveness and accountability in the Council will
strengthen its efficiency and effectiveness. We welcome
and support the sustained work done by its members
to improve working methods. The election of the next
Secretary-General presents a unique opportunity to
strengthen transparency and accountability, and to
achieve realistic and tangible reform around the time of
the seventieth anniversary. We should discuss ideas and
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

proposals for improving the entire selection process,
starting with the nomination of candidates right through
to establishing a more important and decisive role for
the General Assembly.
Mexico has historically advocated for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and remains convinced that
genuinely strengthening the Organization’s role depends
to a great degree on strengthening the enforcement
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
I reiterate my country’s commitment to continuing
to participate actively and constructively in the
enforcement and full implementation of the purposes
and principles set in the Charter. The seventieth
anniversary of the Organization compels us to reflect
on the opportunities ahead. Member States must find
sufficient political will to reassess and transform the
way we operate, placing the individual at the centre of
everything we do. None of our responsibilities is more
important than ensuring that women, men and children
around the world have the opportunity to better their
lives and live in peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I would like to thank
your delegation warmly, Mr. President, for convening a
debate on this very important topic. We also appreciate
the opportunity for us to present the perspective of the
smallest State participating in today’s debate, and I
would like to thank New Zealand for pointing out the
importance of listening to the views of small States as
well.
This morning we have heard expressions of what I
believe is a worrying trend to considering the Security
Council as a playground of the powerful, a place where
grand geopolitical moves are made or prevented. The
focus on the Charter of the United Nations in this debate
is therefore appropriate and one that we appreciate.
Liechtenstein affirms its strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter. It might be said
that that is easy for a small State with no army to do, but
my point underlines the fact that for many small States,
respect for the Charter is a matter of survival, and a
very serious one.
It has also emerged in today’s debate that everyone
seems to have his favourite purposes and principles
of the Charter, a choice that is usually inspired by a
country’s history or standing in the world. For us, the

S/PV.7389

starting point for the Charter’s purposes and principles
is its very first purpose:
“To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace”.
In our view, the Charter envisages an activist Security
Council that responds to the needs of the world. It is true
that the number of meetings, resolutions, field missions
and so on is ever increasing; but so is the number of
conflicts and the number of people affected by conflict
worldwide. Today we have more refugees than at any
point since the Second World War. We therefore need
even more Security Council action. How do we achieve
that? First, in reaffirming their commitment to the
Charter, we believe that Council members must make
greater effort to overcome their differences and commit
to working for compromise. Rather than debating the
contours of abstract concepts, they should search for
practical solutions in concrete situations. In recent
years that has become more difficult as differences,
especially among permanent members, have grown.
We therefore believe that there is now an increased
responsibility on the part of the elected members of
the Council to take greater ownership of the Council’s
work and lead the way to more compromises.
Secondly, the veto — the use of the veto, the
threat of the veto and the possibility of the threat of
the veto — remains the greatest procedural obstacle to
Security Council actions where permanent members
have difficulty agreeing on a course of action. The
price of such inaction is unacceptably high when we are
faced with mass atrocities and thousands of innocent
victims. We cannot continue to give greater weight to
the opinion of one single permanent member than to the
need to save thousands of lives. We therefore reiterate
our call to Security Council members not to block
Council action aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocities, and to put such a commitment in writing.
Thirdly, we should recognize that the Charter and
change go hand in hand. The Charter’s values and
principles underpin the international system and have
inspired new instruments, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty. We must act on our evolving understanding of
threats to peace and security, as, for example, has been
recognized by the Council in the case of terrorism,
and as it has sometimes done in response to massive
human rights violations. But we must place human

15-0483841/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

rights and people’s dignity, especially the rights of
civilians in armed conflict, more firmly at the centre
of our reference. Such an approach also constitutes
a return to the Charter itself, which at the beginning
of its Preamble established that we the peoples of the
United Nations are determined
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
Therefore, if the world’s greatest Powers were able to
make such a statement in 1945, just after the end of the
Second World War and a complete collapse of human
decency, they will hopefully also be determined to
reaffirm their faith in the role of the Security Council,
70 years later. The Security Council Chamber remains
the most important forum for that win-win cooperation
that the presidency has called for.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate today. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is timely to focus on the issues that lie at the
heart at the system of collective security, a system that
has allowed us to avoid global conflict since the Second
World War, but one that must continually evolve to
meet contemporary security challenges. Australia is
firmly committed to a rules-based international order
that respects international law and respects not only the
letter but also the spirit of the Charter.
The challenges facing the international system
continue to grow. Today there are more simultaneous
crises with a bigger impact on a larger number of
people that at any time since the Second World War.
Terrorist groups have descended to new depths of
brutality. Their use of social media exposes vulnerable
young men and women around the world to their hateful
propaganda. The brutality of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant and its claims to territory are an urgent
security challenge that we must all confront. The
United Nations must respond nimbly and effectively
to these crises with the full range of instruments at its
disposal, just as it must take concrete steps to prevent
new conflicts from emerging.
We are all familiar with the warning signs of
conflict, social unrest, displacement and significant

42/103

23/02/2015

human rights violations. The Security Council must
use the full weight of its political authority and other
preventive tools to address these warning signs as they
emerge, including effective use of sanctions to disrupt
destabilizing actors and to stem the flow of funds,
weapons and fighters that fuel conflict. In responding
to conflict, the Security Council must ensure that the
United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions have sufficient authority, clarity and direction
to carry out well-targeted and achievable mandates,
including to improve rule of law and to protect civilians.
The current review of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a welcome opportunity to achieve
important reforms. On average, countries emerging
from conflict only have a seven-year window to build
lasting peace before they risk relapsing into conflict.
The United Nations has a central role in preventing this
relapse. Strengthening the rule of law is a critical pillar
of both conflict prevention and effective post-conflict
peacebuilding, and that makes it core business for the
Council and United Nations peace operations.
Respect for human rights is of course central to the
Charter. Our collective responsibility is the universal
promotion, protection and realization of those rights
for all, and the knowledge that living in peace and
security means we never turn a blind eye to gross and
widespread violations of human rights. Sovereignty
carries with its fundamental obligations, chief among
them the need to protect citizens.
Australia reaffirms its strong commitment to all the
principals of the responsibility to protect. We welcome
France’s initiative on restraint in use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity, and we encourage further
progress on this important initiative. The credibility of
the United Nations system depends on its willingness
and capacity to protect civilians, particularly women
and children who suffer disproportionately in conflict.
It is our conviction that the investigation and
prosecution of serious international crimes is also
critical to establishing lasting peace. Tragically, Rome
Statute crimes are committed today in many locations
on an alarming scale. It is the duty of every State to
exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible
for international crimes. The International Criminal
Court (ICC), as a court of last resort, has a vital role
to play when States are unable or unwilling to act.
The ICC deserves the full support of the international
community.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we reaffirm our commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations at its seventieth anniversary year
we should be able to say its fundamental norms are
universally applied, but sadly this is not the case. Key
elements of the Charter, including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and of the legal framework of
protection for civilians have been persistently defied
in recent times, with tragic consequences. The United
Nations, this Council and all Member States must
continue to be vigilant to ensure these fundamental
norms are protected. Only then will the international
community be working effectively and collectively to
ensure peace and security for all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give floor
to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala welcomes China’s initiative to hold this
important open debate, and we appreciate that Foreign
Minister Wang Yi has personally presided over it. We
are grateful for the concept note (S/2015/87, annex) that
was prepared for this meeting, which certainly invites
reflection. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement.
We are pleased to take part in this debate,
particularly as historical events linked to the creation of
the United Nations are being commemorated. Given the
loss of so many human lives in conflicts at the global
level and the new threats, it is timely for Member States
to ask ourselves whether we are realizing the founding
promise of the Organization to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We would like to
make the following comments in that regard.
First, Guatemala attaches the highest importance
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. This is not a mere listing of values and
general goals. It is the part of the founding instrument
of the Organization that justifies its existence and to
which we should refer to validate the interpretation of
its Articles and to reach a correct political assessment
of the actions taken by its Members. The purposes and
principles of the Charter also show that international
peace and security can be achieved not only through
measures of a political nature, such as diplomacy,
military means or legal measures designed to prevent,
reduce or eliminate conflict. In addition to those, we
must adopt measures to empower cooperative and
unifying relationships among States.

S/PV.7389

Secondly, we will not find the road to world
peace in the twenty-first century in the principles of
non-intervention and by invoking absolute sovereignty.
The concept note presents as opposing ideas interfering
only when peace and security are truly threatened, and
non-interference in internal affairs. Guatemala has
experienced both sides of the argument. On the one hand,
we strongly defend the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. Nevertheless, we lived
through a 36-year internal armed conflict in which
mass atrocities were committed. That is why the
phrase “Never again!” is especially resonant for us.
The principles of sovereignty and non-intervention
should not be used as an excuse for non-compliance
with international obligations. Rather, Governments
have the responsibility to protect their own people. We
cannot forget that sovereignty equals responsibility.
Thirdly, maintaining international peace and
security also requires strengthening the sole global
body responsible for defending them. The Security
Council must respect and fulfil the purposes and
principles that should guide its work. The international
community needs and has the right to an effective
and efficient Security Council. All Members of this
Organization have given a mandate to this body to act
in our name. However, on a number of occasions — for
example, the inaction in Syria and on the question of
Palestine — the purposes and principles of the Charter
and its obligations to the international community have
been diminished.
At this time, when an agreement on proposed
reforms seems distant, the permanent members can act
boldly and make a commitment to the French proposal
to regulate the use of the veto in situations involving
mass atrocities. The use of the veto must be limited
because it has sometimes blocked the prevention or
resolution of conflicts, or even fostered impunity. The
five permanent members must always provide detailed
reasons and motivations behind the use of the veto. This
justification should respect the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fourthly, in a world that is constantly changing,
and given the need for rapid and effective solutions,
we cannot lose sight of the notion of balance or the
value of that concept. Extreme positions have been
shown not to work effectively or efficiently to resolve
conflict. In many situations, they can create conflicts
that are larger than those they are trying to prevent. In
evaluating a potential course of action and its possible

15-0483843/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

consequences, two fundamental requirements must be
met. On the one hand, timely action is important; on the
other, a precautionary approach to the measures to be
implemented is also needed.
Guatemala, as a founding Member of the United
Nations and champion of democracy and the rule of
law, is committed to finding lasting solutions to the
scourge of the war. However, in order to ensure that
peace is lasting, we need action not only from the
Security Council, but from all the main organs of
the United Nations and from Member States to build
true multilateralism under equal conditions and in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the floor and for organizing this
open debate, which gives us an opportunity to reflect
on our shared history and the principles that guide our
work for international peace and security. My statement
is based on that made of the European Union and that to
be delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Rule of the Law.
As many have already underscored, 2015 is
a special year. We commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi concentration
camps and the end of the Second World War. Beyond
these commemorations, we will also celebrate the
anniversary of the creation of the United Nations and
the institutions and mechanisms that the world created
to safeguard future generations from the scourge of
war. However, conflicts have continued, including
genocides, as in Rwanda or Srebrenica. One look
at the map of the world is enough to see how fragile
international peace and security are, and how important
it is to remain fully engaged in the implementation
of the objectives and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Indeed, the Charter enshrines the
principles that should guide our actions for peace and
international security: respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. Seventy years later, we are still implementing
those principles selectively. For example, while the
European Union was built as a project of peace, today it
is witnessing along its borders serious violations of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.

44/103

23/02/2015

Yet, for many years, we have been working to
develop the instruments and mechanisms that would
allow us to better prevent and better respond to
atrocity crimes and serious violations of human rights.
We created the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and later the
International Criminal Court. We have strengthened the
mandates of peacekeeping operations for the protection
of civilians, and at the 2005 Summit we unanimously
we reaffirmed our responsibility to protect populations
from the most serious crimes. In that regard, we have
made progress, it is true, in the area of early warning.
Belgium welcomes the Secretary-General’s Rights Up
Front initiative, as well as the establishment, through
the Secretary General’s Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and for the Responsibility to
Protect, of a framework for analysis for the prevention
of atrocity crimes.
Despite such progress, the very violent conflicts
that we are witnessing today demonstrate the extent to
which we need to operationalize the system that we have
created. These preventive mechanisms will continue to
remain irrelevant if we do not have the political will
to use them and to act before it is too late. That is why
we must strengthen our resolve to implement at the
national, regional and global levels the commitments
that we undertook in 1945 and 2005.
The responsibility to protect is rooted in the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and is based on a very simple core concept.
In the face of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing, all human beings
have the right to be protected. The responsibility
for their own peoples clearly falls first and foremost
to Governments; it is incumbent on them to create
legitimate and accountable national institutions that
serve all citizens, are credible in the eyes of the people,
and respect human rights and the rule of law .
Our Governments must all encourage the creation
of an environment conducive to mutual respect and
resistant to intolerance. Combating hate speech through
education and counter-discourse is essential in that
regard. Belgium, which currently holds the presidency
of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe,
will organize the next high-level conference on the
theme “Tolerance is stronger than hatred” in Brussels
on 8 May. It will highlight how the diversity of our
societies is an asset, rather than a risk. Belgium has
also developed a new strategy to prevent radicalization.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that context, it is committed to working for the
development of counter-discourse at the national and
international levels.
But when a State does not exercise its responsibility
to protect its population — wither because it does
not want to or because it cannot — the international
community cannot remain indifferent and must take
action. The Security Council has a special responsibility
in that regard, and should be prepared to use all
instruments that the Charter has placed at its disposal.
The use of the veto — for example, to block the
adoption of resolutions on the situation in Syria — is an
unfortunate illustration of the shortfalls of the system
and a failure of the Council to shoulder its most
fundamental responsibilities. That is why Belgium
fully supports France’s initiative in favour of a
voluntary abstention of the use of the veto with respect
to situations involving atrocity crimes. Belgium hopes
that the permanent members of the Security Council
will be able to agree on a modus operandi in that respect,
which we believe would be an important contribution to
the ongoing work on United Nations reform.
The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): I now
give the floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I speak on behalf of the
following participants of the Group of Friends of the
Rule of Law: Belgium, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Paraguay, the
Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and my own
country, Austria.
As we reflect on the past 70 years since the
founding of the United Nations, it is timely to reaffirm
our commitment to all the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is also right to
reaffirm our commitment to international law and to
upholding democracy and the rule of law, as the concept
note (S/2017/87, annex) for this debate suggests. But we
will not do so selectively. We reaffirm our commitment
to all the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, which include the core
principles, or three pillars, on which the United Nations
is built: peace and security, development and human
rights. Firmly based on the universal values of equality,
justice, freedom and the dignity and worth of the
human person, the Charter places equal importance on

S/PV.7389

the universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as it does on such principles of international
law as the prohibition of the threat or use of force, the
territorial integrity of States and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
We reaffirm that States shall uphold in good
faith the entirety of their obligations arising from the
Charter, including under Chapter VII. We call on States
to abide by all their obligations under international law,
including human rights and international humanitarian
law. We reiterate the call on States to ratify and
implement multilateral treaties, to settle their disputes
peacefully, including through the International Court of
Justice, and to cooperate fully with international justice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, in order to end impunity
The Security Council has oftentimes confirmed
that the rule of law and justice are fundamental
building blocks of conflict prevention resolution and of
sustainable peace. The Security Council has also, on
a number of occasions, recognized that grave human
rights violations may constitute a threat to international
peace and security. As we reflect on the lessons from
our past of wars, conflict and human suffering, we
recognize that peace and security and respect for human
rights and the rule of law are intrinsically linked. To
quote the preamble of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
“it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law”.
As we face new and more complex threats and
challenges to international peace and security, and new
levels of atrocities, brutality and suffering, we would do
well to recall the foundations and principles embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations. We emphasize
that our collective response to threats to international
peace and security must be guided by the rule of law
at both the national and international levels. Both are
inherently linked and intertwined, for every nation that
proclaims the rule of law at home must respect it abroad
and every nation that insists on it abroad must enforce
it at home.
As participants in the Group of Friends of the
Rule of Law, we reaffirm that the rule of law is the
foundation of the international system and the basis
on which just and fair societies are built, and we will

15-0483845/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

continue to advocate for strengthening the rule of law,
inter alia, throughout the elaboration and, later, the
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to
thank China for convening this open debate on such
a consequential issue that is directly linked to our
commitments to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. I commend your
initiative and thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2015/87, annex) that has defined the areas to
be explored in that context. Algeria obviously aligns
itself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement by our colleague from Iran,
and I would like to add the following comments.
Algeria is of the firm view that it is high time for the
United Nations to reflect on how the Organization and
the Security Council should adhere more efficiently to
their mandate, missions and the great expectations that
the Charter and the community of nations have placed
on their shoulders. Seventy years have gone by since the
inception of the United Nations, but while its methods
have barely evolved, the world has in the meantime
undergone a complete metamorphosis. In addition to
the long-standing, everlasting threats to international
peace and security, other challenges of a different
nature are putting pressure on an already overburdened
Security Council agenda. Terrorism in its different
forms, threats of genocide and diseases that know no
borders are hindering the security of nations and the
safety of citizens. Needless to say, the pitiless shadow
of continuous and perilous conflicts and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction still cast a baneful shadow
over the whole of humankind. We believe that the
questions to be addressed are the following ones.
How can we improve the efficiency of the United
Nations system, and specifically of the Security Council,
while always bearing in mind the goals, purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that all
of us deem profoundly valid? The rule of law, openness,
democracy, dialogue, peaceful settlement of disputes
and the very principles enshrined in the first article of
the Charter should be the guiding rod.
How can we use these reflections to define the
operative tracks for the next 70 years of the Organization?
One cannot ignore the fact that unfulfilled promises
and unaddressed expectations might undermine the

46/103

23/02/2015

confidence of the whole world in the United Nations.
We have to fully understand that the world has radically
changed during the past 70 years, but the Security
Council and its interaction with other organs have
barely evolved. The Security Council has not adapted
itself either to a global constituency that has increased,
or to the necessity to adapt its working methods. In that
regard, I would like to say the following.
First, the membership of 15 States does not reflect
today’s world. Secondly, its working methods, including
transparency, ought to be improved. Thirdly, the use of
veto power is not compatible with the open societies
that we look forward to building, and obviously Algeria
welcomes the ideas aimed at limiting its application,
as a first step. Fourthly, we should reflect on ideas
and methods, not only to react to conflicts, but also
certainly to prevent and forestall new ones. Conflict
prevention and peacebuilding should be as important
as peacekeeping. We look forward and we expect the
Council to strengthen as far and firmly as possible its
ties, bonds and interaction with regional organizations
and countries that are engaged in mediations and
conflict-solving endeavours.
Algeria also believes that Chapter VI and
Chapter VIII of the Charter ought to be privileged in
many circumstances. We are also of the view that the
Council could and should create organs that might help
in fulfilling necessary tasks such as inquiries, factfinding missions or information that could help perform
the tasks of the Security Council.
Finally, Algeria strongly believes that the
responsibility of the General Assembly should not be
forgotten and must be respected in accordance with the
mission bestowed by the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Seventy years ago, representatives
of 50 nations met in San Francisco to draw up the
Charter of the newly formed United Nations. President
Truman addressed the conference, saying,
“With this Charter the world can begin to look
forward to the time when all worthy human beings
may be permitted to live decently as free people.”
The signatories believed that every man and woman on
this Earth has dignity and rights. After witnessing the
ravages of two world wars in the span of a generation,
they understood that freedom is never free. It is not

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

enough to write a charter or give a speech; freedom
must be fought for.
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
outlines the institution’s four purposes. The first is
to maintain international peace and security and take
effective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace.
The greatest threat to global security is posed
by radical Islamist groups like Hamas, Hizbullah,
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and Boko Haram. The battle being waged against these
groups is the battle between civility and barbarism,
between pluralistic and totalitarian societies, between
tyranny and freedom. Day by day, extremism is
spreading its ugly tentacles and, in the process,
destabilizing communities and nations. The threat is
obvious and it is growing, and yet the Security Council
has been reluctant to take decisive action. Worse, it has
on occasion surrendered to those nations that harbour,
fund and support terrorist groups.
On 28 January, Hizbullah terrorists fired anti-tank
missiles at an Israel Defense Forces vehicle in northern
Israel, killing two Israeli soldiers and injuring seven
others. Hizbullah immediately claimed responsibility
for the attack. One would think that in light of this
clear admission of guilt, the Security Council would
immediately and unequivocally condemn Hizbullah.
Yet it took an entire week to release a statement that
did not even mention the terrorist group. If we intend
to fight terror, we must not differentiate between tenor
and terror; there is no good terror or bad terror group,
and we must treat them all alike.
Hizbullah has held Lebanon hostage for the better
part of three decades and now seems intent on holding
the Security Council hostage as well. Thanks to the
backroom dealings of its Iranian patron, Hizbullah
has been allowed to continue its reign of terror. Here
in the theatre of the absurd, it would not surprise me
if ISIS was given a starring role on the Human Rights
Council. Let me be clear — this institution cannot
claim to uphold international security while indulging
those nations that are actively undermining peace and
security.
The second purpose of the Charter of the United
Nations is to advance relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights. If we are
honest with ourselves then we will admit that we
have not done enough to defend basic freedoms. One

S/PV.7389

example is the Middle East. Across the Middle East,
repressive regimes seek to control what people think,
how they are educated, whom they can love and what
they believe. For 2,000 years, Christian communities
dotted the landscape of the Middle East. Today that
figure has dwindled to less than 10 per cent. We saw an
example of such brutal persecution just last week when
ISIS beheaded 21 Egyptian Coptic Christians in Libya.
But it is not just Christians who are being
persecuted; all minority groups are at risk. As we
speak, Yazidis, Baha’i, Kurds, Christians and Muslims
are being executed and expelled by radical extremists
at a rate of 1,000 people per month. Extremists have
unleashed a plague of persecution, believing that by
silencing individuals, they can silence civilization.
Nobel Prize winner and humanitarian activist Elie
Wiesel has said that
“wherever men and women are persecuted because
of their race, religion, or political views, that place
must — at that moment — become the centre of the
universe”.
Millions of men and women look to us to defend their
dignity and their rights and we are simply not doing
enough to help them.
The third purpose of the Charter is to promote and
encourage respect for human rights. The primary body
responsible for upholding this principle is the Human
Rights Council. Members of the Council currently
include Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Algeria and Venezuela. I
imagine there is not a person in this Chamber who would
want to be placed on trial in one of those countries.
And I would think that no one here would be willing to
write an article criticizing one of these Governments
while living under its dominion, certainly not if she
valued her liberty and her life. Yet these and other
human rights offenders are given leadership roles in
this institution. In 2008, for example, Saudi Arabia — a
regime notorious for public executions, lashings and
beheadings — was elected the Special Rapporteur of
the General Assembly’s Third Committee, dealing with
human rights.
The fact of the matter is that this institution has
been hijacked. The ruthless autocracies that jail
journalists rush to lecture us on the virtues of a free
press. The repressive dictatorships that persecute
political opponents filibuster on the sanctity of free and
fair elections. And mass-murdering tyrannical regimes
preach to us about human rights. Yet instead of criticizing

15-0483847/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

these regimes, the very nations that undermine
international peace get elected to the United Nations
bodies responsible for maintaining global security. In
2013, the General Assembly elected Iran to the United
Nations committee that deals with disarmament and
international security. This is like inviting North Korea
to write a resolution on cybersecurity.
But the absurdity does not end there. Last year,
Iran was elected to serve as Vice-Chair of the United
Nations Legal Committee — an unusual choice
given that Iranian citizens are denied due process
and fair trials. It is remarkable that Iran is so active
in international affairs given that its citizens are not
afforded opportunities to participate in Iranian national
affairs.
The fourth and final purpose of the Charter is to
be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.
You, Sir, convened this debate to reaffirm international
commitment to the principles outlined in the Charter
of the United Nations. The Charter speaks about the
United Nations as a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations, but the only harmony I hear is the chorus
of condemnations aimed at Israel. This institution will
never live up to the principles in its Charter so long
as it persistently, consistently and insistently focuses
on Israel. Last year, the General Assembly adopted
20 resolutions singling out Israel for condemnation and
only three resolutions to protest the actions of all other
nations combined.
The worst humanitarian crisis of our generation
is taking place in Syria, where 200,000 men, women,
and children have been murdered by a regime that
employs torture, starvation, chemical weapons and
barrel bombs. And yet the General Assembly adopted
just one resolution (resolution 68/182) condemning the
brutal Syrian regime. Since 2006, more than half of all
resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council in
criticism of a particular country have been directed at
Israel. This is not logical and it is not moral; it is simply
prejudice. When the actions of the United Nations
are placed against the yardstick of its Charter, the
institution simply does not measure up. We are failing
those who need us most.
Last night, Hollywood celebrated the Oscars, and
as millions tuned in, the following thoughts occurred
to me. If the Oscars for maintenance of international
peace and security were given at the United Nations,
I would not be surprised if these candidates were
awarded prizes. In the Best Actor Category — for
48/103

23/02/2015

acting like a peace-loving country while developing
nuclear capabilities, denying the Holocaust and
threatening the destruction of another Member State,
the Oscar goes to Iran. In the category for Best
Supporting Actor — for its unrelenting support to
the Al-Assad regime in killing hundreds of thousands
civilians, the Oscar goes to Hizbullah. In the category
for Best Visual Effects — for making women disappear
from the public squares, the Oscar goes to — surprise,
surprise —Saudi Arabia. There was no competition.
And finally, for rewriting history, the Oscar for Best
Editing goes to the Palestinian Authority. But the truth
is that the Palestinian Authority has already received
enough prizes from this institution.
Putting the Oscars aside, if we want to pursue peace
and security in the real world, it is time to bring down
the curtain on this theatre of the absurd and return the
original values of the Charter of the United Nations
back to centre stage.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I recall that the
time limit for statements is four minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Seventy years ago, the
United Nations was created for the purposes and
principles enumerated in the Charter: the maintenance
of peace and security, the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the self-determination of peoples. Upholding
these purposes and principles of the Charter, the world
body has made important contributions. Placing high
importance on the role played by the United Nations,
Japan has come a long way together with the United
Nations.
Japan expresses its highest appreciation for the
work of the United Nations in maintaining the peace and
security of the international community. At the same
time, when we look at the world’s current situation,
people are still suffering from conflicts, poverty and
human rights violations. This reminds us there is an
even greater need to be united in order to tackle threats
common to us all. In view of these circumstances and
given that this year marks the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations it is important for us to reaffirm
that all the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are equally important as we head
towards the future. I therefore welcome the holding of
today’s open debate and express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Throughout its post-war history Japan has, based
on feelings of deep remorse regarding the Second World
War and by upholding all the purposes and principles of
the Charter, walked the path of a peace-loving nation
that contributes to the peace and security of the world
while consistently respecting freedom, democracy, the
rule of law and human rights. Since becoming a Member
of the United Nations, Japan has made assiduous efforts
to contribute to the peace and prosperity of the world.
That is a reflection of the genuine desire of my country
to dedicate itself faithfully and actively to promoting
the ideas and objectives enshrined in the Charter.
We place particular importance on the principle
stipulated in the Charter that international disputes shall
be settled by peaceful means, based on international
law and not by force or coercion. In this context, Japan
fully associates itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of
more than 20 countries from the Group of Friends on
the Rule of Law. Japan has made great efforts to fully
comply with international law and we are proud of
our record. Japan is committed to every international
tribunal, including the International Court of Justice,
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
and the International Criminal Court. We have made
significant and constructive contributions for their
better use and universalization.
At the same time, if the Organization is to deal
effectively with the ever-changing realities of the
international community, the United Nations, including
the Security Council, must consistently reform and
strengthen itself. The seventieth anniversary of the
foundation of this world body should be a golden
opportunity for us to renew our resolve to redouble
our efforts to this effect. Japan will continue with its
endeavours to achieve concrete results, together with
an overwhelming majority of Member States calling for
reform.
Peace, democracy and human rights now constitute
an inherent part of the identity of the Japanese people.
That is proven by the fact that, based on feelings of
deep remorse regarding the Second World War,
our people have endeavoured for 70 years to build a
free and democratic nation respecting fundamental
human rights and the rule of law. Japan has walked
the path of a peace-loving nation and has made
significant contributions to the peace, development and
democratization of the world. The path we have taken

S/PV.7389

so far is the pride of Japanese people and will never
change.
Since the inception of the United Nations, history
has shown how important all the purposes and
principles of the Charter are to us. I should like to end
my statement by reaffirming Japan’s determination to
continue on its path as a peace-loving nation together
with the United Nations. We will do so in order to
that the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter are duly crystallized in the actual world. My
full text will be circulated.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on maintaining international peace and security. The
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations provides
us with a unique opportunity to reflect on and reaffirm
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. By the same token, I should like to offer you
our best wishes for the beginning of the Year of the
Goat.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement that will be delivered later by
the representative of Maldives on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Although there is much good to say and successes to
remember about 70 years of United Nations existence,
as time is short I will comment on only some pending
issues for the future. With regard to the topic of today’s
discussion, I should like to reiterate that the protection
of human life is the foremost priority that we as the
international community — we the peoples — have
been given. Carrying out this mandate of the Security
Council should be clear and understandable to us all.
In the Charter of the United Nations, the permanent
members of the Security Council were given great
power but also great responsibility to maintain peace
and security in the world. The three most important
principles that should be adhered to while maintaining
peace and security in our view are democracy, the rule
of law and the fight against impunity. I hope that all the
members of the Council are and will be guided by those
principles.
Considering the large number of crises throughout
the world and their disastrous consequences for civilian

15-0483849/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

populations in Syria, Ukraine, the Middle East, Somalia
and South Sudan, to name but a few, it is clear that the
Security Council has not always lived up to its tasks.
Several attempts to adopt resolutions on an effective
international response to end crises and ensure
accountability for perpetrators of atrocity crimes have
been blocked by permanent members of the Security
Council. Far too often, history has shown us how the
distinct privilege of the veto, or even just the threat of
using it, has been abused, leaving the Security Council
paralysed and passive on the sidelines in situations
where it is most needed.
The saddest example of that is the four-year long,
ongoing humanitarian catastrophe in Syria. Estonia
therefore stands by the French proposal to establish
a code of conduct on the voluntary restraint on the
use of the veto and firmly believes that taking such a
step would help the Security Council to live up to its
mandate. The Security Council can and should make
its contribution to the protection of fundamental human
rights through its power of referring situations to the
International Criminal Court.
From the perspective of the working methods of
the Council, one aspect that needs to be taken into
consideration is the obligation deriving from Article
27 of the Charter, which establishes the only limitation
to a Council member participating in a vote in the
Security Council, to wit: “in decisions under Chapter
VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article 52, a party to a
dispute shall abstain from voting”. This applies in equal
measure to all Council members and should be adhered
to.
Furthermore, while focusing on the Council’s role
in the maintenance of peace and security in the world,
one cannot ignore the seriously deteriorated security
situation in Europe. The conflict in Ukraine has
shown that one of the basic principles of international
law — respect for a country’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty, and for the inviolability of its borders — can
be breached. We, the peoples of the United Nations,
should not tolerate it. With the occupation and illegal
annexation of Crimea that we do not recognize, and
the ongoing military intervention in eastern Ukraine,
one permanent member of the Security Council has
violated international law and the underlying principles
of European security, including those enshrined in
the Helsinki Final Act and Paris Charter. Despite
those violations, however, these principles are still
valid and must be fully respected. The independence,

50/103

23/02/2015

sovereignty and territorial inviolability must remain
the fundamental right of States and nations.
Last but not least, on the broader spectrum of the
United Nations, Member States can make their own
contributions to the maintenance of peace and security
by strongly adhering to the rule of law, which also
encourages sustainable development as progress is
best guaranteed by good governance, transparency of
decision-making processes and the minimization of
corruption. Estonia firmly believes that loyalty to the
rule of law is a tool to improve the fundamental human
right of access to justice, which is inherently linked
to the promotion of a culture of accountability over
impunity and to wider security and stability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Let me at the outset congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council for this
month. I also welcome the presence of Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, at this meeting
and thank him for convening this debate.
Let me reaffirm the following points. The first is
the importance of strict compliance with the principles
of the Charter. At the top of this list is respect for the
sovereignty of States, their territorial integrity, legality,
sovereignty, the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States. That is the sole approach that anchors
the rule of law on the international scene. Respect
for international peace and security guarantees
development and strengthens cordial relations among
Member States.
Secondly, the experience of the past seven decades
underlines the need to respect and comply with the
Charter and to reform certain working methods of the
Security Council. There is also a need to strengthen
other working methods so that the United Nations
can be in a position to play the role entrusted to it by
Member States and to preserve its effectiveness.
Throughout its history, the United Nations
has had to deal with actions of certain influential
States seeking to impose their hegemony over the
Organization and make use of it for their own interests
and policies without paying the slightest attention to
the contradictions of their policies with the principles
and purposes of the Charter or the interests of other

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Member States. When the founders of the Organization
drafted the Charter, they opened it with “We the peoples
of the United Nations”, but we see current practice
as an attempt to change this wording to “We, certain
influential States of the United Nations”. We have seen
this very clearly since the very inception of the United
Nations, which has been paralysed and remains so
because of the policies of certain of these influential
States, and is unable to take the necessary measures
under the Charter to implement many of its resolutions
of international legitimacy, particularly those calling
for an end to the Israel occupation of the Syrian Golan
and other occupied Arab territories, and for Israel to
end its aggressive policies and racist crimes against
Arab citizens living under occupation in the States of
the region.
That is also very clear when the Charter is flouted
by double-standard policies. New terminology,
new principles and new concepts have emerged to
circumbent the Charter and international law, such as
the protection of civilians. This concept that does not
enjoy full international support and has been used to
justify colonialist, bloody, military interventions in
certain areas, for example in Iraq and Libya, which are
now dealing with chaos and terrorism. It is also used
to impose illegal unilateral measures against certain
States, including Syria.
Thirdly, the United States, which won the Second
World War and defeated fascism and racism, must now
work seriously and sincerely on the civilian and military
fronts to address the terrorist tidal wave represented by
international terrorist groups linked Al-Qaida, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Al-Nusra Front and their offspring in Syria and Iraq,
which are supported from outside. We see this in Boko
Haram, the Movement of East Turkestan, the Caucasus
Emirate, Ansar al-Sharia, Al-Shabaab, and others. Syria
reaffirms in this respect that all efforts aimed at putting
an end to terrorism will be successful only if we stick
to the principles of the Charter and international law
and cooperate with the Governments and institutions
of the States involved, since certain States make use of
terrorism as a tool for international policies, and only
if we stop ignoring the fact that others actually practise
terrorism.
The situation in Syria and other States of the region
demonstrates the deplorable state the United Nations is
in. Since the initial days of the crisis — and we are now
in its fifth year — certain States have used this forum to

S/PV.7389

intervene flagrantly in the internal affairs of Syria and
worked relentlessly to provoke, spread lies, demonize the
Syrian Government, exacerbate the crisis and support
terrorism in all its forms, as well as to block efforts to
achieve a settlement, destabilize Syria and undermine
its policies and its strategic, national sovereign choices
in order to promote regime change through force and
terrorism. Certain States have also sought to impose
unilateral measures against the Syrian people and to
lay the groundwork and find excuses for military
intervention on the basis of falsehoods, as we saw in the
Libyan experience. The brotherly Libyan people and
the whole world continue to see the disastrous effects
of such an approach, without hearing the least apology
from those who responsible for these deadly destructive
and serious actions. We see no enlightenment or change
in their disastrous policies, which have heaped shame
upon them and bled our peoples.
The situation does not stop there. Certain influential
States members of the Council have worked to guide
their puppet regimes in the region and encouraged them
to gather terrorists, criminals, foreign mercenaries and
bloodthirsty Takfiris from throughout the world, to
finance and arm them, and send them to Syria and Iraq
to establish their pseudo-State and make Syria a new
base for their terrorism against the rest of the world.
The Turkish regime has gone further still. Just yesterday
morning, it carried out an aggression on Syrian territory
when hundreds of soldiers and armoured divisions from
Turkey made an incursion into Syrian territory. That
aggression demonstrates Turkish intentions to expand
into the region and the depth of the relationship between
the Turkish regime and the terrorist group ISIL.
Where are the promises made by those States,
when they joined the United Nations, to live together in
peace and in relations of good-neighbourliness? Where
is their respect for the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and cooperation among
States, set out in General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 1970? How can the representatives of these
influential countries who have spoken today explain
these violations? Why is the Security Council unable to
condemn these practices?
I have with me today a 500-page document that
includes the names of thousands of foreign terrorists
who were killed in October 2013 alone. Hundreds
of those were nationals of Council members. We are
talking about realities and we feel deep pain. Thousands
are being killed in Syria, Iraq and other States in the

15-0483851/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

context of the inertia of the so-called international
community and its inability to bring to account the
masterminds of international terrorism. If the United
Nations is not compelled to respect the principles of
the Charter and international law, it will have lost its
moral quality and will have become a weapon for the
strongest against the weakest.
In response to the statement made by the
representative of the United States, who is a specialist in
international law, need I remind her that the Pentagon’s
training of mercenaries in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
Turkey to deal with Syria is a flagrant violation of
the principles of the Charter and prohibited under
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014), and
2199 (2015)?
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
remind all speakers that statements should be limited to
four minutes; otherwise the President will have to stop
the speaker.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We thank the
delegation of the People’s Republic of China
for organizing today’s open debate on the topic
“Maintenance of international peace and security:
reflect on history, reaffirm the strong commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations”. My delegation welcomes this debate as it
extends to the very core of the strategic objectives of
South Africa’s foreign policy, namely, the protection of
territorial integrity, sovereignty and enhancing respect
for the provisions of international law.
South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Mozambique on
behalf of the African Union as well as the representative
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community, and we wish to make the
following additional remarks in our national capacity.
It was almost 70 years ago, in 1945, when the
Charter of the United Nations was introduced to the
global community. One of the most pertinent articles,
which is relevant to this debate and to the Organization’s
future existence is Article 2.1, which notes that “The
Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members”. That is self-explanatory in
all its pronouncements.

52/103

23/02/2015

That provision prohibits all use of force against
another State unless that use of force is one of the limited
exceptions provided by international law — such as
military action in self-defence and military action
taken as authorized by the Security Council — or has
become part of customary international law binding
all States. The actions of Governments that are not
consistent with this provision show an unacceptable
disregard for international law and the key principles of
State sovereignty and territorial integrity.
South Africa would like to reaffirm the importance
of prioritizing the attainment of the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Architecture in all parts of
Africa through the collective efforts of the member
countries. In this regard, we encourage the Security
Council to deepen its relationship with regional and
subregional organizations at the institutional level.
We further welcome the ongoing efforts to improve
the institutional relations between the United Nations
and the AU characterized mainly by the good working
relations between the secretariats of the two organs.
The United Nations representative office in Addis
Ababa is an invaluable conduit through which greater
policy coherence between the United Nations and the
AU can be achieved.
On our continent, the norms underpinning the
African Union peace and security regime resonate
directly with the Charter of the United Nations. That
stance is reflected in the African Union Constitutive
Act and the AU Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council. Both these doctrines
assign high priority to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its member States. At the same time it
should be noted that although the AU Constitutive
Act does acknowledge that a State has the principal
responsibility for protecting its citizens, the AU has
the right to intervene for human protection purposes.
As noted in article 4 (h) of the Constitutive Act, the
Union has the right to intervene in a member State
pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of
grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.
The AU has adapted and reformed according to
changing circumstances and realisms. My delegation
calls on this body to do the same and adapt to present-day
realities. We however appreciate the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations to review the peacebuilding
architecture and a comprehensive assessment of the
state of United Nations peace operations. This for us

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7389

is an important step towards addressing the changing
nature of conflict.

and provide concerted momentum for sustainable
development.

On the protection of civilians, we wish to underline
that it remains the primary responsibility of States to
protect civilians within their borders. Accountability
must first and foremost be sought at the national level.
Failing that, the international community has a collective
responsibility to act using mechanisms at its disposal
including independent fact-finding commissions and
commissions of inquiry. We would also reiterate that
Member States should commit governing and principles
of the United Nations Charter, as well as to basic norms
governing international relations. States should also
commit themselves to the noble cause of maintaining
international peace and security, promoting fairness
and justice to prevent conflict from erupting.

Being a responsible, supportive and highly engaged
State Member of the United Nations has been one of
the highest priorities of my country’s foreign policy.
Kazakhstan sees the Charter, the conventions and the
legal instruments as a guideline for its work at the
United Nations for maintaining peace and security,
sustainable development and humanitarian action.
We share with others the deep conviction that the
fundamental principles of the Charter emphasizing
the sovereign equality of States, the rule of law in
international relations, non-interference in internal
affairs and respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, together with the peaceful
settlement of disputes, are more relevant than ever.
Our commitment to multilateral diplomacy, mutual
trust, confidence-building and international fairness
and justice must therefore be unfailing with an honest,
impartial and balanced brokerage.

In conclusion, the fact that this open debate comes
in the year that marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations is highly significant
to my delegation, as South Africa’s expectations
are clearly defined regarding movement towards
meaningful reform of this organ, which at present
remains unrepresentative and has not conformed to
global realities. South Africa remains committed to the
Ezulwini Consensus, on which African countries speak
with one voice for Security Council reform. Africa calls
for the expansion of the Security Council in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories from 15 to
26 seats, with Africa getting no less than 2 permanent
seats and 5 non-permanent seats.
As the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations continues to deliberate on matters that
directly affect the peacekeepers, I should like to
conclude by commending all personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions as well as civil society groups
for the service they perform.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this meeting,
which makes us reaffirm our commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations. This year, we usher in
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations and
the transformational post-2015 phase. We realize the
absolute unparalleled importance of the United Nations
as the only universal Organization in the world that can
address pressing issues of regional and global security

Kazakhstan has endeavoured over 23 years to
develop friendly relations with all States. We have
learned from our experience that all countries, large
and small, need protection and should have their voices
heard in the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies on international policies of peace and security,
as well as sustainable development. That is because of
the close nexus between the two, acknowledging that
without peace there can be no development and vice
versa.
As for the component of development, global
cooperation and partnerships with an outreach to
support Africa, the land-locked developing countries,
least developed countries and small island developing
States (SIDS) in areas of nuclear, food, energy and water
security — and especially climate change mitigation
for SIDS — will promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger basic freedom for all.
The tasks before us can be effectively achieved if
all the principal organs of the United Nations — the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council, the International Court of Justice
and the Secretariat — work in close cooperation with
the specialized agencies and regional organizations.
The good offices of the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoys, as listed in the Charter, should also be
availed of to the fullest.

15-0483853/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Charter gives the Security Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In fulfilling this mandate it must
adopt judiciously a range of measures, including
the establishment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The comprehensive and hybrid nature of
peacekeeping operations today call for greater global
solidarity to meet unprecedented challenges and must
be in consultation with the troop-contributing and host
countries.
Force must be used only as a last resort when all
attempts at diplomacy and negotiation have failed and
must be so done if authorized by the Council. We also
abide by the basic directives of human dignity and
fundamental human rights of both men and women.
The protection of civilians, especially women and
children, is an imperative, with a halt to all forms of
gender violence and impunity.
If preventing succeeding generations from the
scourge of war was the main motivation for creating
the United Nations, then Kazakhstan had the moral
courage to close down in 1991 its nuclear-weapon test
site in Semipalatinsk, the second largest in the world,
and renounced its nuclear arsenal, the fourth largest in
the world. Along with other countries in our region,
the Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone was
established as a means of regional and global security.
My country is presently working with stakeholders on a
universal declaration for the achievement of a nuclearweapon-free world to make our world safer.
To conclude, Kazakhstan remains steadfast in its
pledge to be part of the multilateral action to uphold the
highest principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. Italy aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and wishes to add some remarks in its
national capacity.
This debate could not be more timely. This year
marks not only the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization, but also the sixtieth anniversary of Italy’s
membership in the United Nations. We are strongly
committed to the Organization and to the maintenance
of international peace and security, as set out in Article
1 of the Charter. We express that commitment as the
top contributor of troops to the United Nations among
54/103

23/02/2015

Western countries; the seventh contributor to the
regular peacekeeping budget of the Organization; and
the proud host country of the United Nations agencies in
Italy, including the food and agricultural hub in Rome,
the Brindisi logistics base, and the United Nations Staff
College in Turin.
“Building peace for a better tomorrow” is the motto
that accompanies the logo of our Security Council bid.
Peacekeeping, peacebuilding and creating conditions
for a better life globally are the cornerstones of our
United Nations action and will continue to guide our
future commitment. Yet, as our daily tweets remind us
all too often, our efforts are constantly challenged by
old and new threats that demand from us a renewed and
strengthened multilateral partnership. While we may
have different views on the nature of these threats and
how best to address them, I am sure we can all agree
that today’s threats to peace and security are complex
and know no boundaries. From terrorism to climate
change; from the need to protect public global goods
to the eradication of poverty; from fighting Ebola to
tackling major international crises, including in the
Mediterranean, the Organization is called upon to act
effectively and inclusively.
The growing complexity and costs of crisis
management lead us to believe that greater efforts
should be dedicated to conflict prevention and
mediation. Preventive diplomacy and mediation should
be seen not only as a moral imperative but also as a
strategic investment to create more stable environments
and better economic and social conditions. We need to
shift from reaction to action, from fixing to prevention.
From this perspective we should enhance the United
Nations early warning mechanisms and increase our
collective capacity to provide an effective and timely
response to arising conflicts. Partnerships with regional
organizations should be strengthened to improve our
understanding of local realities. We support the work of
the Department for Political Affairs especially in this
area. We have also helped to set up the Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes of the Office on Genocide
Prevention, which we consider to be a priority.
Devoting more human and financial resources
to conflict prevention and peacebuilding through
understanding and confidence-building is a good
investment. Global conflict prevention also depends on
respect for the rule of law and meaningful mechanisms
of accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. The Rome Statute of the International

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Criminal Court thus represents the cornerstone of what
should become an integrated system of accountability
that can assure the end of impunity for perpetrators of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
And it is the job of the Security Council in that
respect to ensure that there is follow-up to the calls for
accountability.
“Peace cannot be kept by force. It can be achieved
only by understanding.” These are the words of Albert
Einstein. Understanding, listening, preventing and
mediating should be our tools of choice in pursuing
the purposes of the Charter. The multiple sources of
instability require multiple sources of action using the
necessary tools and stakeholders to address the threats
we face.
Italy is ready to do its part. Back in 1992,
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali spoke of
the Italian formula as an original mix of institutional
and non-institutional approaches to brokering a
peace agreement. He was referring to the experience
in Mozambique and the peace agreement signed in
Rome, with the involvement of a prominent Italian
non-governmental organization, the Community of
Sant’Egidio. Some 20 years later, the Italian formula
is still relevant. In the Mediterranean we are all aware
of the importance of understanding, listening and
mediating to prevent rather than react to crises in
complex situations and we apply this approach through
multilateral channels. This Italian formula applies first
and foremost to our peacekeeping missions where the
use of the most recent technologies goes hand in hand
with the close involvement of civil society. In the same
spirit, Italy promotes respect for human rights with an
inclusive and balanced approach, taking into account
all of the different positions.
The maintenance of international peace and
security requires a holistic approach that addresses the
complexities of the international scenario. The year
2015 could be a year of action. The review of peace
operations, the peacebuilding architecture review and
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) will
be keys to that end. The international community
is also formulating a new definition of sustainable
development that integrates the economic, social
and environmental dimensions. It is also tasked with
mobilizing all available resources to finance the new
agenda and with reaching a universal agreement on
climate change. These three important steps will define
our collective action and our ability to tackle the root

S/PV.7389

causes of instability, inequality and uncertainty. In this
context, I should like to recall that in a little more than
two months Expo Milano 2015 will officially open,
focusing on food security and nutrition to promote
sustainable ways to feed the planet.
I conclude by reaffirming our strong commitment
to our joint efforts against terrorism. Ten days ago,
Italy co-sponsored resolution 2199 (2015) to combat the
funding of terrorist groups. We affirm our contribution
to this effort and our condemnation of all acts of
terrorism. After hearing the reference made by some
delegations to Security Council reform, I should like
to stress that merit and not privilege should be our idea
for the bedrock of a new Security Council. That is the
challenge that all Member States should address while
reaffirming their commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement’s appreciation for convening this open
debate on such a fundamental issue. We hope this
open debate will contribute to our overall efforts to
make the United Nations more efficient and effective
in maintaining international peace and security as well
as being more transparent, democratic and consistent.
As always and at the time of the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization, NAM consistently
calls upon the international community to renew its
commitment to uphold and defend the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
as well as the means provided in the Charter for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and non-resort to the
threat or use of force. These are essential in preserving
and promoting peace and security, the rule of law,
economic development and social progress, and human
rights for all.
NAM member States note that the new and
emerging threats and challenges, including the multiple
interrelated and mutually reinforcing current global
crises, continue to impede efforts by States to attain
greater economic development and social progress,
peace and security and the enjoyment of human rights
and the rule of law. Global peace and security continue
to elude humankind due to, inter alia, an increasing

15-0483855/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

tendency by certain States to resort to unilateral measures
and shirk their obligations — especially concerning
weapons of mass destruction and conventional weapons
treaties — terrorism, conflicts and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Moreover,
the use of double standards in international relations
and the continuing failure on the part of the majority
of developed countries to fulfil their socioeconomic
commitments are also undermining peace and security.
We underscore the need for the international community
to collectively redress those situations according to the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law.
NAM member States, guided by the Movement’s
principled positions and recognizing the serious threat
and danger posed by actions and measures seeking to
undermine international law and international legal
instruments, stress the need to undertake a wide range
of measures. Among others, they include identifying
and pursuing measures appropriate to achieving a
peaceful and prosperous world and a just and equitable
world order based on the Charter of the United Nations
and international law; conducting external relations
based on the ideals, principles and purposes of the
Movement, the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and the relevant resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly; firmly opposing unilateral
evaluations and certifications of the conduct of States as
a means of exerting pressure on non-aligned countries
and other developing countries; refraining from
recognizing, adopting or implementing extra-territorial
or unilateral coercive measures or laws, including
unilateral economic sanctions, other intimidating
measures and arbitrary travel restrictions that seek
to exert pressure on non-aligned countries, thereby
threatening their sovereignty and independence and
their freedom of trade and investment and preventing
them from exercising their right to decide, through
their own free will, their own political, economic and
social systems, where such measures or laws constitute
flagrant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, the multilateral trading
system as well as the norms and principles governing
friendly relations among States; and opposing and
condemning the categorization of countries as good
or evil based on unilateral and unjustified criteria and
adopting a doctrine of pre-emptive attack, including
attack with nuclear weapons by certain States, which
is inconsistent with international law, in particular the

56/103

23/02/2015

international legally binding instruments concerning
nuclear disarmament.
Finally, the Movement has stressed that the Charter
of the United Nations includes sufficient provisions
regarding the use of force to maintain and preserve
international peace and security, and that efforts by the
Council to achieve that goal should be strictly conducted
in full conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter. Resorting to the use of Chapter VII of the
Charter as an umbrella in addressing issues that pose
no threat to international peace and security must be
avoided. In that regard, the Council should fully utilize
the relevant Charter provisions, where appropriate,
including Chapters VI and VIII. In addition, consistent
with United Nations practice and international law,
as pronounced by the International Court of Justice,
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations is
restrictive and should not be rewritten or reinterpreted.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): As this is the first time I take
the floor in the Security Council this month, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of February.
I also wish to convey the appreciation of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) to you for
convening this open debate, which provides us with an
opportunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, at a time when we are looking forward to
celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, and all of the Foreign Ministers
who have enriched the debate by personally attending
and delivering statements on this very important
subject.
SADC associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
SADC recognizes the fact that the world has
undergone profound changes over the past decade
as new threats to international peace and security
have continued to emerge. The Charter of the United
Nations provides the basic framework for the peaceful
conduct of relations between States. The purposes and
principles of the Charter should continue to guide us in

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the maintenance of international peace and security and
in the pursuit of the common good of all our nations.
Experience has shown that upholding the
principles of the sovereign equality of States, respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States fosters a global environment
conducive to peace and security. Member States should
respect each other’s cultures and values and commit to
peaceful coexistence.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary, we
should address our shortcomings and challenges.
The Security Council, as the principal organ of the
United Nations charged with the responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security, should reflect
current geopolitical realities in order to maintain peace
for the future. A more democratic and representative
Security Council will enhance the legitimacy of its
decisions in the maintenance of peace and security.
Reform of the Security Council, which is long overdue,
will involve the embedding of equity, transparency and
accountability.
According to Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Member States. That
universal representation needs to be reflected in the
composition of the Council today. The way by which
we reform the Council will have a strong bearing on
this world body and on our common security.
It is important that the Security Council act
in an even-handed manner. Double standards and
the selective application of rules and concepts only
undermine confidence in the Council. SADC is
concerned that the protection of civilians is used as a
pretext to intervene in some conflicts, and yet it is not
applied in connection with graver situations that result
in thousands of causalities.
SADC also notes with concern the growing
inequalities among nations in terms of adherence to the
rule of law at the international level. It is regrettable
that in practice international law is applied only against
smaller and weaker States, while bigger Powers enjoy
unmerited, yet unassailable, immunity. The sovereignty
of smaller and weaker States is increasingly becoming
less sacred than that of powerful States. Equally
agonizing is the impotence and helplessness on the part
of the United Nations in the face of growing violations
of international law by major Powers.

S/PV.7389

The Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels, adopted by Heads of State
and Government in September 2012, cautioned States
to avoid the use of unilateral measures against other
States. Such measures, which are often employed by
powerful States against weaker ones to achieve narrow
political objectives, undermine international peace and
security as well as socioeconomic development. SADC
is concerned about the increase in Council-imposed
sanctions. Over the years, the Security Council has
increasingly resorted to using Chapter VII of the
Charter to address issues that do not necessarily pose a
serious threat to peace and security. We strongly believe
that coercive measures should be used only when peace
and security are under real threat. Sanctions should be
considered only after measures for the pacific settlement
of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter have been
exhausted. Furthermore, they should be imposed for a
specific time frame. We reject the use of the multilateral
system to pursue selfish political agendas.
States must refrain from the threat or use of force
to solve disputes. The United Nations must continue
to champion the resolution of conflicts by peaceful
means within the confines of international law. History
has demonstrated that heavy-handed interventions do
not bring about sustainable solutions, but cost more
lives and destroy economies and social infrastructure,
resulting in failed States. The use of force must be
guided by the provisions of Article 51 of the Charter,
which authorizes force only in cases of legitimate
self-defence. In the African context, article 4 (h) of
the Constitutive Act of the African Union authorizes
intervention in grave circumstances, such as genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Since both the General Assembly and the Security
Council often are not in a position to undertake
the proper assessment of any conflict due to their
remoteness from situations of conflict, it is imperative
that regional and subregional organizations in areas of
proximity are empowered to take action in that regard.
The importance of building sustained partnerships
between regional organizations and the United Nations
cannot be overemphasized. Such partnerships enhance
the operational capabilities of those organizations in
peace enforcement and peacekeeping activities. The
foundation of Africa’s partnership with the United
Nations is based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which provides for the participation of

15-0483857/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

regional organizations as first responders to ensure the
pacific settlement of local disputes. In Africa, where
most peacekeeping missions operate, the partnership is
proving critical for saving civilian lives and averting
tragedy. In Darfur, the African Union took proactive
action to save lives before the United Nations moved in.
In the Central African Republic, the swift deployment
of the African Union-led a force and the French
Operation Sangaris prevented a further deterioration of
the situation.
In accordance with the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, SADC has established a standby brigade
whose mandate includes undertaking interventions for
peace and security. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Force Intervention Brigade is a good example
of the cooperation that exists between SADC and the
United Nations.
Finally, SADC believes that the nexus between
development, peace and security, human rights and the
rule of law is inextricable. As we craft a transformative
post-2015 development agenda, let us also ensure that
it is responsive to the critical needs of our peoples.
Poverty
eradication,
economic
transformation,
including industrialization and protection of the planet
Earth, can be achieved only in an environment of peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add some comments in my
national capacity.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate. Given the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
conferred on the Security Council, it is very topical and
appropriate to concentrate this debate on reconfirming
the fundamentals of the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me begin with a story of Poland’s extraordinary
path as a member of the United Nations. In 1939, Poland
became the very first victim of the Second World War
in Europe. We were subsequently invaded by both our
neighbours, on 1 September 1939 from the West and on
17 September from the East. Throughout the next six
years, my country not only lost 6 million people but also
made an immense military contribution to the defeat of
58/103

23/02/2015

the Nazism. Fighting on all fronts, Poles accounted for
the fifth biggest Allied army in the European theatre.
It is therefore a paradox of history that, due to an
objection by one of the Allies, the legitimate Polish
Government in London was deprived of its right to
participate in the work of the preliminary conference
that drafted the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as to represent Poland at the founding San Francisco
Conference. A great Polish pianist, Arthur Rubinstein,
who was invited to play the American anthem at the
inaugural concert at the Conference, noted as he
entered the hall, with its long line of all the national
flags of participating States, that the Polish flag was
missing. After playing the American anthem, he stood
up and said: In “this hall, where the great nations gather
to make this world a better place, I do not see the flag of
Poland, on behalf of which this cruel war was waged.”
He then sat down and played the Polish anthem in a
great resounding forte, as a symbolic artistic protest
against injustice. Despite the absence of representatives
of the legitimate Polish Government at the Conference,
Poland was counted as one of the United Nations
founding Members by amending the wording of Article
3 of the Charter. It took my country nearly another halfcentury to regain full sovereignty. The story of Poland
must teach us all that no country should ever be left
behind if we are ever to create a truly United Nations.
The rules and provisions of the Charter are equally
binding on all. The strong cannot silence the weak.
As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations, Poland is fully committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter. The 70 years of the
history of the Organization fully confirm the validity
and continuing importance of the United Nations
founding act, particularly in strengthening efforts by
the international community to maintain peace and
security. One would have hoped that, 70 years after
the Second World War, armed conflicts would have
disappeared from international life. Unfortunately, that
is not the case. Numerous military conflicts on many
continents show that the reasons for which the United
Nations was established are equally as valid today as in
the early days of the Organization. We should be proud
of many situations when firm and consistent actions by
Member States helped to prevent threats to international
peace, contributed to conflict resolution and restored
peace and stability. But we should equally remember
our failures, in order to learn from those lessons and
prevent the reoccurrence of similar tragic instances.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me be clear: we strongly believe in the
principles upon which the system of the United Nations
is based. Respect for the basic rules of the Charter — for
example, regarding sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the right of countries to decide their own futures — is a
prerequisite for the fair and just participation of States
in international life. We have seen far too many threats
and challenges to international peace and security when
those rules were not observed. We see it now in Ukraine,
which is facing external military aggression and where
the values enshrined in the Preamble and in Article 2 of
the Charter, such as respect for the obligations arising
from international law and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, are seriously compromised.
We see it in Southern Europe, where human dignity
and freedom are being challenged by terrorists and
criminals pretending to act in the name of Islam.
Respect for democracy and the rule of law is
as important in international relations as it is on a
national level. As Members of the United Nations, we
are equally obliged to implement international law. We
cannot shy away from using all the tools at our disposal,
including sanctions, when dealing with clear violations
of international norms.
In the twenty-first century, external threats to
national security do not come only from other countries
or international terrorist organizations. An important
example is the fate of the small island States, which
face the challenge of the dire consequences of global
warming. The United Nations has to better address
those new developments.
Today, Poland stands ready to further contribute
to the United Nations. Solidarity, responsibility and
commitment are key words that characterize our
activities at the United Nations. Solidarity is not only
the name of the movement that some years ago triggered
historic political and economic changes in Poland. It
is also a symbol of the much-needed international
cooperation that is vital to the success of our common
efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency, especially the Foreign Minister,
for convening this open debate.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union earlier today.

S/PV.7389

The world has gone through profound changes in
the past 70 years. We have witnessed the progress of
humankind, an increase in the number of sovereign
States, the rise of non-State actors, climate change
and environmental degradation, inter- and intra-State
conflicts,and the complexity of the many global
challenges we face today. Addressing those new
challenges, which require global action, is increasingly
difficult for the international community — or, rather,
the United Nations, which, so far, has been unable to
entirely adapt to the changing world.
There is no doubt that the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are still very
much valid. However, if we want the United Nations
to remain credible today and in future, we have to do
better in fulfilling them.
We believe that the United Nations and its States
Members should do more to promote and protect human
rights and to address growing inequalities. Respect
for human rights is the basis for peace, stability,
development and prosperity, and the Security Council
plays a key role in ensuring that every person enjoys
their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Slovenia’s emphasis on the importance of human
rights is also reflected in its active support for the
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative,
which inspired the idea for the conference on the theme
Rights for Peace: Challenges and Opportunities, which
will take place in Slovenia in September.
In 2015, 10 years after the adoption of the World
Summit Outcome Document, we should fulfil the
commitments of our leaders, notably to uphold the
responsibility to protect. We should try not to reduce
that responsibility to military intervention alone, but
take into account the other pillars as well. Focus should
be placed on sharing responsibility among United
Nations Member States and trying to help each other, in
particular those in need. Particular emphasis should be
placed on the core principle that each and every country
has the responsibility to protect its own population.
There should be no excuses whatsoever. The principle
of the responsibility to protect does not undermine
sovereignty; on the contrary, its implementation can
only strengthen sovereignty.
We believe that a political division among Member
States of the Council and the Council’s failure to
take action when the lives of people are at stake is
unacceptable. That is happening too often and is

15-0483859/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

becoming a great problem. It is high time to fulfil
another key commitment of the 2005 World Summit,
namely, reforming the Security Council and adapting
it to the new realities and circumstances of the
international community. It is necessary to continue to
adapt Council’s working methods and regulate the use
of the veto in actions aimed at preventing or ending
the most heinous acts, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In that regard, Slovenia aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Maldives on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group.
The United Nations Charter and the resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly should be
respected and implemented. With regard to the Security
Council, it is important to establish a clear overview
of adopted resolutions and the deficiencies in their
implementation before devising an action plan on how
to overcome the difficulties.
The Council and all Member States should make
better use of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter.
Prevention and the timely peaceful resolution of
potential conflicts are by far the most cost- and
resource-efficient means. Slovenia focuses particularly
on the issue of mediation. In that regard, it is also
important to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and among the
regional organizations themselves.
When conflicts do occur, however, we need to
ensure that people responsible for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and gross abuses of human rights are
held accountable, regardless of their side in the conflict.
International criminal justice bodies, including the
International Criminal Court, could be of significant
help in such cases. The rule of law is one of the key
elements for peace, stability and development. In
that regard, Slovenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law.
In conclusion, I believe that we also have to use
this year’s review processes on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and on the peacebuilding architecture and
peacekeeping missions to make the United Nations
more credible. We have to keep in mind that the United
Nations is only as strong and efficient as its Member
States allow it to be.

60/103

23/02/2015

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): As we approach the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, it is a
fitting time to reflect on how we, the Member States,
and our representatives on the Security Council uphold
the guiding principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, specifically peace, security and the respect for
human rights and the dignity of persons.
The Charter underscores the Security Council’s
important work in the protection of civilians and, by
extension, the promotion of equality between women
and men, as well as the empowerment, human rights,
protection and well-being of women and girls in
situations that pose a threat to international peace
and security. It is important that we address how the
Council must evolve in order to respond to shifting and
emerging peace and security issues, and meet those
responsibilities.
(spoke in French)
The legitimacy of the United Nations family, in
particular that of the Security Council, depends upon its
effectiveness, the quality and timeliness of its decisions
and its ability to mobilize the necessary support for
action in times of crisis. The primary responsibility
of the Security Council is to maintain international
peace and security. We cannot allow this body to be
used for political self-interest, thereby flouting the very
principles on which it was founded. We cannot stand
idly by while innocent civilians, women and children are
made the targets of atrocities, a tactic that has become
frighteningly common in modern-day conflicts. As
a Member State, Canada expects the Council to act
when the guiding principles of the United Nations are
flouted or disregarded, and thereby threatening peace
and security. Those responsible for serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
must be held to account. We expect the members of
the Council to respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of other Member States.
Unfortunately, that has not been borne out in Ukraine.
(spoke in English)
Fundamentally, the United Nations and the Charter
itself will be judged not by words but on the ability to
act to preserve international peace and security and to
protect the most vulnerable. The horrific events in the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-affected

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

areas of Iraq and Syria add impetus to the need for the
Council to show real leadership in support of women
and girls in particular. The rampant sexual violence
and abuse perpetrated by ISIL against women is an
assault on all of our values. The most recent killings of
21 Egyptian Christians in Libya, again at the hands of
terrorists, is a stark reminder that people are killed daily
around the world for their beliefs. In our judegment, the
freedom of religion is a litmus test of the degree with
which other fundamental freedoms can be ignored.
In Darfur mass rapes occur, and the Government
simply covers them up. Without further delay, the
United Nations must properly investigate the abuses
that have taken place, and the Government of the Sudan
must be held to account for its complicity in the hiding
of such horrific crimes. In Syria the Al-Assad regime
has dropped barrel bombs and used chemical weapons
against its own people. Hundreds of thousands of people
are not receiving the emergency life-saving assistance
that they are in dire need of because the regime will not
let humanitarian aid get through.
(spoke in French)
Those few examples serve as daily reminders that
in far too many places civilians are deliberately targeted
and continue to suffer from unspeakable crimes. That
reality stands in stark contrast to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. All
too often, implementation falls short of translating
the decisions of the Council into concrete actions. The
Council must act and exercise real leadership to ensure
that those failures can be overcome. It must be willing
to exercise the full range of options at its disposal to
stop violence against the most vulnerable. Faced with
the many challenges before us — combating violent
extremism, the use of sexual violence and rape as a
weapon of war, the targeting of civilians, especially
women and children, protracted humanitarian crises,
and public health emergencies that threaten years
of development gains and the stability of affected
countries — it is time to act decisively in those areas
where we continue to fall short.
(spoke in English)
In our judgement, it is critical that we defend our
principles with concrete action. Vulnerable populations
around the world deserve the full commitment of the
United Nations. The United Nations and the Security
Council can continue to rely on our country to support
those efforts and to promote freedom, democracy, human

S/PV.7389

rights and the rule of law — the very underpinnings of
the Charter of the United Nations — wherever in the
world that support may be required.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all, to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate in the context of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. I would
like to join those who spoke before me in expressing
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
As clearly indicated in the Preamble of the Charter,
the United Nations was established, among other things,
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As the Preamble also makes clear right from the outset,
the United Nations is intended to be an Organization
of the peoples of the United Nations. Over the past
70 years of its existence, the United Nations has indeed
been an indispensable body for advancing collective
security and promoting multilateral cooperation among
its Member States in line with the spirit of the Charter.
There is no doubt that the Organization has passed
through many challenges; it has had its successes and
failures. But I am sure we all agree that the United
Nations is the only indispensable universal Organization
we have that we cannot live without. That is true in
all the areas of its purposes. The question is how we
can make this premier international Organization much
more relevant in addressing the challenges and threats
faced by humankind in the twenty-first century.
There is no doubt that the United Nations collective
security system has helped to reduce the danger
of war and, in peacekeeping, the Organization has
made enormous contributions. However, the global
geopolitical landscape has changed tremendously since
its establishment. The increasing number of intra-State
conflicts and the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, as well as other transnational crimes by
non-State actors, are posing greater risks to world
peace and security than ever before. The prevalence of
poverty and inequality, the spread of pandemic diseases,
the impact of climate change and other socioeconomic
challenges also have serious implications for the
security and survival of humankind as a whole. That is
why, particularly at this juncture in history, we need the
United Nations more than ever before.
That is also why the Organization has to be able to
address its weaknesses and make a greater difference,

15-0483861/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

not only in the security area but also in the economic,
social, human rights and humanitarian spheres. That
is why the reform of the United Nations is so critical:
so that the Organization lives up to what is stated in
the Preamble of the Charter that it is the Organization
of the peoples of the United Nations. Obviously, the
Organization can only be as strong as its Member
States representing their respective people are prepared
to make it.
The year 2015 offers a unique opportunity for
us to reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism by
summoning the political will and political leadership
necessary to achieve the transformative agenda that we
have agreed to carry forward in the post-2015 period.
That cannot be achieved without the full cooperation
of all countries — developed and developing — based
on our respective capacities. Failing to do so will have
serious repercussions for the peace and prosperity of our
world. For instance, terrorism and violent extremism is
not a matter of concern for a few Member States that
are directly affected, but a threat to the peaceful and
harmonious existence of humankind as a whole. That
is why we have to fight it together, without any double
standards, in the spirit of resolution 2178 (2014).
It is also incumbent upon us to address the root causes
and manifestations of terrorism. Ending poverty is not a
socioeconomic issue alone, and that is why the success
of the post-2015 development agenda is so crucial.
Therefore, it is in the enlightened self-interest of all of
us — both developed and developing countries — to
work towards the realization of the ambitious goals that
we have set for ourselves within the framework of that
agenda and demonstrate the necessary compromise
to agree on its means of implementation during the
Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Addis Ababa.
In conclusion, what all this means is that we have
a historic responsibility to take bold steps in many
areas. In that regard, we need not only reaffirm our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, but also muster the courage
and commitment to rise up to the challenge. Ethiopia
is fully committed to do its part, as it has done over
the past 70 years. Our country knows full well, from
its own experience, that, as Emperor Haile Selassie
stated in his address to the General Assembly in 1963
in referring to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, “their value depends wholly on our will to

62/103

23/02/2015

observe and honour them and give them content and
meaning.” (A/PV.1229, para. 5)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for having organized today’s debate on this important
subject. I would also like to align myself with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union and its member States.
In the concept note for this debate (S/2015/87,
annex), it is rightly stated that the United Nations is
the result of humankind’s long struggle for peace and
development. It goes on to restate one of the primary
objectives of the United Nations — to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Over the past 70
years, the United Nations has played its role in ensuring
the avoidance of another global cataclysm on the scale
of the two major wars of the last century. But the past
70 years have not, unfortunately, been marked purely
by peace and development. There have been too many
conflicts that have claimed the lives of millions of
people across the globe, more and more of them entirely
innocent civilians.
Mr. Cai Weiming took the Chair.
At the same time, we have witnessed an unprecedented
rise in global development. The global population of
2.5 billion of 1945 has today grown to some 7 billion.
Global life expectancy has increased dramatically,
from an average of 46 years in the post-war period to
nearly 70 today. A larger population, married to new
technology, scientific development and free trade, has
also led to huge economic growth, providing much
higher living standards across the globe.
Overall, as we reflect on the history of the past
70 years, what other lessons can we draw? Much of
the period was overshadowed by the Cold War and
the existential threat of a nuclear conflict, which
would have devastated the world and its inhabitants.
The imminence of that danger may have receded, but
Ireland, along with many fellow Members, continues
to work for a world free of nuclear weapons and the
dangers they pose, along with other disarmament
objectives. The end of the Cold War was not the end
of history, as some had foretold. A complex multipolar
world has emerged. It is one where even the largest and
best-resourced nations struggle to deal with threats
from much smaller and dispersed enemies.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

We recognize that in the 70 years of the United
Nations and the 60 years of our membership, a great deal
has changed. However, for Ireland, our values remain
unaltered. We stand for a fairer world, a just world,
a secure world and a sustainable world. In defending
these values, we are, like you, Sir, firmly committed to
the multilateral framework and the rule of international
law for the conduct of international relations. As such,
we are guided by the following principles: dialogue
and compromise as the solution to conflicts between
peoples; respect for the rule of law and solidarity within
the international community when a democratic State
is threatened; a strong commitment to peacekeeping
while preserving Irish military neutrality; the critical
importance of development; and the promotion of
human rights, in particular the rights of minorities and
of women and girls.
The current threats to international peace and
security, and those which occupy this Council on a
daily basis, are manifold. The principle of dialogue
and compromise as the solution to intractable conflicts
between peoples is one that guided my Government
during the lengthy peace process in Northern Ireland.
The Irish Government, working closely with the British
Government, endeavoured to keep the focus on the
ultimate goal of peace during the many difficulties and
setbacks that threatened to derail the entire process.
I would hope that others engaged in promoting peace
benefit from a similar focus and approach.
If the Security Council is to uphold its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and security, it must
be fit for purpose. Along with our colleagues in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
with whose statement we align ourselves, Ireland
continues to press for a Council that is more open, more
transparent and more accountable. We acknowledge the
improvements made in the past year but reiterate that
there is much more that can be done if the will is there
to do so.
Separately, we will participate actively in the
intergovernmental negotiations on reform of the
composition of the Security Council. Bringing the
composition of the Security Council into line with
the realities of today’s world is long overdue and it is
our earnest hope that this work, under Ambassador
Rattray’s guidance, can be brought to a conclusion this
year as the United Nations celebrates its seventieth
anniversary.

S/PV.7389

Finally, the United Nations continues to critically
reflect on how it can best serve its Members and meet
its objectives. Ireland, as a significant and longstanding
contributor to peace keeping missions, looks forward
to this year’s review of peace operations, led by Jose
Ramos-Horta. We equally look forward to the review of
the peacebuilding architecture and the global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. These three reviews reflect the
reality that maintaining peace and security is complex
and requires longer-term engagement in addition to
responding to immediate crises.
Placed alongside the agreements being pursued
on sustainable development and climate change, we
can make 2015 a landmark year in the United Nations,
which will enhance the global significance and impact
of the Organization and the way in which the goals of
the Charter are fulfilled. Let us have the courage and
the will to see each of these processes to a successful
conclusion.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We appreciate the
opportunity to take part in this open debate on this
very important topic. We thank you, Sir, for the very
interesting concept note provided in preparation for
this debate (S/2015/87, annex). Albania aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the European Union. I shall add some remarks in my
national capacity.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations. Nothing could
have been nobler in 1945, nor today, than the common
ideals enshrined in the Charter of the Organization,
including, notably, “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind”. There has
been immense progress during the seven decades of the
United Nations existence. Let me briefly mention some
of the areas where the United Nations, by introducing
and developing new concepts, has brought real change.
The concept of peacekeeping as a wholly new means
of conflict management invented was under the United
Nations. The vast issue of human rights — enshrined in
the Preamble of the Charter objective to reaffirm faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small — was almost
inexistent before the founding of the United Nations.
It managed the decolonization process. The immense

15-0483863/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

progress made with respect to the new and challenging
agendas on women, girls, children and the elderly,
among other areas, and the drastic reduction of poverty
worldwide have thoroughly transformed nations,
empowered societies and contributed significantly to
peace and security.
Undeniably, the United Nations has contributed
greatly to the transformed world, indeed the better
world, we live in today. But disappointment and failure
have also been constantly present. Millions of people
across the world who have placed their trust on the
United Nations and the Security Council in particular
have had no other choice but to water down their
expectations when faced with wars, atrocities and
massive human rights breaches of the sort from which
the United Nations has solemnly pledged to save them.
In 2013, the number of refugees, asylum-seekers
and displaced people exceeded 50 million, half of
them children. The ongoing crises in various parts of
the world, including Syria and South Sudan, have left
the world with the immense and increasing cost of the
failure to prevent and/or resolve conflict. Important
recommendations on several situations from the General
Assembly and other United Nations mechanisms have,
most regrettably, not been referred to the International
Criminal Court. The solemn pledge of “never again” has
been repeated too often, and manmade tragedies keep
recurring, thereby challenging the belief in humanity’s
capacity to learn from its failures.
Albania remains particularly and deeply concerned
about the soon-to-be one-year-long catastrophic
developments in Ukraine. General Assembly resolution
68/262, which supports the sovereignty, independence,
unity and the territorial integrity of Ukraine, remains
unimplemented, and the Security Council continues
to be deadlocked on the issue. We have welcomed the
latest peace agreement and we reiterate our call for the
serious and sincere engagement of the Council towards
a durable political solution there.
The Charter of the United Nations tasks the Security
Council, as the body responsible for peace and security,
to act swiftly and resolutely when States face situations
involving mass atrocities or grave human rights
violations, or are at risk from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We know
only too well what happens when the Council fails to
live up to its responsibilities — innocent people, mostly
women and children, will pay the price. The credibility

64/103

23/02/2015

and legitimacy of the Council and of the Organization
are seriously affected.
Worse, the use of the veto in such cases betrays the
trust of millions of people for whom the United Nations
is the only hope. It openly neglects and despises victims.
It empowers dictators and other serious human rights
offenders, and undermines international efforts to end
impunity. In that respect, Albania reiterates its strong
support for the French proposal and the efforts of ACT
for a code of conduct on refraining from the use of veto
in situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing.
In concluding, I wish to recall that the core
mandate of our Organization is to maintain or restore
international peace and security. That is, in other words,
its raison d’être. The authority and the legitimacy
vested in the Security Council to fulfil that pledge has
no precedent in international relations, and the Council
must live up to its responsibility and world confidence
and fully uphold the principles enshrined in the Charter.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking the
Chinese presidency for organizing this debate.
The globe is experiencing challenging times.
The number and intensity of violent conflicts are on
the rise. Xenophobia, discrimination, attacks against
migrants and intolerance threaten the very nature
of peaceful coexistence, while epidemics, terrorism
and cybercrime add to those challenges. However,
budgetary and administrative constraints, coupled
with the increased divisions within the Council and
the United Nations, impede the effectiveness of our
response capabilities. One tragic example is Syria.
In the words of the Spokesperson for the SecretaryGeneral on Syria the other day,
“The last four years of war have led to the deaths
of over 200,000 civilians, the greatest refugee crisis
of modern times and created an environment in
which extremist groups and terrorist organizations
such as ISIL/Daesh flourish”.
Any failure of the United Nations to react to critical
issues threatening international peace and security
undermines the credibility of this Organization.
Therefore, rethinking how to enable a more effective
United Nations response to emerging threats is
particularly critical. There is no doubt that the Charter

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7389

must be the guiding light in our endeavours. However,
we must also adapt our response to present-day realities,
which are different than those of 70 years ago. We must
build upon the lessons we have learned since the end
of the Second World War, always bearing in mind the
very first Article of the Charter, which emphasizes that
the purpose of this Organization is to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace.

Fifthly, the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and political independence of Member States are clearly
stipulated in the Charter. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations is another prerequisite
for promoting local ownership. In addition, successful
partnerships with local Governments, civil society, the
private sector and academia will not only foster local
ownership, but prove useful in terms of efficient and
effective resource mobilization.

I would like to highlight some of our priorities in
making the United Nations system more responsive,
efficient, effective and transparent. First, the quest
for a more democratic, representative, transparent,
effective and accountable Security Council must be
prioritized. The interconnectedness of the different
aspects of the reform agenda also requires a holistic and
comprehensive attitude to reform.

Finally, there is a need for serious international
debate to narrow the gaps between diverging views on
issues such as stigmatization, stereotyping, intolerance,
racism, discrimination, freedom of expression, religion
and belief. The Alliance of Civilizations, launched
by Turkey and Spain, provides a vital framework for
overcoming artificial divides and building bridges
across cultures and religions.

Secondly, we also support the review processes this
year on peace operations, peacebuilding and gender.
When combined, those processes aim to provide
comprehensive answers regarding the United Nations
response to the interconnected nature of current global
threats and to preventing relapses into conflict. They
should also address the increasing complexity of
peacekeeping environments, where unconventional
threats are increasingly affecting the work and security
of United Nations personnel.

We believe that we have the necessary toolbox to
improve the United Nations response to the challenges
and threats the world faces. The Charter provides the
most important tool in that respect. If there is sufficient
political will, there is no reason for us not to succeed.

Thirdly, the effective use of Chapter VI tools to
promote conflict prevention should be prioritized.
The guiding principles of mediation, such as the
consent of local parties, the impartiality of mediators,
the inclusivity of the mediation process and national
ownership all have a solid foundation in the Charter.
The Group of Friends of Mediation, which is co-chaired
by Turkey and Finland, strives to increase the role of
mediation in the United Nations system.
The fourth element is the nexus between security,
development and human rights. The priorities stated
in the synthesis report of the Secretary-General
(A/69/700) — dignity, people, justice, partnership and
prosperity — should guide our peace and development
work ahead, so that no one is left behind. Encouraging
policies that lead to increased participation,
inclusiveness and the economic empowerment of all
segments of society while promoting good governance,
human rights and the rule of law are key to sustainable
peace and development.

In relation to the crisis in Syria, we categorically
deny the baseless allegations raised by a certain
delegation just a little while ago. The recent operation
conducted by the Turkish armed forces was for the
evacuation of the Suleiman Shah Memorial Outpost, a
10-acre plot of land of Turkish territory inside Syria,
which was facing an imminent threat from Daesh. The
operation, which lasted nine hours, was conducted
on the basis of Turkey’s rights, which emanate from
international agreements and international law. The
President of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and others were informed of the operation the
very same day.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): The Maldives is a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, a cross-regional group comprised of 24
regional Member States, and we are honoured to speak
on its behalf.
ACT congratulates China on holding this open
debate. In the light of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, we have a unique opportunity to reflect
and reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter.
It was 70 years ago that the United Nations was founded
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war. Although this goal has been ambitious, the world
would have been in a far worse state without the work

15-0483865/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the United Nations. Yet, looking at the numerous
crises all around the world and their dreadful impact on
civilians on the ground, for instance in the Middle East,
Ukraine, Somalia, Nigeria or South Sudan, and with the
Syrian humanitarian catastrophe reaching proportions
not seen since the Second World War, there is indeed no
doubt that the United Nations has not yet come close to
fulfilling its mission.
Mr. Wang Min took the Chair.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
must be a time for action. Now is the time to take steps
to enhance the efficiency of the working methods of the
Council and ensure that the commitments taken by the
international community are effectively implemented.
That call was also already made in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
in which the improvement of the working methods of
the Security Council was recognized as a concern of the
international community. The seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, along with the tenth anniversary of
the World Summit, should remind us that, despite our
achievements, greater work needs to be done. In fact,
the overall discussion regarding the improvement of
the Council’s working methods has now moved beyond
the United Nations conference rooms and is echoed by
the media and international civil society. The time has
come to make this step and ensure enhancements.
ACT is convinced that more inclusiveness and
accountability will contribute to a more efficient and
effective Council. We commend all the efforts the
Council has made thus far, such as last year’s notable
7 per cent increase in the proportion of public and
private meetings as opposed to closed consultations.
We would also like to welcome Angola as the new chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and ACT looks forward
to collaborating as a constructive partner with Angola
and the Working Group on issues of working methods.
I would also like here to remind the Security
Council of the letter sent by ACT to the President of
the Council on 28 January with concrete suggestions
in order to contribute to the enhancement of the
Council’s transparency and accountability. Those
recommendations are based on ACT reflections and also
take into consideration the statements delivered by the
wider membership on related issues. In addition to the
ideas that will be developed further in this statement,
let me also highlight some of the elements presented by

66/103

23/02/2015

our Group in the letter: the necessity for the Council
to sharpen its preventive role by fully implementing
resolution 2171 (2014); enhanced interaction with
the Peacebuilding Commission, which could assume
a greater prevention role; greater collaboration
between the Security Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries; greater consideration of
the membership’s recommendations delivered at open
debates; more joint initiatives by Council members
regarding penholders, and so on.
That said, today we would like to outline three
ACT-supported topics with regard to adapting working
methods.
First, concerning implementation, while the
adoption of no less than six presidential notes in the past
two years specifying better working methods is highly
commendable, we note that often the implementation of
the adopted measures has proved to be unsatisfactory
or inconsistent. ACT encourages the Council to monitor
and report consistently on the implementation of the
measures through the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and in cooperation with the Secretariat.
Secondly, concerning the appointment of the
Secretary-General, in view of the approaching
appointment of the Organization’s next SecretaryGeneral, we invite a discussion on how to improve the
appointment process. ACT calls for greater transparency
and involvement on the part of the wider membership
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. This should include the following points:
a proper, formal, transparent nomination process; the
official publication of all candidatures; the possibility
of the General Assembly convening hearings with the
candidates on a voluntary basis; and an invitation to the
Security Council to consider including more than one
name in its recommendation to the General Assembly.
Thirdly, regarding the use of the veto, the ongoing
crisis in Syria has demonstrated the consequences of
a Council unable properly to fulfil its responsibilities.
ACT invites all members of the Security Council,
elected and permanent, to voluntarily commit to
refraining from voting against Council action aimed
at preventing or ending genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. Our Group has been pleased
that France, as a permanent member of the Council, has
taken up the advocacy of this idea and welcomes the
broad and supportive discussion on the proposal. We
also support the rapid finalization of a code of conduct,

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

as suggested by France, and will be submitting our
suggestions for such a code of conduct soon.
In closing, we believe that the propositions just
made are not only legitimate but also relevant; they
also are necessary to enhance the performance of the
Security Council, which today faces simultaneously an
unprecedented number of serious conflicts and complex
crises, amounting to immense human suffering.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
Mr. António (African Union) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, and also to convey the congratulations
of the African Union (AU) Commission following the
assumption by your country of the presidency of the
Security Council. We believe that you will build on
your experience and dedication in heading the Council’s
work this month. I wish you every success.
I would also like to welcome the participation
this morning of the Secretary-General as well as of
other eminent personalities who have come to New
York to participate in this important debate. I should
like in particular to welcome the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria; and His Excellency Mr. Excellency
Mr. Manuel Domingos Augusto, Secretary of State for
External Relations of the Republic of Angola, who is
still with us here today, and who, along with Chad,
daily is paving the way within the United Nations for
Africa to become a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.
China’s choice of this topic is a good illustration of
its commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter at a time when the United Nations and the world
as a whole are preparing to celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of our Organization.
Seventy years after the creation of the United
Nations, its Charter remains fully relevant, and our
Organization continues to be as fundamental as it has
always been in ensuring the trinity of peace, human
rights and development. Looking back at the past, it is
clear that the ambitious system of collective security
set up by the United Nations continues, in spite of the
limitations encountered in its implementation, to be
a sine qua non for tackling the global challenges that
weigh heavily on international peace and security.

S/PV.7389

The question today is how to ensure that we fill
the gap between the principles set forth and the results
we achieve each time that action is taken. Indeed,
given the proliferation of cross-border threats, in
particular international terrorism, the time has come
to mobilize and consolidate the efforts of all actors in
the international community as well as to strengthen
strategic partnerships, complying with the principle of
the Security Council bearing primary responsibility
for upholding international peace and security. It is
that spirit of cooperation that characterizes all United
Nations activities, including those in the area of
peacekeeping and international security, objectives that
guided the creation of our Organization.
Traditionally, in its relations with the United
Nations, the African Union has fully complied with
the spirit of cooperation and endorsed the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Its
efforts to promote peace and security on the continent
are complementary to United Nations activities.
The African Union has, inter alia, deployed a
number of peacekeeping operations, including in
Burundi, Darfur, Mali, the Central African Republic
and Somalia. The stabilization efforts undertaken by
those missions and the sacrifices made by their staff
have substantially paved the way and facilitated the
work of the United Nations missions that then take over.
This division of responsibility is taking shape as a
system where the African Union has the first boots on
the ground, stabilizing the situation in areas of conflict
and thereby creating a situation where the United
Nations can deploy peacekeeping operations at a later
stage. This partnership is a boon for the United Nations
and for the African Union, but it would be well served
by a more innovative interpretation of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations. That would allow
for the African Union and its regional mechanisms to
fully play their roles as an integral part of the global
system of collective security.
To do so, it is important for the two organizations
to act with greater policy coherence so as to further
strengthen the partnership regarding preliminary
consultations for decision-making, a common
understanding of the issues raised and support for
African peacekeeping efforts. An appropriate solution
should also be found regarding the legitimate request
of the African Union for the financing of peacekeeping
operations undertaken with United Nations consent.

15-0483867/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Along those lines, the current review of United
Nations peacekeeping operations by the High-level
Panel, which was recently hosted in Addis Ababa by
the Chairperson of the AU Commission in the context
of productive consultations with the African Union,
was an opportunity to promote our common goal
of establishing a ground-breaking, forward-looking
partnership pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.
I cannot conclude without recalling the importance
of correcting the historic injustice done to Africa,
which remains the only continent that is not represented
in the category of permanent members of the Security
Council, while also being underrepresented in the
non-permanent category. Frankly, Africa’s lack of
adequate representation remains at the heart of the
Security Council’s deficiencies of representativeness
and legitimacy. I would like to take this opportunity
to call on Member States to correct that injstice by
supporting the common African position as outlined in
the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): I would first like to
congratulate China on organizing this timely debate.
The Republic of Cyprus aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and would like to make some
additional remarks in its national capacity.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations, one of the
most remarkable achievements of the international
community, built on the ruins of a devastating war. For
countries like the Republic of Cyprus, its foundation
has been a source of inspiration in our endeavour to
achieve national independence within the context of
the anti-colonialist movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
Cyprus’s independence, in 1960, followed a long series
of struggles on the part of our people, including their
contribution to the victory against Nazism during the
Second World War. Although Cyprus was a small
country under colonial rule at the time, 10 per cent of
its male population volunteered to serve in a British
regiment as well as in other Allied armies. Greek and
Turkish Cypriots fought and sacrificed together under
the flag of ecumenical values such as democracy and
humanism.
The principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations have been further developed and enriched by
68/103

23/02/2015

subsequent landmark conventions such as the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In addition,
the Rome Statute and its corresponding Kampala
amendments, which my country fully supports, have
strengthened justice and accountability with regard to
atrocities and war crimes. The United Nations Charter
has also been complemented in areas such as maritime
jurisdiction via the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, the protection of the environment and
social and economic development. That in turn has led
to the advancement of the rule of law and the further
development of customary international law.
Regrettably, Cyprus constitutes a case in which
the principles of the United Nations Charter are still
being violated as a result of the continuing Turkish
occupation, which raises the question, to this body
and to the whole of the international community,
as to whether those principles are being adhered to
unreservedly and universally or whether they are being
diluted by mere declarations of good intentions and
selective application, only for the world to eventually
revert to a state of anarchy, double standards and the
perception that might is right.
Cyprus is not asking anyone to intervene in its
favour. We are simply invoking international law
and legality, because we believe that a key element
of our civilization is not primarily the pursuit of our
self-interests, but the support of legality. It would be
more appropriate if we said that our true collective
interest is to support legality and the rule of law on the
international stage.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I would first like to
wish your country and nation, Mr. President, a happy,
peaceful and prosperous new year. Romania joins others
in thanking China for preparing and organizing today’s
thought-provoking debate on the eve of the seventieth
anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is indeed an excellent opportunity for United Nations
Members to reaffirm, individually and collectively,
their commitment to the purposes and principles of the
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations founding treaty. Romania, of course, is
honoured to firmly re-state its original pledge.
I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
on behalf of the European Union and by the Ambassador
of Austria on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law, and would like to add a few thoughts in my
national capacity.
Reflecting on history, let us go back for a few
seconds to the moment 70 years ago when United
States President Harry Truman addressed the national
delegates gathered in San Francisco. He recalled the
brave women and men who gave their lives so that future
generations could live in a secure world ruled by justice.
“Let us labour”, he said, “to achieve a peace which is
really worthy of their great sacrifice.” Achieving a
peace worthy of their sacrifice is a commandment
we are still bound to and challenged by today. After
70 years of working together, and 70 years since the end
of the Second World War, mistrust between States has
not completely disappeared, to put it mildly.
The myriad conflicts we are witnessing
today — from Ukraine to the frozen one in the
Transnistrian region, from Nagorno-Karabakh to
Abkhazia and Ossetia, to name just a few, in addition to
heinous phenomena such as the spread of radicalization
and terrorism — require that the United Nations and
the international community remain vigilant and strive
tirelessly to provide relief through common action.
While the security landscape has fundamentally
changed, the core of our collective security system is
the same. The ban on the use of force in international
relations is as valid today as it was in 1945. The
necessity of common action is as valid today as it was
70 years ago, while of course exponentially enhanced
by the speed of interaction in a globalized world. In
that context, my country reaffirms the importance of
the resolution of all conflicts, without differentiation,
on the same basis — respect for the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the norms and principles
of international law, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States within their internationally
recognized borders, and in a framework of negotiations
conducted in good faith and in inclusive formats.
Promoting the rule of law in international relations
has been a constant aim of Romanian foreign policy.
One example is that on, 5 February, the Romanian
Senate unanimously enacted a law accepting the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. It will soon enter into force, enabling a

S/PV.7389

declaration of acceptance to be deposited with the
Secretariat as a token of Romania’s full commitment
to international law and its recognition of the Court’s
prominent contribution to international peace.
The international community has repeatedly called
in question the strategies and instruments used by the
United Nations in fulfilling its mandate, including
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That does not mean that the principles of
the Charter are being questioned, but that the capacity
to provide prompt and efficient responses to threats
and challenges needs constant improvement and
enhancement. Romania considers the role of regional
actors to be an essential element of a well-functioning,
efficient and legitimate collective-security system.
While the Council retains the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, regional
organizations are increasingly recognized as being
instrumental in the prevention, resolution and
management of conflicts. In our view, mutually
beneficial cooperation could be ensured by even more
active and continuous engagement on the part of the
Security Council, capable of acting in a united and
cooperative manner.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
spells out the principles that guide partnerships with
regional arrangements and agencies. The Charter
provides no precise definition of regional organizations,
thus allowing for a variety of cooperative efforts. It is
clear by now that such cooperative efforts should be
undertaken with willing and capable partners, in order
to ensure success.
In 2005, Romania put forward what later became
the Council’s first resolution to address cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security.
We are still convinced today — this year, when my
country will celebrate 60 years of United Nations
membership — that developing strong, flexible
partnerships with regional actors will assist the Council
in discharging its increasingly diversified duties, both
efficiently and legitimately.
The huge loss and suffering that led to the
establishment of the Organization was a tribute to the
fundamental values of justice and human dignity. We
must continue working together to achieve a peace
worthy of that sacrifice. I leave participants with
the thoughts of the outstanding Romanian diplomat
Nicolae Titulescu, the only twice-elected President

15-0483869/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the League of Nations, who said, “Each of us has a
mission. Together, how can we fail to succeed?”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We
recognize that the theme of this discussion is very
important as well as timely, particularly in conjunction
with this year’s marking of the seventieth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations. Indeed,
Indonesia’s Constitution, which was developed by our
founding fathers also 70 years ago, reflects in many
ways the spirit that motivated the creation of this global
Organization. Let me quote some parts of the preamble
of the Indonesian Constitution.
“Whereas independence is the inalienable right
of all nations, therefore, all colonialism in the world
must be abolished ... as it is not in conformity with
humanity and justice”.
Furthermore, our Constitution mandates our
nation to the implementation of “a world order based
on freedom, perpetual peace and social justice”. Those
parts of our Constitution provide clear guidelines on
the conduct of our foreign policy. In adhering to the
implementation of its constitutional mandate, Indonesia
has been relentless.
In 1955, we organized the Asian-African Conference
in Bandung to mobilize solidarity and to support nations
under colonial Powers in achieving their independence.
The Conference, which constitutes an important
stepping stone in the establishment of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in 1961, was also intended
to promote global peace, security and prosperity based
on the principle of the sovereign equality of all nations.
The outcome of the Bandung Conference included a
10-point declaration on the promotion of world peace
and cooperation, the first point of which states, “Respect
for fundamental human rights and for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations”.
A number of independent States have emerged since
then, making up the majority of the United Nations
membership today. However, despite the Charter of
the United Nations and the United Nations system’s
growing normative and operational frameworks in
peace, human rights and security, the greatest challenge
remains the maintenance of peace and security. The
United Nations, and the international community in

70/103

23/02/2015

general, has unfortunately fallen short in ensuring
that the Palestinian people exercise their inalienable
rights and their right to independence from the foreign
occupying Power.
It cannot be denied that throughout its history the
Organization did not effectively tackle and did not
succeed in preventing many armed conflicts, genocides
and other international tragedies. As we understand,
the United Nations was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to promote peace,
curb aggression, regulate diplomatic affairs, set an
international code of law, nurture collective social
development and foster prosperity. What is crucial is that
the United Nations continues to reinvent itself to adjust
to changing challenges and strategic environments,
through persistent reform. However, it needs to deliver
on the rightful expectations of the global citizenry. In
that context, some reforms have worked well, while
others have stalled. The Organization can certainly do
better, and in some areas, as in conflict resolution and
nuclear disarmament, it must fight for greater relevance.
Indonesia underscores the peaceful settlement of
disputes and giving higher priority to political dialogue,
mediation and diplomacy, while consistently upholding
human rights, the rule of law and the Charter of the
United Nations. We emphasize the peaceful resolution
of conflicts also because we have reaped direct benefits
from it in our once restive province of Aceh. We
continue to work diligently to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes regionally and internationally.
To that end, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has been tremendously important in our
region. We fully support a strong partnership between
the United Nations and ASEAN and between the United
Nations and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations.
On its part, Indonesia will continue to contribute
tirelessly to help enhance international peace and
security. In line with our constitutional obligation,
Indonesia has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping missions from as early as the 1950s. Many
Indonesian troops have served as Blue Helmets across
the different continents. There are currently 1,850
Indonesian peacekeepers deployed with nine United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Indonesia is aiming
to become among the top 10 contributing countries.
To achieve that goal by 2019, we have implemented
strategies under the so-called Road Map for Vision
4,000 Peacekeepers.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the light of the current world challenges,
Indonesia plans to hold in April a commemoration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the Asian-African Conference,
to reaffirm the Bandung principles. It will include
an Asia-Africa summit to bring countries in the two
continents closer and to strengthen cooperation while
utilizing advantages derived from commonalities and
diversities to contribute to global peace and security,
the eradication of poverty and achieving sustainable
development.
The United Nations must become the true pivot of
the international effort to engender shared goodwill,
fraternity and peace. Throughout the history of its
existence, the Organization has made progress in some
areas while suffering setbacks in others. We must all
fully exercise our responsibilities to ensure that the
United Nations fulfils its promise. That will require
achieving significant progress in Security Council
reform without further delay. The Council must reflect
the realities of the twenty-first century. Indonesia
wishes to see a Council that can demonstrate clearly
that it is representative, democratic, transparent,
accountable and efficient and serves the interests and
is responsive to the concerns of the entire international
community, rather than a select few. While recognizing
some strong differences on reform, we believe that
there are also some quite workable proposals, such
as the French proposal to regulate the use of the veto
in situations of crimes against humanity. We believe
that, with greater political will and mutually respectful
dialogue, meaningful progress can be made.
In conclusion, Indonesia strongly believes that the
Organization is the best hope for multilateralism. The
purposes and principles set out in the Charter remain
valid. We must spare no effort to strengthen the United
Nations for a more fair, peaceful and prosperous world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand welcomes
the timely convening of this open debate, as this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations. We thank the Secretary-General for his
informative briefing.
The four main purposes for the establishment of the
United Nations are clearly and well set out in Chapter
I of the Charter. During the past 70 years, the United
Nations has experienced both successes and failures
in achieving its original objectives. While we have

S/PV.7389

made considerable progress on the development front,
the maintenance of peace and security in many parts
of the world and the promotion of respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all, without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, seem
to have met serious challenges. History has shown
that success or failure in achieving the objectives
of the United Nations heavily depends upon two key
questions, among others. First, does the United Nations
live up to its responsibility? Secondly, do Member
States respect the principles and fulfil their obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations? Allow me to
give some examples.
Massacres in various countries could have been
prevented if the United Nations had transcended
political divides so as to undertake swift responses, or
if it had had adequate resources to fulfil its mandates.
They could have also been prevented if the relevant
Member States had adhered to the principles of the
Charter to respect human and equal rights and to abide
by international law. Lessons learned from those tragic
incidents compel us to do our utmost not to let history
repeat itself. In that respect, Thailand commends the
Secretary-General for his Human Rights Up Front
initiative, and the relevant United Nations mechanisms
for their continued efforts to protect civilians and to
prevent the repetition of such horrible tragedies.
We are witnessing emerging and chronic
intra-national and international conflicts caused by
acts of aggression, disrespect for State sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and intolerance of religious
faiths and cultural differences. Many innocent people
are deliberately executed simply because they profess
different religions, faiths and beliefs. Villagers are
forced to leave their homes merely because they are of
different races and tribes. Perpetrators have not been
brought to justice. There continue to be the unilateral
use of force and military intervention without the
Security Council’s authorization. All of those examples
serve to clearly demonstrate that we have not yet
achieved the noble goals of the United Nations and that
the Charter has not been fully observed and respected.
The priority of the United Nations and the
international community of today is to achieve social
equality, respect for and promotion of human rights,
sovereign equality and tolerance to prevent the spread
of extremism and terrorism. To address those key
issues, some may believe that the Charter, which first
came into force in 1945, may be outdated and no longer

15-0483871/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/02/2015

relevant. Thailand believes otherwise. The principles
and provisions stipulated therein remain universal,
applicable and relevant. To deal with those pressing
issues effectively, what we need are new working
methods, approaches and measures, in accordance with
the Charter and international law. Thailand encourages
continued discussion in various forums among Member
States, the relevant United Nations organs and civil
society on this important topic.

It is our turn to return the favour to the international
community, which participated in the restoration and
consolidation of peace in my country after several
years of unprecedented crises and war. It is then
understandable that the deployment of our troops
to peacekeeping operations is our way of thanking
the international community, which has remained at
Burundi’s side as much in time of peace as in time of
war.

National interest remains the supreme and
uncompromising goal of every country and is often
referred to when foreign, military, economic and
even cultural policies are being formulated. However,
one possible approach to prevent conflict and uproot
terrorism and extremism is to realize and attach more
importance to the term “mutual”, where we regard equal
sovereignty and rights and appreciate different values.
The world today is in real need of mutual interest,
mutual respect and mutual understanding.

Since the 1990s, peacekeeping operations have
become the rule rather than the exception so as to
re-establish peace and stability, especially in regions
targeted by internal conflicts, such as in our region of
the African Great Lakes. The nature of the mandates
of those operations has evolved throughout the decades
and has been constantly changing. At the same
time, the implementation mechanisms have become
increasingly complex, which means that the challenges
the Organization must face continue to multiply.

In conclusion, Thailand has always believed
that the four original objectives of the founding of
United Nations can be achieved if all Member States
fully respect and adhere to the principles enshrined
in the Charter. I should like to reaffirm Thailand’s
commitment to fulfil our obligations as set forth by
the Charter for our joint effort to maintain peace and
security and to allow peace to prevail.

Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank you and your country,
Mr. President, for having organized this important and
very interesting open debate on the theme “Maintenance
of international peace and security: Reflect on history,
reaffirm the strong commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations”.

Nothing can be done without security, yet everything
becomes possible when security is guaranteed and
extends throughout the national territory. In that
regard, the early mobilization of sufficient resources for
capacity-building and the financing of related activities,
such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), are key to any security sector reform. In that
regard, Burundi welcomes the success of its own DDR
programme, which allowed for the proper integration
of foreign rebels into the regular army. Thanks to that
successful integration, Burundi now has defence and
security forces that are truly national and inclusive,
and currently help to maintain peace in several hotspot
areas. Burundi stands ready to share the experience of
its DDR programe with other nations in the framework
of a tripartite partnership that would include Burundi,
the country concerned, and the United Nations and/or
the African Union.

Burundi is pleased to have been associated,
following the rebirth of its democracy in 2005, with the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and the
African Union. Burundi is the top African francophone
troop-contributing country to peacekeeping operations
in several conflict areas across the world. Its military
and police personnel work courageously each day under
the blue flag of the United Nations and under the green
flag of the African Union, so as to re-establish peace
in troubled areas, notably in Somalia and the Central
African Republic.

Extending mandates for existing operations and
establishing new operations must be done in strict
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States, and non-intervention in
domestic affairs. Moreover, it is necessary to comply
with the basic principles adopted by the General
Assembly with respect to those operations, such as the
consent of the parties, impartiality, and the non-use of
force except in self-defence.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.

72/103

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we all know, a large number of peacekeeping
operations are mandated to protect civilians. We
reiterate that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians falls to sovereign States, except
in the event of mass atrocities, such as genocide, crimes
against humanity or ethnic cleansing. The protection of
civilians cannot serve as a pretext to promote a change
of regime, a military intervention or any other act that
would run counter to the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. In that respect, it is important to
continue to strengthen dialogue among countries that
host peacekeeping operations, troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariаt and the Security Council.
Burundi believes that peacekeeping is an important
tool of the United Nations for resolving conflict
situations around the world, and we believe in that tool.
However, peacekeeping does not replace other, more
cost-effective mechanisms already in existence, such
as preventive diplomacy and political efforts to settle
disputes peacefully before they happen. We underscore
that when establishing a peacekeeping operation or
extending the mandate of an existing operation, there
is a need to adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles
that govern those operations. We must, inter alia,
respect the principles of sovereign equality, political
independence, territorial integrity, and non-intervention
in domestic affairs.
It cannot be said enough that cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries is key to the success of peacekeeping
operations. The role played by troop-contributing
countries, whose soldiers risk their lives for peace in
the overall peacekeeping process, and the importance
of their full participation in the development of policy
or reaching of decisions related to troops, the mandate
and the composition of peacekeeping operations can
hardly be underestimated.
The provision of any financial and logistical support
necessary to peacekeeping operations is essential to
ensure that their mandates are successfully carried out.
The financing of peacekeeping operations should not
become a burden for troop-contributing countries.
While reaffirming that the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security rests
with the Security Council, it is imperative to continue
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in resolving
conflict and post-conflict situations through joint efforts

S/PV.7389

in conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The ongoing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is testimony to
the potential of cooperation between the United Nations
and other regional organizations. This cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
should be continued, strengthened and made lasting.
Given the short amount of time allotted to discuss
this extremely broad and relevant topic, allow me to
briefly make some concrete proposals in the framework
of our shared goal to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This is not an exhaustive list.
First, in the context of maintaining multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding elements can
be incorporated quickly. Any strategy for peacebuilding
must be based on national experience and planned in a
consistent and cross-cutting manner to ensure that it is
in line with the needs of the country in question, and
with the principle of national ownership and priorities
set by national authorities. To that end, the views of
the host country and the lessons learned by and best
practices of troop-contributing countries may prove
necessary to determine the real needs of field missions.
Secondly, we recall that women play a key role in
conflict prevention and rebuilding broken societies. In
that respect, we advocate for the systematic inclusion
of women throughout the process of settlement of
disputes, mediation, community recovery and local
administration after conflict.
Thirdly, it is crucial to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations and those mandated by the
United Nations — such as the African Union Mission
to Somalia and, more recently, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic — have clearly defined and adequately
resourced mandates, objectives and chains of command
that are based on a realistic assessment of the situation
on the ground. We believe that each mission must take
into account the needs and priorities of the countries
concerned, in cooperation with national authorities,
from the earliest stages of the mission planning process.
Fourthly, we call for strengthened and sustained
dialogue and cooperation among the Security Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat in order to meet peacekeeping challenges
in a spirit of partnership, cooperation and mutual trust.

15-0483873/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fifthly and finally, we call on the Security Council
to continue to support regional and subregional
initiatives so as to strengthen their ability to contribute
to efforts to maintain international peace and security.
We have witnessed the important гoIе that the African
Union and subregional organizations — such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States, the East
African Community and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, whose headquarters are in
Bujumbura — have played in the area of peacekeeping
and conflict resolution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me express
our deep appreciation to the People’s Republic of China
for organizing this important and rich open debate.
I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement made by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law. I will
deliver an abridged version of my statement; the full
version will be available via Twitter.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has valued the
United Nations since its inception 70 years ago as an
institution indispensable to the achievement of global
peace, justice and development. With that in mind, I
will focus on conflict prevention, the use of the veto
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The best way to maintain peace and security is
to prevent conflicts from happening — a point just
made by our colleague from Burundi. The primary
responsibility to prevent conflicts, of course, lies
with the State. At the same time, the international
community also shares in that responsibility. We call
upon the Council to use the tools mentioned in Chapter
VI of the Charter to prevent conflicts.
A crucial element of conflict prevention is
immediate action on the part of the Council in response
to early warning. Leadership, clear procedures and
means to act are necessary. That is especially so when
there are signals that large-scale human rights violations
or mass atrocities are about to take place. The Council
has a special responsibility to protect in that context.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands also welcomes a
more forward-looking role for the Secretary-General in

74/103

23/02/2015

relation to the Council — for instance, through regular
briefings to the Council in which he can raise issues of
concern, even if they are not yet formally on the agenda
of the Council. The mediation work of the SecretaryGeneral could be further enhanced. We also believe
that the interaction between Council members and other
United Nations Members could be further improved.
My second point concerns the use of the veto.
We have been witness too often to mass atrocities
in situations where preventive measures failed. On
occasion the Council has been unable to act to address
such situations because of the contentious use of the
veto. In our view, in those situations the use of the veto
by the permanent members of the Council ought to be
limited. In that respect, we agree with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of the
Maldives, which was very clear. We therefore continue
to laud and support the French initiative for a voluntary
code of conduct for the five permanent members to
abstain from using the veto in such situations.
We believe that the peaceful settlement of disputes
is a vital tool in the prevention of conflicts. Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations recognizes that
crucial objective. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
deeply committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
with a special emphasis on judicial settlements. Among
other institutions, the Kingdom is proud to host the
International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration at The Hague, the legal capital of
the world. We strongly encourage the Council to take
measures to expand the use of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, both in relation to State and non-State
actors.
Under Articles 34 and 36 of the Charter, the
Council can recommend that parties settle their disputes
peacefully. The Council can also suggest the specific
form it deems most suitable and request to be briefed
about the results. In cases where the International
Court of Justice has jurisdiction, the Council can also
strongly urge the parties to take their disputes to the
Court. The Council could also encourage parties to
accept the Court’s jurisdiction when the Court does not
yet have jurisdiction.
The Netherlands has full confidence in the quality
of the dispute settlement mechanisms mentioned in
the Charter. We strongly believe that States should not
only submit themselves to those mechanisms, but also
should abide by the decisions taken through them.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, the Netherlands strongly believes in
its partnership with the United Nations for peace, justice
and development. It is that firm belief that serves as the
foundation of our candidature for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the 2017-2018 term. The
Netherlands is ready to play its part as a constructive
partner in the Council in the pursuit of the maintenance
of international peace and security. Let me end by
quoting a speech delivered by my Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Albert Koenders, last week in which he quoted
Willy Brandt: “Peace is not everything, but everything
is nothing without peace.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, which we believe is very
timely as this year we will commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
I also thank you for the concept note (S/2015/87, annex)
that has been circulated for this purpose.
This debate allows us to reaffirm Uruguay’s
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and, at the same time,
provides us an opportunity to reflect on where we stand
today, given that we note with concern that we are still
far from fully fulfilling those purposes and principles.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Maldives on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.
In the task of maintaining peace and security,
Uruguay, as founding Member of the United Nations,
reaffirms the principles enshrined in the Charter of
San Francisco in 1945. While the international context
has significantly changed since then, those principles
remain fundamental principles that form a framework
of basic rights and obligations. The principle of the
sovereign equality of States is the cornerstone of
the multilateral system that unites us today. By the
same token, the principle of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States is a fundamental value, as it is
safeguards the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and self-determination of States.
As stated in the Preamble of the Charter, the
Organization was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. However, we note
with regret that we are far from achieving the goals of
peace and security enshrined in the Charter.

S/PV.7389

Uruguay is concerned about the fact that the
purposes and principles of the Charter are not observed
in various areas of the world where they are still
challenged by activities that contradict them. That not
only affects international peace and security, but also
has an impact on the system as a whole and endangers
its very foundations. The fact that an unprecedented
120,000 military, police and civilian personnel are
deployed in various missions demonstrates that the task
of peacekeeping remains enormous and is growing.
The consent of the State concerned is a guiding
principle of peacekeeping operations, which ensures
their legitimacy. However, we are aware that currently
most armed conflicts are intra-State in nature and
that, in some cases in which the most basic values and
human rights are threatened, one cannot adopt the
most extreme interpretation of sovereignty because
that would amount to impunity. We acknowledge that
is the primary responsibility of the State to protect its
population. However, when that responsibility is not
fulfilled and there is an imminent threat of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or ethnic cleansing,
non-intervention gives way to the involvement of the
international community.
Uruguay’s commitment to international peace and
security is tangible, inter alia through our significant
contributions to peacekeeping operations in which it is
participating, not only to achieve those goals but also
through the categorical, ethic and moral imperative of
solidarity with brotherly countries of the region and
with other nations that must face serious situations
of conflict and instability. Uruguay’s commitment is
not new, but goes back to the 1950s and 1960s, when
my Government decided to send military observers
to missions in the Sinai Peninsula and in India and
Pakistan and then increased its participation until the
number of Uruguayan Blue Helmets exceeded 2,000 in
2013.
In that regard, it is worth mentioning the role
of Uruguay in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where approximately 1,000 of its troops are
participating, and in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, where not only does it have troops on
the ground, but it also chairs the Group of Friends of
Haiti.
To achieve lasting peace we must address the
underlying causes of conflict, and therefore promote
development in all its dimensions and the defence,

15-0483875/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/02/2015

promotion and protection of human rights. The political
stability, democratic governance and territorial
integrity of States are necessary conditions for conflict
prevention. At the same time, strengthening the rule
of law, protecting and promoting human rights and
ensuring sustainable economic and social development,
equality, social inclusion and the elimination of poverty
also contribute to the prevention of conflicts and postconflict peacebuilding.

for the initiative from the States Members of the United
Nations.

In conclusion, while we recognize the primary role
that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council in the
difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security, we also recognize the complementary role
that is entrusted to regional and subregional bodies.
As a member of the Union of South American Nations,
a cooperation and political consultation body that has
played an important role in preventing conflicts and
finding peaceful settlements to disputes, Uruguay is
part of a zone of peace that puts its trust in preventive
diplomacy as an effective tool.

That reaffirms Article 2, paragraph 1, of the United
Nations Charter, which underlines the sovereign
equality of all States Members of the United Nations.
We thank all Member States, as we reaffirm this
important principle. In that regard, I would especially
refer to the statement made this morning by the
Foreign Minister of New Zealand, who noted the fact
that we — in this context I think he was referring to
the Council — “should listen to the United Nations
membership, including the smaller members, which
are often not heard”. He further said that “we should
hear their disappointment and their frustration” (supra,
p. 8). We submit that hearing all voices would indeed
enhance the concept of win-win cooperation, which
today’s debate seeks to promote.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate on the topic “Maintenance of international
peace and security: Reflect on history, reaffirm the
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations”.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, Papua New Guinea
will celebrate its fortieth year of independence and
membership in the Organization. When we joined,
on 10 October 1975, our country committed “to the
maintenance of peace throughout our region and the
world and to our undertaking to uphold the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations”. Indeed, that
commitment has been reaffirmed time and again by
our leaders at successive general debates at the General
Assembly. It will continue to be maintained along with
the reaffirmation of our commitment to the rule of
law and support for the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of sovereign States, as noted in
Article 2, paragraph 7 of the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, we support the initiative by France
on restraint in the use of the veto in relation to mass
atrocities. However, we would further propose that
this very important issue be discussed in the General
Assembly in order to garner the widest possible support

76/103

We strongly support the statement in the Chinese
delegation’s concept note that countries
“big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are all
equal members of the international community, and
they are all entitled to participate in international
affairs on an equal footing.” (S/2015/87, annex, p. 3)

Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan underlined
the important nexus between development and security
when he stated that there can be no security without
development and no development without security,
along with the recognition of the importance of human
rights within that context. As we move towards the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, we
must also ensure the continued implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals as an important
component of the sustainable development goals.
Development has to be a critical part of the proposal
on win-win cooperation. To recognize that would be a
reaffirmation of the “beautiful vision set forth in the
Charter” (supra, p. 4), as noted earlier by the Foreign
Minister of China.
Part of the development paradigm must recognize
the need to address the serious adverse impacts of
climate change. This issue has been raised by the
Pacific small island developing States in the context of
threats to their sustainable development and ultimately
their existence. To that end, the Pacific small island
developing States proposed the resolution entitled
“Climate change and its possible security implications”
(General Assembly resolution 63/281), which the
Assembly adopted in 2009 and which notes the link

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7389

between security and climate change. Paragraph 1 of
that resolution invites

weapon, which, in the hands of a few Powers today, has
the ability to wipe out all of humankind.

“the relevant organs of the United Nations, as
appropriate and within their respective mandates,
to intensify their efforts in considering and
addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications”.

The world’s people, through their Governments, in
order to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war — as the Preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations puts it — created this Organization based
on several fundamental principles of international
relations and endowed its bodies with different
functions, including the General Assembly, where all
Member States of the Organization participate, and
the Security Council, to which the States assigned
the main function of maintaining international peace
and security. Effective action by the Security Council
requires that its actions be based on respect for the
principles on which the United Nations was created and
framed in the functions and powers that the Charter
gives it. The purposes and principles are the measuring
rod against which the actions of the Council are to be
judged.

Along with the need to respect and recognize the
planet’s limits, we recognize the nature of climate
change to be a threat multiplier, with the potential to
aggravate certain existing threats to international peace
and security. In that regard, among other important
issues, in 2011 the Security Council expressed in a
presidential statement its concern
“that possible security implications of loss of
territory of some States caused by sea-level-rise
may arise, in particular in small low-lying island
States.” (S/PRST/2011/15, p. 2)
The United Nations is the only global institutions
that provides each Member State an equal voice. Today’s
debate has strongly reaffirmed that proposition.
In conclusion, during his recent visit with the
Pacific island developing States leaders in Fiji, President
Xi Jinping reaffirmed, “we shall be good partners of
win-win cooperation and common development” and
added that China would continue to provide support
and assistance to the Pacific small island developing
States, and for that we are all grateful.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Before beginning my statement, I would like express to
you, Mr. President, my best wishes on the occasion of
the lunar new year. I also wish to extend my best wishes
to all who are celebrating that holiday. I also wish to
congratulate China for having proposed a subject for
today’s open debate that is particularly relevant as we
prepare to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations.
The United Nations emerged as a response of the
international community to the horrors of a war whose
fronts spanned almost two thirds of the planet and
which killed about 75 million people. Approximately
40 million of them were civilians — many victims of
genocide, mass bombings, disease and famine. The end
of that war also saw the first military use of an atomic

Among the primary purposes set forth in the Charter
of the Organization are the maintenance of international
peace and security and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Efforts to achieve those purposes must be
carried out in conformity with the principles set out in
Article 2, the first of which is the sovereign equality
of States. That principle, together with the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, is a
guarantee for the independence of all our countries and
protection against the ambitions of States that, given
their economic or military might, aim to impose social
systems and their recipes for development on other
nations.
The first concern of the Council, as guarantor
of international peace and security, must be that the
principles of sovereign equality and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States are respected.
There is no shortage of examples in the recent history
of the world where lack of respect for those principles,
even in some cases under authorization of the Security
Council, has led to situations of greater political,
military and economic insecurity,as compared to what
existed prior to foreign interventions, as in certain
cases — I reiterate — when the Council itself was
unable to prevent unilateral military interventions.
Although the Charter of the United Nations, with
the aim of preserving international peace and security,
envisioned a series of mechanisms that should be
used, we find an increase in the number of resolutions

15-0483877/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/02/2015

adopted by the Security Council under the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter. We would like to make an
appeal that in circumstances of conflict and potential
threats to international peace and security what should
be used, with a sufficiently gradual approach and based
on subsidiarity, are the provisions of Chapter VI on the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the principles of
Chapter VIII on regional agreements.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the Permanent
Representative of Austria on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Rule of Law. The Philippines has
consistently called for the rule of law, as embedded
in the Charter, to be at the forefront of our collective
resolve to achieve peace.

I would like to recall that Ecuador is part of
an area of peace declared by the Heads of State and
Government of the Community of Latin America and
Caribbean States. By the same token, the SecretaryGeneral has the prestige of his Office at his disposal to
exercise preventive diplomacy with the aim of avoiding
the deteriorating conditions of instability wherever
they arise.

The Philippines believes that the promotion of
global peace primarily starts at home. The international
community has witnessed our unwavering commitment
and tireless efforts to bring about and build peace in the
southern Philippines. We started a long journey towards
achieving lasting peace in that part of the country and,
despite recent setbacks, the Philippine Government,
as well as all the relevant stakeholders in the peace
process, remains steadfastly committed to the goal
of one day seeing a peaceful and prosperous Muslim
Mindanao come to fruition. To step back and reverse all
the progress made is not an option. We are grateful to
the international community and to the United Nations,
which have given their strong support throughout the
whole process, for their continued confidence.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): Allow me to extend
the Philippines’ appreciation to China, which hold the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, for convening this open debate on a topic that
is most relevant and at the very core of the existence of
the United Nations.
Eight months from today, the United Nations will
mark the seventieth year of its establishment. It was
born out of our collective desire for peace, our mutual
interest to end the scourge of war and our shared goal
to achieve prosperity through peace. With the number
of countries facing crises at a record high and current
conflicts causing the loss of thousands of innocent
lives, the destruction of property and the displacement
of families and putting extraordinary strain on
global resources, it is almost impossible to imagine a
world where no global body exists fully devoted and
committed to maintaining international peace and
security. As former United States President Dwight D.
Eisenhower said in 1961,
“With all its defects, with all the failures that
we can check up against it, the United Nations still
represents man’s best-organized hope to substitute
the conference table for the battlefield.”
Yet, the United Nations can only be as effective and
useful as its Member States make it. It is therefore
incumbent upon each of us to keep the letter and spirit
of the Charter of the United Nations alive amid new and
persistent challenges.

78/103

While we settle outstanding issues concerning
the Mindanao peace process, we are facing an equally
challenging task of resolving tensions in our regional
seas. The Philippines has resorted to the rule of law in
trying to resolve those tensions, and believes that the
core instrument for resolving maritime disputes is the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). We have kept the international community
apprised of our position on, and developments in,
the peaceful settlement of disputes in the West
Philippine Sea and the South China Sea, an issue that
is undoubtedly and unquestionably of global concern.
The Philippines has resorted to arbitration to clarify
maritime entitlements and settle maritime disputes
peacefully through UNCLOS. Arbitration is fully
entrenched in Chapter VI, Article 33, of the Charter
of the United Nations, on the pacific settlement of
disputes.
We have called for, and reiterate our call, for a stop
to all reclamation activities in the disputed areas and
the acceleration of talks on a legally binding code of
conduct in the South China Sea. Massive reclamation
is a direct threat to the Philippines and other claimant
States. It should be considered a great concern for all
States, as it threatens the security and overall peace
and stability in the region. Moreover, the massive

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

reclamation, which is causing widespread destruction of
the region’s biodiversity, will also irreparably damage
the entire ecological balance in the West Philippine
Sea and the South China Sea. Such irreversible damage
will have long-term effects on all the peoples across
geopolitical boundaries who have depended on the
sea for their livelihoods for generations. It is equally
incumbent upon us to ensure the safety of those peoples,
who have been peacefully, sustainably and legitimately
pursuing their livelihoods in those areas. Those whose
actions endanger the lives of those peoples and those
who do not heed the call for restraint are not being true
to the cause of peace.
It is unfortunate that some of us here have forgotten
the horrors of wars, have undertaken actions that
undermine peace and security in our regions and have
rendered meaningless the commitments made in San
Francisco in 1945 to
“practice tolerance and live together in peace
as good neighbours and to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security”.
Amid all the threats to peace that confront us today, the
international community can count on the Philippines
to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The United Nations and its Charter
have been, and will continue to be, crucial bastions
for the voices of all countries to be heard on the global
stage.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary wishes to thank
China for convening this highly appropriate open
debate of the Security Council, for we cannot pledge
enough our commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is my privilege to speak here today in the
Chamber for the very first time as the new Permanent
Representative of Hungary. Much has been said today,
and so I would rather focus on three major points: first,
the need for, but lack of, real dialogue; secondly, the
importance of not forgetting, but learning from, our
previous sins; and, thirdly, the need think out of the
box and look for new methods in order to succeed in
peacemaking.
Talking in tune has always been my aim throughout
my professional life. Talking to each other with dignity
even when our differences hold sway should be a

S/PV.7389

main preoccupation in turbulent moments for all of
us. Indeed, differences in our opinions and visions
are at times pronounced, and the spirit of consensus is
difficult to bring to bear on some issues. But Hungary
would still argue that we should handle our political
differences through ongoing dialogue and the art of
listening and responding in order at least to try not to
misunderstand each other.
“Dialogos” does not mean a conversation between
two people or two groups, but an acceptance by two or
more participants that they will compare and contrast
their respective arguments to the end. Dialogue is
accordingly a perilous enterprise. In my country’s
view, the United Nations was created for dialogue, and
it must act on the highest possible level for dialogue.
The Council will agree with me that we have to
renew our commitment to understanding and tolerating
each other’s cultural background and identity, keeping
in our hearts and minds the verses of Jalal al-Din Rumi,
the great thirteenth century Islamic scholar, poet and
philosopher, who wrote: “Half of me comes from here;
half from everywhere/ Half of me comes from the pearls
of the sea; half from distant shores.” We, the people
of the world, are connected to each other globally, and
today our interdependence is greater than ever. We
must therefore consciously protect our sensitive peace
together and act together against evil for the betterment
of the future of our children.
Hungary fully supports the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.
The founding mothers and fathers of the United
Nations and its organs, including the Security Council,
wanted to “save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”, as we have heard many times today,
but they also wanted to achieve more: human rights,
the rule of law and development. And, as Nelson
Mandela said, there is no peace without development
and no development without peace. None of this can
be achieved without teaching our children at a very
young age to respect and celebrate the diversity of
the human race. Only then will grown-ups respect
State sovereignty, territorial integrity and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes.
We have seen an amazing evolution of humankind
since the end of the Second World War. We should never
forget the immense developments in the political arena,
and we should be proud of them. The United Nations

15-0483879/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

has undeniably had its success stories. It stabilized
the security situation in a bipolar world and, in many
cases, served as the most important — sometimes the
last — hope on the international platform for Member
States to overcome their differences.
However, the world has been changing. The
world has changed. Only, many people seem no
longer to recall why the United Nations had to be set
up 70 years ago. Conflicts, bloodshed and human
suffering continue. Religious and ethnic minorities are
again threatened. People are beheaded because of their
religion, nationality and beliefs? Are we going back
in time? Only, people do not go to the main square in
their towns to watch executions or to the arena to see
brutality; we just switch on the television.
The world needs new enlightenment. The United
Nations could play the leading role in creating it.
Today, the world is in turmoil despite the Security
Council never having been busier. Somehow, we do not
seem to learn enough from our sins and mistakes, our
greediness and selfishness. And the Security Council
and the international community seem to be paralysed
in many of these situations. But history has already
shown us that failure to act will only prolong human
suffering and invite further atrocities, and that we will
pay a very high price for our inaction in the form of lost
lives, lost generations, lost hopes and lost futures.
Our inability to live up to the challenges we face
also undermines the trust and belief that people around
the world have in the United Nations. They see the world
Organization ever more distant and detached from
reality. Einstein said that we cannot solve problems
by using the same kind of thinking we used when we
created them. Based on the lessons learned and reunited
by our common values, we must be open to new ideas
in order to effectively implement the noble principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
the Chinese New Year, and to thank you for having
convened this very important debate of the Security
Council on the theme “Maintenance of international
peace and security: reflect on history, reaffirm the
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations”.

80/103

23/02/2015

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the end of one of the most abhorrent wars witnessed
by world, which claimed millions of victims and led
to told suffering. The destruction brought about by the
Second World War was not limited to a few parties to
the conflict; many nations of the world paid the price
of that destruction. Indeed, one of the most important
chapters of the War took place in Egypt, where
approximately 20 million landmines were left along the
northern coastline of the Western Desert. That, too, led
to a great deal of bloodshed. The nations of the world
emerged from that tragedy more determined than ever
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to practice tolerance and to promote social progress,
better standards of life and freedom.
The seventieth anniversary of the war and the
founding of United Nations is a turning point calling
for us to review the history of the Organization. We
should take pride in our achievements in the context
of peace and security, but we must also learn lessons
and learn from the mistakes and shortcomings in the
performance of the Organization in the past. In this
regard, I would note that we must not believe that the
Second World War ended with one victorious party
and the defeat of another; the result was a victory for
humankind, which determined to build a new world
in which efforts to maintain peace and security and to
achieve prosperity for all nations were combined.
To that end, Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations stipulates that the Security Council discharge its
mandate on behalf of all Members of the United Nations.
In that regard, we need to make greater efforts to reform
the working methods of the Council so as to make it
more transparent, democratic and representative. We
must also end the unfair representation of the African
continent so as to improve the work of the Council and
its credibility.
Our debate today is an opportunity to reaffirm the
principles of sovereignty equality, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, the non-use or threat of
use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Council must uphold those principles in discharging its
mandate. It must also support the role of parties and
regional organizations in mediation and the facilitation
of negotiations and respect national ownership in
reconciliation processes.
The threats we are faced with today are no less
serious than those the United Nations faced when it

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

was first established. We must therefore develop the
tools of our Organization in dealing with conflicts,
primarily peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations,
but also special diplomatic missions. Such missions
may take place under the current review of both the
peacebuilding and peacekeeping systems and focus on
preventive diplomacy.
The world is today witnessing a number of
transnational security threats. At the forefront are the
issues of organized crime, trafficking in drugs, people
and weapons, and the horrific acts of terrorism that
have been committed in many areas around the world,
such as those that have taken place recently in Syria,
Iraq, Libya, the Sahel and Western Africa.
We do not feel the need to absolve any specific
religion of those attempts by ignorant or ill-intentioned
parties to link a religion to terrorism. We are confident
that the noble and lofty goals and principles that
are shared by all religions are able to stand on their
own. But we must not be complacent. We must adopt
intellectual and practical mechanisms that will enable
us to work collectively to face the challenges posed by
those extremists, who try to attract more extremists
while exploiting religion. I would also like to recall
many instances from history. Those who overlook
or exploit terrorism for political purposes will be
inevitably hurt by terrorism at some point. That is what
Egypt reaffirmed lately when it dealt with the threat of
terrorism by besieging terrorist groups and cutting off
their provision lines.
In conclusion, I must mention the Palestinian cause,
which remains unresolved. This state of affairs is in
direct contradiction with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international legitimacy. We
must call for a just and comprehensive peace among
the nations of the Middle East and end this injustice,
which has been done to the Palestinian people by
guaranteeing that they can enjoy their rights, including
self-determination and an independent State with
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate China for convening this
debate, which gives us an opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. My delegation associates itself with
the statements made by the representatives of Maldives

S/PV.7389

on behalf of the Accountability, Consistency and
Transparency (ACT) group and Austria on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Rule of Law.
Seventy years after the San Francisco Conference,
conflict prevention remains one of the central reasons
for the existence of the United Nations. It is undeniable
that the maintenance of peace and security is closely
linked to the resolution of issues related to development
and respect for human rights, which are also central
goals of the Organization in accordance with the
Charter. Therefore, Costa Rica wishes to make the
following comments in its national capacity.
First, it is vital to adjust the Council’s work in terms
of prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Security Council has the means necessary to
take measures under Chapter VII, but is much less
accustomed to adopting peaceful measures under
Chapter VI. This must change. As members of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, Costa Rica calls for the
available preventive diplomacy tools to be used to the
maximum extent and highlights the role of regional and
subregional organizations in this respect. We also hope
that the Council recognizes this and coordinates its
work with other United Nations agencies with related
competencies.
Secondly, we highlight the link between conflict
and serious deteriorations in human rights situations.
Such situations, when they occur, should be reported
to the relevant entities, including the Security Council.
Sovereignty must be understood as belonging to a
sovereign State that is responsible for protecting its
populations from mass atrocities. In this sense, Costa
Rica reiterates its support for the Secretary-General’s
Rights Up Front initiative. We also reiterate that due
account should be taken of the protection of civilians
and human rights issues in general in the formulation
of peacekeeping mission mandates.
Thirdly, Costa Rica stresses that the Council
cannot continue to ignore Article 26 of the Charter,
which compels it to develop plans for the establishment
of an arms control system to promote the establishment
and maintenance of international peace and security
through minimizing the diversion of the world’s human
and economic resources towards weapons. From our
point of view, such resources would be better used for
development.
Fourthly, Costa Rica urges the Council to use more
flexible working methods and thus be more agile in

15-0483881/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

its consideration of situations and more inclusive, on
the basis of the principle of the sovereign equality of
States. We reiterate our call for the full and systematic
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 and its
updates and for the formal adoption of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
Fifthly, Costa Rica, first as part of the group of five
small nations and now as part of the ACT group, has
opposed the use of the veto, especially in situations of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
support the French proposal of a code of conduct on the
use of the veto and call on the permanent members to
adopt a declaration of principles to mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization.
Finally, in the lead-up to the appointment of a new
Secretary-General, Costa Rica calls for that process to
be more inclusive, transparent and democratic. To that
end, we must define profiles and hear statements by
those who present themselves for election. The General
Assembly must hold a vote on at least two candidates
who have been preselected by the Council. We must
overcome this challenge, extend the election period and
make clear that this election will be for a single term.
My delegation believes that, in the light of the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and with the strong support
of the Council, the Organization, which brings together
every State in the world, will find the best person to take
on the great challenges of being Secretary-General and
to fight tirelessly for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the interests and aspirations of
humankind.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. An Myong Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea expresses its appreciation to China
for having organized this open debate on the topic of
reaffirming the strong commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We expect that this wide-ranging topic will serve
to squarely reflect on the real picture in terms of
international peace and security.
The purpose of the United Nations — to maintain
international peace and security and develop friendly
relations based on respect, the principle of equal
rights and the self-determination of peoples — and the
principles of the United Nations, which are centred on

82/103

23/02/2015

respect for the sovereign equality of all its Member
States, remain valid 70 years after the founding of the
United Nations and assume even stronger vitality and
relevance in view of today’s reality.
Today, an absolute majority of the countries of
the world participate in the activities and work of the
United Nations as sovereign States with equal rights
and qualifications, irrespective of differences in
ideology or system, population size and territory, or
level of development.
However, the equality of rights and qualifications
of sovereign States, that is, sovereign equality, is not
yet embodied in the overall work and activities of the
United Nations, but rather ignored, even trampled upon.
Threats to or infringement upon States’ sovereignty,
political and social system, genuine human rights and
culture are being perpetrated to a dangerous degree,
and justice and truth are being trampled under the
pretext of democracy, anti-terrorism, the protection of
human rights, freedom of expression, non-proliferation
and so on. Therefore, world peace and security, which
is a main and permanent theme of the United Nations,
has not yet been achieved, and challenges to it are
increasing.
The United Nations has entrusted the Security
Council with the maintenance of international peace
and security as its first and foremost responsibility.
However, the activities of the Security Council today
lag too far behind the principles enshrined in the
Charter.
The present reality of the Council is that one
permanent member State seeks to act as the world
police through either military blocs or bilateral military
alliances that have nothing to do with the United
Nations, or through abuse of the Security Council. The
large-scale military exercises of an aggressive nature
conducted by that permanent member against a State
Member of the United Nations are ignored, but selfdefence capabilities built to defend sovereignty and the
right to existence are brought up as a threat to peace
and security, and sanctions are imposed.
Satellite launches conducted by some Member States
are not questioned, but the same satellite launches by
other Member States are questioned. Missile launches
conducted by some Member States are not questioned,
but the missile launches conducted by other Member
States are seriously questioned. The horrible acts of
torture committed by that permanent member in other

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries are downplayed, but the so-called human
rights issues of a Member State, fabricated on the basis
of false testimony by those who are morally inhuman,
who committed crimes at home and defected, are cast
as a threat to peace and security.
The atrocities committed by Israel, which infringe
upon the right to self-determination and are aimed at
extinguishing the very existence of the Palestinian
people, are perpetrated in connivance and even
encouraged, but the just demands and hope of the
Palestinians to exercise self-determination and to live
in their homeland are vetoed by that permanent member.
Twelve years ago, we heard the accusation made
by the United States in the Security Council arguing
that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
Only after the military invasion took place, followed
by continued tragic bloodshed, did the world come to
realize that it had been the big lie of the century, whose
catastrophic consequences we are still witnessing.
Unless the present circumstances, in which the
Security Council is abused to serve the unjust purpose
of one permanent member and to justify its actions,
are properly addressed, the Security Council will
no longer be able to deal with issues of international
peace and security in conformity with the aspirations
and demands of Member States and the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter.
The arbitrariness and high-handedness reflected in
the actions of the Security Council, due mainly to one
permanent member, find their clear manifestation in the
situation created on the Korean peninsula. Today the
handling of the Korean problem in the Security Council
is not oriented towards promoting peace and security
on the peninsula, but forced into realizing the strategic
aim of the United States to destroy the sovereignty and
right to existence of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the liberation of Korea and the seventieth year since
the artificial division of the Korean nation by foreign
forces. In the course of those decades, the world has
made tremendous advances and the times have seen
dramatic changes. But the Korean nation has not yet
achieved reunification, suffering the pain of division. It
is a deplorable fact known to all and lamentable to all.
In order to open up a broad avenue to independent
reunification this year through the joint efforts of the
whole Korean nation, the Government of the Democratic

S/PV.7389

People’s Republic of Korea put forward initiatives to
remove the danger of war, ease the tension and create a
peaceful environment on the Korean peninsula. For its
realization, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
requested the United States to stop the large-scale war
exercises it conducts continuously throughout the year
in South Korea and to fundamentally change its policy,
which is hostile to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
However, the United States Administration
responded by a confrontational announcement to topple
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — to topple
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and I repeat
this phrase because these are the exact words spoken
by President Obama — and to continue to conduct war
exercises aimed at occupying Pyongyang.
Thus, the United States has completely destroyed
the basis of the so-called dialogue it has been talking
about, though outwardly, and openly confirmed its
strategy of toppling the system of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. It is the policy of the
United States Administration to mobilize all possible
means — nuclear, human rights, cyberattack, freedom
of expression and so on — in order to eliminate the
ideology, system and sovereignty of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
That is the reality unfolding on the Korean
peninsula, where the present situation of world peace
and security is consolidated, and that is the position
and attitude of one permanent member towards the
principle of respect for sovereign equality enshrined in
the Charter.
The downgrading of the status quo of the Security
Council to a tool of arbitrariness should be redressed,
hence an urgent need for comprehensive reform of
the Security Council has arisen. The United States
must withdraw its unilateral hostile policies against
sovereign Member States and refrain from abusing
the Security Council for its unjust unilateral purposes.
If the Security Council is to demonstrate its serious
stance and attitude towards peace and security issues,
it will have to duly address the United States war
exercises aimed at targeting and toppling a sovereign
State and the horrible CIA acts of torture and atrocities
committed in other parts of the world.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
discharge its responsibility and duty as a State Member
of the United Nations to achieve peace and security

15-0483883/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

for all, in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, and, for the sake of
discharging that responsibility and duty, will continue
to stand against any move to abuse the United Nations
for the pursuit of individual purposes and interests.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative to convene
today’s important and thought-provoking open debate
on reaffirming our strong commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. My
delegation also appreciates your insights into the theme,
as reflected in the concept note (S/2015/87, annex). I
would also like to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and vision on our topic.
Today’s debate is taking place as we prepare to
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations. The theme of our meeting clearly
reflects our aspirations and accomplishments, and
should be understood broadly. It provides an opportunity
to look back at past achievements and explore ways of
strengthening and improving the effectiveness of the
United Nations, so as to enable it to fulfil its mandate to
preserve peace and security among States and promote
human development. In approaching the subject, we
should bear in mind that the nature and scope of the
United Nations have expanded greatly since 1945.

23/02/2015

broad and concerted interpretation of its provisions by
Member States. To date, the United Nations has played
a significant role in promoting new norms and ensuring
the progressive development of international law,
thereby creating the conditions necessary to address
such global challenges. Despite that, long-unresolved
issues, such as the question of Palestine, show clearly
that if we are to achieve peace and justice, aggression
and usurpation of land must be stopped and colonial
rule banished from our world.
A major breakthrough in the strengthening of the
Charter’s foundations has been the drastic change that
has occurred in the interpretation of the term “threat to
peace”. While in the era immediately after the Second
World War it was strictly confined to threats of war
between States, it has now been firmly established
within the United Nations that threats to peace can
also be the result of terrorist acts, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, a lack of good
governance, transnational organized crime, climate
change, the spread of pandemics, poverty and so forth.
Such challenges represent a far wider array of concerns
than the issues that were debated in San Francisco.

Since its inception, the United Nations has proved to
be a cornerstone of the international peace and security
architecture. It has faced many international crises and
challenges. It has developed on the basis of its Charter,
an international treaty that is concise compared to
many others, consisting as it does of fewer than 10,000
words. Its provisions and expressions, carefully selected
by the drafters to be of a fairly general nature, have
contributed to the emergence of a spirit of compromise
that has survived to our own times and has reinforced
the multilateral work of the United Nations, laying the
ground for the Charter’s dynamic and evolutionary
interpretation in the light of changing circumstances
and our evolving peace and security situation.

From being based on a system of collective security
devised to deal with State aggression, the United
Nations has adapted to the new realities on the ground
by broadening the scope of its action to promote human
security and sustainable peace and development.
Indeed, promoting international peace, preventing
and resolving conflicts and pursuing new norms of
global justice are closely linked to the attainment of
sustainable development. The demands placed on the
United Nations are also more complex. Addressing
those interlinked challenges requires joint collective
efforts, for no country can resolve them on its own.
Our challenge today is to devise more inclusive forms
of global governance by reaffirming our commitment
to respect for international law and strict adherence to
the principles and objectives enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. My country, Tunisia, has always called
for those principles to be accepted as the cornerstone of
relations between nations, and we have built and shaped
our foreign policy on those parameters.

One of the most significant issues to be considered
from this perspective is terrorism. While the Charter
makes no reference to it, the vast array of normative
work that has been done to produce multilateral
anti-terrorism conventions clearly demonstrates that
the Charter was ahead of its time, paving the way for a

Promoting the lofty ideals of the Charter implies
that decision-making bodies must reflect the world’s
new realities. The Security Council is a case in point.
We believe that reforming the Council can strengthen
international law as a prerequisite for peace, security
and development, and will further consolidate the

84/103

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council’s position as a central component of effective
global governance that can promote concerted efforts
to address today’s challenges.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank the People’s Republic
of China for convening today’s debate and for its
important concept note (S/2015/87, annex ), which has
enabled us to reflect on history and reaffirm Member
States’ commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations on its seventieth
anniversary.
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The evolution of world events has only confirmed
our deepest fears. We have reached a critical juncture
for civilization, and States are finding that their peace
and security are permanently endangered. We must
erase from our minds and our hearts all thoughts of war
and the culture of war, of violence, interference and
intervention, and replace them with a mindset and a
culture that value peace and prosperity for all.
We emphasize the importance of committing to and
strengthening the maintenance of peace and security,
particularly in these very dangerous times our world is
living through. No Member State can arrogate to itself
the right to the use or the threat of the use of force in
international relations. The exceptionalist policies of
which many of us have been victims in recent years
must end, for they only create more conflicts and
threaten people’s peace and security. We will never
tire of reiterating that conflicts are resolved through
dialogue and political negotiation, and that the United
Nations, based on its raison d’être and its Charter, must
shoulder its historical responsibility and lead the world
in promoting and ensuring world peace and rejecting
warmongering policies, war and confrontation. Given
the challenges we face, it is becoming increasingly
imperative for us to thoroughly reform the United
Nations so that it can be a forum in which we all
participate, have our voices heard and possess the
power to decide all matters affecting the interests of
our peoples and in turn of world peace and humankind.
Nicaragua takes a principled position in rejecting
and condemning any action aimed at undermining
peace and security, such as regime change, breaches

S/PV.7389

of constitutional order, incitement to violence, the use
of force and coups designed to overthrow legitimate
Governments — in short, any action that threatens
international peace and security. The 33 countries
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC) recently proclaimed our region as a
zone of peace, and thereby undertook, as our Heads of
State and Government put it,
“a permanent commitment to ... the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in order to forever banish
the use and threat of use of force in our region”.
However, policies of subversion and aggression and
attempted coups against some countries in our region
have continued, as has been the case with our sister
State the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where a
coup d’état and the assassination of President Nicolás
Maduro Moros were planned. At the most recent CELAC
summit, our leaders expressed concern about the
aggressions and attempted coup against the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Reprehensible acts that do not
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Similarly, we welcome the start of talks between
the sister Republic of Cuba and the United States for
the restoration of diplomatic relations between the
two, which should lead to the immediate lifting of the
inhuman and criminal blockade and other aggressive
acts against that sister nation. This continued aggression
against these two sisters in our region undermine the
aspirations of our region to live in peace and security.
In Nuestramérica, a zone of peace, we will
continue to fight to eradicate colonialism, particularly
in our Caribbean, including Puerto Rico, and to end
the occupation of the Malvinas Islands. The occupying
Powers must cease these policies that threaten peace in
our region.
Seventy years since the founding of the United
Nations, the world is again on the brink of another
major catastrophe, caused by hegemonic Powers that
do not respect international law or the Charter of the
United Nations and practice interference, intervention,
aggression and crime as methods to resolve conflicts
according to their own interests. It is their responsibility
to commit themselves, before the peoples of the
world, to setting aside their imperial practices and to
contributing to our common progress towards a world
in which the right to international peace and security
prevails.

15-0483885/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

We call on the international community to work
together in this world of profound crises that intersect
and interact with each other, and where an unjust
imbalance of development among nations prevails.
Working for cooperation and development and in
solidarity with mutual respect, we can overcome these
crises and eradicate, in the shortest period of time, all
the scourges threatening us, which constitute major
obstacles to fulfilling the purpose for which we are
here and for which our Organization was founded 70
years ago — the maintenance of international peace
and security.
I wish you, Sir, best wishes for the Chinese lunar
New Year, the preparations for which we had the
opportunity to witness at the historic CELAC-China
meeting, held recently in Beijing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on China’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Viet Nam welcomes China’s initiative to hold this
open debate to reaffirm our strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The important theme of the debate is all the
more relevant as the United Nations approaches its
seventieth anniversary.
The founding of the United Nations seven decades
ago was a historic milestone in the advancement of
humankind. Guided by the purposes and principles
of its Charter, the United Nations has grown to be
truly universal and indispensable in coordinating
international efforts to address global challenges. The
United Nations and its Members have relentlessly worked
to reign in wars and conflicts, and have succeeded
in preventing the reoccurrence of another world war.
We have strengthened international cooperation for
development and for the promotion and protection
of human rights. We have promoted the progressive
development of international law and strengthened
democracy and justice in inter-State relations.
Yet, the challenges we face today are ever more
daunting. Wars are still raging in many regions, while
the risks of armed conflict are threatening others.
The threat or use of force and the wishful thinking of
power politics continue to endanger international and
regional peace and security. Many lessons of history,

86/103

23/02/2015

unfortunately, have not been learnt. This compels us to
take up our collective duty to reinforce and materialize
the strong commitment to the principles and purposes
of the Charter, including the principles of sovereign
equality, national sovereignty, territorial integrity,
non-interference and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We must also redouble our efforts to address
issues such as poverty, hunger and inequality, which
are among the root causes of insecurity and instability.
We must all contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security through concrete,
practical actions, including the development and
promotion of principles, norms and codes of conducts
in accordance with the principles set out in the Charter.
The Security Council and its permanent members in
particular have a special role to play in this regard.
Having undergone many decades of wars, Viet
Nam cherishes the value of peace. Viet Nam is strongly
committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, and always
contributes actively and constructively to common
endeavours for regional and international peace, stability
and security. In South-East Asia, Viet Nam is working
with other members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and partners to develop and
adhere to mutually agreed principles and codes of
conduct, and sto ettle all disputes — including the East
Sea /South China Sea issue — by peaceful means, in
accordance with the Charter and international law. We
are doing our best to build the ASEAN Community and
a South-East Asian region of peace and prosperity.
In conclusion, allow me to once again reiterate our
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter, in the firm belief that peace, diplomacy,
law and reason will prevail.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
organizing today’s open debate, and Foreign Minister
Wang Yi for his leadership. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for his well-informed briefing.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity. The full text of my statement will be
distributed.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

After the Second World War, in which Georgia lost
more than 350,000 citizens —10 per cent of its population
at the time — the United Nations was established to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, and to
maintain peace and security. Seven decades later, we
are still faced with unprecedented security challenges
in many parts of the world.
We are deeply distressed by the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in the
Middle East. We condemn in the strongest terms all
despicable acts of terrorism and violence against the
civilian population. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant threaten the nations not
only in the Middle East but in all other places across the
globe. It is only with our joint efforts and commitment
that we can stop, reverse and prevent such violent
actions from happening.
Unlike the expectations of the early 1990s, today’s
Europe is neither free from confrontation nor at peace.
European security is once again being deliberately
challenged by Russia’s ongoing military aggression
against Ukraine. The annexation of Crimea and the
tragedy taking place in the eastern part of Ukraine
should be duly responded to by the entire international
community. In these troubled times, Georgia stands by
the Ukrainian people in their quest for a democratic
future. We reaffirm our strong support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and call upon
the Russian Federation to stop its aggressive policies
against sovereign States.
Alas, the crisis in Ukraine is not an isolated case
but rather a part of the broader policy that Russia has
pursued in its neighbourhood throughout the years,
going so far as to redraw European borders by practicing
aggression, occupation and annexation. One further
attestation to that is the situation in my country, in the
illegally occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia.
Russia’s aggression against Georgia started in the
early 1990s and deepened in 2008, when open military
aggression against Georgia was carried out and the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions were occupied.
Following the recognition of the so-called independence
of both regions, Russia’s policy has been nothing but a
creeping annexation of parts of my country’s sovereign
territories, manifested in the conclusion of dozens of
so-called treaties and agreements by Moscow with its

S/PV.7389

occupation regimes, providing the pretext for continued
illegal military presence.
The pinnacle of this policy was the so-called
comprehensive alliance treaties already signed with
the Sokhumi region and soon to be signed with the
Tskhinvali region, which envisages a full merger in all
spheres of the public domain and the open delegation
of all powers to the Russian Federation. There is no
other name for this but annexation. Russian actions
in the region contradict the fundamental principles
of international law, such as non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, the impermissability of threats
or the use of force, the sovereign equality of States, the
inviolability of borders and territorial integrity — in
short, the Charter of the United Nations.
Despite those provocations, Georgia remains
dedicated to a peaceful and constructive approach and
has been consistently committed to diplomacy and a
peaceful resolution of the conflict with the Russian
Federation. Since 2012, we have redoubled our efforts
to normalize relations with Moscow to the fullest
extent possible in order to create an environment
conducive to confidence-building and conflict
resolution. Regrettably, those efforts have yielded no
results in terms of conflict settlement. We highly value
the international discussions held in Geneva and will
continue our constructive participation in good faith in
the key format established for the implementation of
the ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.
Maintaining international peace and security is
central to the Organization, especially the Council.
But far too often, because of the structural deficiencies
of the Council, universally recognized principles
are blatantly abused. Georgia was most directly and
painfully affected by the inability of the United Nations
to take decisive action. In the course and aftermath of
the August 2008 war, one permanent member of the
Security Council and a party to the conflict precluded
all meaningful measures to be taken by the Council.
We arrived at a paradox. The mandate of the then
existing United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
was terminated by a veto, so instead of an increased
security presence in the aftermath of a full-fledged
war, a vacuum was created in the international security
presence. The Syrian and Ukrainian crises are other
notorious examples in that mode.
In conclusion, let me once again stress that
Georgia remains a strong advocate of the principles of

15-0483887/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We all should take more tangible and resolute
steps towards the realization of our common goal of
preserving international peace and strengthening
international security.
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the Chinese New Year.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, I should like to thank the presidency of
the People’s Republic of China for convening this
important and timely thematic debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the Ministers for
their participation. This debate offers an opportunity
to review the roles of the United Nations system and
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security and to enable the Council to draw lessons on
the understanding of war and the tools necessary for the
achievement of permanent peace.
This year, the global community is celebrating the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. Regrettably, in the very same year we are
commemorating 70 years since the Holocaust and 20
years since the genocide in Srebrenica, while numerous
tragic and pressing conflicts still continue throughout
the world. The nature of conflict has changed
dramatically in the recent period. That fact increases
the challenges to the United Nations and the Security
Council in accomplishing their fundamental purpose
of maintaining international peace and security, the
international rule of law and international fairness
and justice. Conflicts today are less often inter-State
and more predominantly intra-State, asymmetric and
multilayered, not to mention the threats of terrorism and
extremism as very dangerous forms of transnational
instability.
Conflicts are driven by a wide range of factors. They
are often preceded by clearly recognizable indicators
and warning signs. In response to those warnings, a key
challenge for the Council has been in finding consensus
on the balance between a response to an early prevention
of threats to peace and security, on the one hand, and
respect for the prerogatives of national authorities to
resolve internal crises, on the other. The crisis that the
Council is facing today shows that the balance has not
yet been found. The solution could be in better use of

88/103

23/02/2015

the tools provided by the Charter and of the capacities
of the United Nations system.
My country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, supports the
French initiative on a code of conduct for the use of the
veto in the Security Council in situations of genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. The proposal does not advance a limitation
of the Security Council; it is an attempt to overcome
the current paralysis, to prevent future deadlocks, and
to reclaim the Council’s ability to make decisions that
uphold its international responsibility for peace and
security.
Many United Nations actors have to contribute to
maintaining peace and security. The Secretary-General,
pursuant to resolution 1366 (2001), has an important
role to play through good offices, such as those of his
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, his
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict.
The Security Council regularly considers issues
of post-conflict peacebuilding. However, it is also
important that the Security Council exchange views
with States that have first-hand experience in conflicts
and peacebuilding processes, which could help in the
further optimization of the United Nations mechanisms
and enhance a common understanding of existing
problems. We strongly support the position that there
is a need to enable the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, to draw conclusions from its
understanding of war and to determine the means
necessary to achieve a permanent peace. In many cases,
the United Nations still needs to put additional effort
into achieving reconciliation among former parties to
conflict, based on an agreed or shared narrative of a
troubled past.
The United Nations, as we have heard many
times today and I reiterate, has unique legitimacy and
accumulated invaluable experience. In that regard,
we support demands for more effectiveness in United
Nations efforts in the areas of potential conflicts,
existing conflicts and post-conflict response. I should
like to underline that it is our collective duty to remain
persistent and courageous, to have more strength
than those who are threatening the peace, and to
continue building a better world. The elevant reports
of the Secretary-General and the Security Council’s

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

resolutions and well-crafted mandates, and our
experience and lessons learned remain our best guides.
Lastly, Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pajević (Montenegro): Mr. President,
Montenegro congratulates you on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February, and warmly thanks you for taking this
initiative and providing a platform for our deliberations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union;
however, I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. When representatives
of 50 nations met in San Francisco to establish a
new world organization, their primary motivation,
as stipulated in the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations, was to “save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. Although adjusted to a postwar geopolitical distribution of power that needs to
be reformed in many aspects, the United Nations has
proven to be an irreplaceable universal Organization
for fostering international cooperation and preserving
peace and security.
Over the past decades, the Organization has
strengthened its role by rapidly responding to prevent
outbreaks of violence and political crises, and by
providing mediation expertise, logistical support and
resources to countries in need. With a view to pursuing
more durable political solutions, United Nations
peacekeepers have overseen the cessation of hostilities
and played a critical role in the protection of civilians.
They have also provided support to national authorities
in the reform of security institutions, disarmament,
and the promotion and protection of human rights.
The United Nations has also played a crucial role in
supporting transitions, including by providing technical
assistance and expertise in the organization of free and
fair elections in post-conflict States.
Nowadays, due to the internationalized character
of social processes and the global impact of regional
and local conflicts, the role of the universal
Organization is more important than ever. Numerous

S/PV.7389

threats to international peace and security demonstrate
that the world needs a stronger, more effective and
relevant United Nations system, and imply the need
for a responsible approach to United Nations reform.
In our view, the security challenges we face can be
successfully tackled only through the active engagement
of the international community within the reformed
multilateral framework.
Montenegro attaches great importance to the
improvement of the international legal order, in
particular to the United Nations Charter as one of its
key parts. There is no doubt that all States must adhere
to the basic principles of international law, cooperate
with one another with a view to combating all forms
of terrorist activities, aggression, crimes and human
rights abuses, and bring those responsible to justice.
The responsibility for tackling the root causes of
conflict and creating a culture of peace, justice, equity,
democracy and the rule of law lies with us.
Recommitment to multilateralism and the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter is central to
our efforts to accomplish those goals. In that context,
I would like to underline, as on previous occasions of
a similar nature, the significance of United Nations
early detection and early warning mechanisms, as well
as the establishment of mediation as a core function
of the United Nations. Montenegro highly values the
Rights Up Front action plan, as well as all pillars of
the responsibility to protect initiative. Bearing in
mind that conflicts over the past decades have almost
always started as human rights violations, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, should
heighten its sensitivity to early warnings of potential
conflicts. Also, the United Nations system itself needs
to be improved through inclusive negotiations on the
main points of United Nations reform in order to make
it possible to better address crucial issues of peace and
security.
Seventy years after the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations, we must realize that the problems
and challenges facing the world today require a
collective global response. No other international
organization enjoys the legitimacy and capacity to
unite the international community in common cause
to realize enduring solutions to conflicts and to ensure
sustainable peace. Therefore, let us work together
towards a world that will bring about peace, justice
and security. That is our task, our challenge and our
opportunity. Montenegro is committed to playing its

15-0483889/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

role in a constructive and responsible manner in pursuit
of peace and stability in all regions of the world. We are
convinced that multilateralism is the conditio sine qua
non for the challenges facing humanity today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the People’s Republic of China for having
organized this open debate on a very important topic.
We appreciate the concept note (see S/2015/87, annex)
prepared by the Chinese presidency, which deals
substantively with the fundamental areas that are
critical to the proper functioning of our Organization.
Since the inception of the United Nations 70 years
ago, the world has gone through significant and
complex changes. The important principles established
by the Charter of the United Nations, including
respect for State sovereignty and territorial integrity,
the peaceful settlement of international disputes and
non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States,
together constitute the foundation of contemporary
international law and international relations.
In order to maintain international peace and security
we all need, first of all, to maintain and uphold the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
which provides a firm foundation for the universal
application of international law to all Member States.
Our Organization is an organization of sovereign States.
Sovereignty is the fundamental symbol and denotation
of a country’s independence, and the embodiment and
reliable guarantor of national interests. The sovereign
independence and territorial integrity of States must
not be infringed upon and must be respected.
One of the main challenges threatening international
peace and security remains international conflicts.
The ongoing armed conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan continues to pose a serious threat to
international and regional peace and security. For
more than 20 years, Armenia has been using force to
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan, in blatant disregard of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It has occupied around one-fifth of the territories of
Azerbaijan and has carried out ethnic cleansing against
almost 1 million Azerbaijanis. As a result, there is no
single Azerbaijani left in Armenia or in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan.

90/103

23/02/2015

The current impasse in the conflict settlement
process does not benefit anyone. No party is more
interested than Azerbaijan in finding the quickest
possible resolution to the conflict. My country shares the
view of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group and the wider international
community that the status quo is unsustainable and
has negative implications, including for Armenia itself,
which, due to its own policies, is sidelined from all
major regional development initiatives and finds itself
in dire economic and social condition.
The conflict can be resolved only on the basis of
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized
borders. The military occupation of the territories of
the Republic of Azerbaijan and the continued presence
of Armenia’s armed forces there are major destabilizing
factors. Armenia must withdraw its armed forces from
the Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, constructively engage in
the conflict settlement process and comply with its
international obligations.
The cautious optimism expressed by some after a
series of high-level talks vanished with the recent and
unprecedented large-scale military exercises conducted
by Armenia in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
The Armenian side continues to take provocative steps
by regularly and deliberately violating the ceasefire,
and by attacking and killing Azerbaijani military
personnel, as well as civilians residing in the territories
adjacent to the front line. In recent years, such violations
and armed provocations have become more frequent.
Armenia tries to mislead the international
community by speculating on the principle of the
right of peoples to self-determination. Nothing in the
United Nations Charter or the Helsinki Final Act can be
construed as authorizing or encouraging in any sense
the partial or total disruption of the territorial integrity
of sovereign and independent States. International law
is unambiguous in not providing for a right of unilateral
secession from independent States. Armenia itself has
never observed the self-determination principle and has
violated it by using force against Azerbaijan, occupying
its territories, expelling hundreds of thousands of
Azerbaijani civilians from their homes, including
in the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, and
committing gross violations of international legal
norms and acts of particular gravity that amount to war
crimes or crimes against humanity. Armenia’s policy

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

has nothing in common with the realization of the right
to self-determination, and is actually the negation of
that principle. The sooner Armenia withdraws its troops
from the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan and
engages in good faith and constructively in negotiations,
the sooner the conflict will be resolved to the benefit of
all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, as well as the statement delivered by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law.
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this open debate
in order to reflect on and reaffirm our commitments to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The debate proposed by the Chinese presidency is
both historical and timely. It is important historically,
as it lets us reflect on the reasons why the different
nations wanted to establish the United Nations. Why
was the United Nations necessary? The United Nations
was created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained,
and to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom. In other words, the United
Nations was created because humankind had learned
its historical lesson that the world pays too high a price
for the absence of a credible international system.
The United Nations was created to put an end to a
world where might makes right. The United Nations
was created to establish a rules-based system where
powerful countries do not annex parts of other countries
or whole countries on false pretexts.
One year ago, this would have seemed a historical
debate only. Sadly, recommitting ourselves to the
purposes and principles of the Charter has turned out
to be very topical for all Members of the United Nations
and poignant for some. Who would have thought that
a permanent member of the Security Council would
illegally annex a part of another sovereign country
only 20 years after its written commitment to respect
the independence and sovereignty and the existing

S/PV.7389

borders of Ukraine and to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine? After thousands have
died in eastern Ukraine, the promise of the Budapest
Memorandum that “none of their weapons will ever
be used against Ukraine” rings particularly hollow.
Therefore, recommitting ourselves to the purposes and
principles of the Charter is timely and topical, both
for the Security Council and for all Members of the
Organization.
All States Members of the United Nations are the
guardians of this international system and of the Charter
of the United Nations. However, the States members of
the Security Council have a particular responsibility in
this regard. Inaction on the part of the Security Council
when mass atrocities are taking place runs counter to
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
permanent members of the Council are granted a special
privilege — the veto power — in order to protect the
Charter of the United Nations and the international
order, they also bear a special responsibility to ensure
that this power is used in the interests of common peace
and security.
Unfortunately, with respect to recent developments
the Council has not lived up to this special responsibility.
In the case of Syria, the Council has not been able to
stop that State from committing crimes against its
own population. It has even failed to authorize the
investigation and prosecution of those crimes, blocking
the referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. In the case of Ukraine, it was not
able to stop an act of aggression, which triggered the
commission of further crimes. These failures have
immense human costs. They allow innocent civilians
to become victims of the crimes from which the
United Nations is committed to protecting them. The
international community cannot afford more failures.
Latvia therefore supports the French initiative of a
voluntary code of conduct regulating the use of the veto
when genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity
are committed.
With the changing nature of conflicts, the
protection of human rights and the rule of law are key
elements of conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. Serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law can be an early
indication of a descent into conflict or an escalation
of conflict. In order to effectively fulfil its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and

15-0483891/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

security under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council should develop early warning and preventive
measures to address such situations. Respect for
the principles of the Charter and international law,
including human rights law, is equally important to
maintain international peace and security in the twentyfirst century.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening the present open debate
on the proposed topic, which might truly deserve the
convocation of a week-long international conference.
It is a formidable task to reflect on a 70-year journey
since the end of the Second World War and the birth of
the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations
insists that there are no first and economy class tickets
on this journey, as all nations, big or small, rich or poor,
are equal members of the international community.
In our reflections, we also recall that in 1945, only
51 founding Member States joined the United Nations.
The membership doubled in the five subsequent years.
By 1978, it broke the threshold of 150 Member States.
Today there are 193 free nations gathered in this
iconic building — including such countries as Palau,
Liechtenstein or Armenia, or such groupings as the
Group of 20 or the five permanent members — in full
exercise of their determination to work together on a
common global agenda.
The incremental growth of the membership of the
United Nations to its present membership of 193 States
is a source of a deeper thought about the privilege to
be a self-determined free nation and about the exercise
of jurisdiction over other peoples within the confines
of the territorial integrity of States. This dilemma
has been the cause of numerous conflicts, whether in
the times of decolonization or in the aftermath of the
breakup of the Soviet Union. This dilemma has been
resolved differently in each case.
The present number of Member States manifests
the fundamental right conferred to any people to freely
express their will. It is a principle of international
law and a purpose of the United Nations. It does not
necessarily need to challenge the territorial integrity of
a State, as many multi-ethnic nations living in harmony,
with democracy and justice, or as the recent example
of Scotland, distinctly demonstrate. Switzerland, for
instance, might even remind us of an example of the

92/103

23/02/2015

free will to pool sovereignties. However, the legitimacy
of a claim to govern people out of historical injustice
and in a persistent environment of discrimination and
intolerance is always bound to fail. If we are serious
about our collective responsibility towards each other
and about our determination to combat atrocity crimes,
then we should not allow the suppression of freedom in
the name of territorial integrity.
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict is one such
example that awaits resolution. I speak at a time of
heightened tensions in the region. Upon the instructions
of my Government, I have been regularly informing
the Council and the General Assembly about the
situation and about our concerns. Today, I once again
reiterate the full conviction of Armenia that there can
be no alternative to the strictly peaceful and negotiated
settlement of the conflict. I speak at a time when the
co-chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
representing the Russian Federation, France and the
United States, have just concluded a visit to Baku,
Yerevan and Stepanakert in their continued efforts
to foster peace. I once again reiterate Armenia’s full
commitment to the peaceful settlement of this conflict
on the basis of the purposes, principles and norms of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act and the basic principles and elements identified by
the co-chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group.
We are waiting on Azerbaijan to heed the call of the
co-chairs and observe its commitments to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The unequivocal support
of the international community to the agreed format
of the peace talks and the efforts of the co-chairs
remain instrumental for a consolidated peace effort.
We call upon all Members, whether they gather in
the United Nations or in other groupings, movements
or organizations, to remain faithful to this support.
Establishing confidence-building measures, including
the withdrawal of snipers and the establishment of an
investigative mechanism for the ceasefire violations,
remains an immediate priority to address. We once
again call upon Azerbaijan to act on establishing such
measures.
For my people, the past 70 years since 1945 have also
been entwined with the tragedy of 30 years earlier. The
harrowing experience of suffering and extermination of
Armenians in 1915 prompted a prominent Polish lawyer
of Jewish origin, Raphael Lemkin, to coin the term
genocide. Subsequently, in adopting the Convention

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, the international community recognized
the need for a legal instrument to counter this heinous
crime. However, today we can hardly claim victory over
the perpetrators. The people of Rwanda, for one, would
remind us of the price of the international community’s
inaction and silence. Let us now reflect on the denial of
justice and the denial to millions around the globe of
the very sanctity of the right to life. Prevention remains
as compelling an imperative as ever.
As for Armenians, we will commemorate in
dignity the centenary of the Armenian genocide. We
will not be alone as many nations around the world
stand in solidarity with us. We are not bitter. We have
been willing to rebuild relations with our neighbour
Turkey without preconditions. We have initiated the
normalization process, which culminated in the signing
of the Zurich Protocols. Our goodwill, unfortunately,
has not been reciprocated.
While paying tribute to our victims, we will also
celebrate life, revival and confidence, as millions of
Armenians around the world have been doing through
hard work. As for the denialists of the Armenian
genocide, they only continue to do favour to perpetrators
of subsequent genocides. I would therefore once again
reflect on the words of Hitler who asked, prior to the
invasion of Poland in 1939, “Who, after all, speaks of
the annihilation of Armenians?” To the chagrin of the
denialists, millions fortunately do, including in Turkey.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your delegation’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and on your outstanding
leadership in the work of the Council, including its
deliberations on the many important issues being
addressed during this period. Moreover, I thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s open debate on the subject
of “Maintenance of international peace and security:
reflect on history, reaffirm the strong commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations”. It is a cause for much pain that our discussion
on this topic comes at a time when peace and security
are absent in many parts of the Middle East, Africa,
Europe, Asia and elsewhere.

S/PV.7389

While the new world order, which was founded in
the aftermath of the Second World War and which is
represented in the United Nations and its Charter, has
succeeded in avoiding a third world war, the sum total
of the wars the world has witnessed in various places
over the past 70 years exceeds in ferocity, effects and
losses a world war, which makes us wonder whether
this system and the Charter have truly succeeded in
maintaining international peace and security. If we
delve into the Middle East region, we will find that
in the past seven decades there have been no less than
15 wars, most of which were associated in one way or
another with the question of Palestine, and the agony
caused by some of these wars continues to affect the
region to this very day.
Whoever studies the situation of the region and
the wars that have taken place must draw the following
conclusions. First, the international community,
represented by the Security Council, has failed to
prevent and terminate occupation. We are therefore
continuing to see the Palestinian people deprived of
their right to self-determination and the establishment
of their independent State on their national territories in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
adopted by the United Nations. This situation has led to
the outbreak of numerous armed conflicts in the region.
Secondly, the international community has failed to
protect peoples from the massacres committed against
them by authorities who have lost their legitimacy.
Rwanda was a flagrant example of paralysis and
disability in confronting horrific incidents that are still a
heavy burden on the conscience of the world. Similarly,
we see in Syria today the ongoing perpetration of
killings and intimidation against the Syrian people
through the use of aircraft, missiles, poison gas,
blockades, genocide and displacement. These violations
occur while the international community is powerless
to make any progress on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, let alone the achievement of a fair political
settlement.
Thirdly, the international community has failed
to address current dangers that are taking new forms,
such as the threat of international terrorism. Combating
this phenomenon has often been in the form of interim
and regional solutions that do not deal with the fact
that terrorism is a global phenomenon, disappearing
from one place only to appear elsewhere. Furthermore,
terrorism is not only a security issue, but also an
intellectual issue.

15-0483893/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly, the international community has not yet
been able to lay the foundations and set up the rules to
help countries to overcome post-war and turmoil phases.
We take note of such countries as Liberia and Sierra
Leone, which suffer as they oscillate between phases
of war and peace. Other countries, such as Afghanistan
and Libya, have fallen into the kiln of internal conflicts
following earlier stages of combat and so forth.
Fifthly, the high cost resulting from these situations,
whether in terms of lost lives and property, missed
opportunities, crises of hunger, disease or lost
generations, continues to pose a huge burden on
humankind, as they drain substantial resources. Had
they been directed towards development, construction,
eradication of poverty, illiteracy and disease, our world
today would be more stable, secure and prosperous.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a founding
Member of the United Nations and one of the first
signatories of its Charter. It is proud of its commitment
to the Charter. Accordingly, the Kingdom has always
been keen to participate in all efforts dedicated to
maintaining international peace and security, promoting
the performance of this international body and bringing
it closer to achieving its noble goals and objectives
as stipulated in the Charter, whose realization we all
look to see achieved. We keep our firm belief that the
ability of the United Nations to carry out its functions
is closely linked to its Members’ political will to
implement the Charter’s principles, develop and reform
the principal organs of the Organization, and make
them more representative of and adapted to our world
and the changes that have taken place over the course of
the history of the United Nations.
A short while ago, we heard the representative of
Israel addressing this vital subject in a cynical manner
and with arrogance and mockery. We saw how he gave
himself the right to play Oscar voter, giving out awards
left and right, while forgetting, or pretending to forget,
the extreme absurdity of his country’s appointment to a
position on the commission dedicated to the elimination
of occupation when it is an undisputed occupier. He also
forgot to include in the awards he gave out the Oscar
for Best Horror and Murder, for the crimes his country
has committed in Gaza, Qana, Deir Yassin, Sabra and
Shatilla, Bahr el-Baqar and elsewhere. Moreover, he
should have given Israel the award for Best Forged
Documentary, for its false claims on Jerusalem, Hebron
and the territory of Arab Palestine, as well as the award
for Worst Actor, for its representative’s talk of human

94/103

23/02/2015

rights, democracy and justice while his country violates
all these concepts on a daily basis.
In the end, before we pat each other on the back and
exchange congratulations on the seventieth anniversary
of the international Organization, we must review and
retrace its deficiencies and exercise a certain humility
and objective self-criticism in recognizing that this
system in its current form continues to fall short of
its Member States’ aspirations and hopes, and in
effectively addressing current issues and problems. The
most important initiative we need today is the revision
of some concepts and institutions. The starting point
should be recognizing that what was suitable for the
mid-twentieth century is no longer appropriate for this
century. We must recognize that the United Nations
system is in urgent need of comprehensive reform that
would rejuvenate and restore vitality to its institutions
and organs.
Accordingly, it is reasonable to say that the Council
should start considering how to develop its work and
increase its efficacy, credibility and the legitimacy
of its representation. If the Council can attain such
results, then you, Sir, should be proud of what this
meeting has achieved under your presidency. However,
if this occasion passes like any other, then we will find
ourselves in a vicious circle of discussion and dialogue
without the ability to achieve a solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Given the
lateness of the hour, I hereby request that speakers be
concise in their statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this important high-level open debate
to reflect on our history and to reaffirm our strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The choice of this topic
and the participation of His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of
China, are testiment to the demonstrated commitment of
your country to upholding the principles of our Charter.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing this morning and for his overall achievement at
the helm of the Organization over the past eight years.
We share the views expressed in the concept note
(S/2015/87, annex) that this is indeed the right time and
place to have this debate. We all know that the United
Nations, especially its Security Council, came into
existence 70 years ago, in the aftermath of the Second
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

World War, to rectify the inefficiencies of the League
of Nations. The United Nations was established in
response to such a magnitude of threat to peace and
security and was another expression of the international
collective determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, as recalled in the concept note.
Over the past 70 years, although the world has
fortunately been spared a third world war, there have
been hundreds of inter- and intra-State conflicts, as well
as foreign military interventions of all sorts, with the
loss of millions of lives. In Africa, for example, nearly
one-third of its countries had active armed conflicts
during the mid-1990s. The Middle East has never been
at peace since the establishment of the Organization;
and the ongoing crises in Iraq, Syria and Yemen, as well
as the emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and Levant
in the region, have made the situation worse than ever.
As those few cases highlight, our main source
of frustration today is the continued inability of the
Organization to credibly and accurately predict and
rapidly respond to conflicts that may turn violent, and
even lead to genocide and other mass atrocities, as was
the case in 1994 in Rwanda. While several reasons may
be put forward, the evolving and complex dynamics of
conflicts and, to some extent, the reluctance of many
States to take steps that involve risks and costs, are
some of the issues that prevent the implementation
of the proactive aspects of the Charter of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, the increasing discussions of
this nature raise the hope that a multilateralization of
conflict prevention could reduce the number of missed
opportunities in the future.
In that regard, Rwanda believes in the equal
sovereignty of States. At the same time, we have
welcomed the outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and
embraced the principle of the responsibility to protect
peoples from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. In that context, Rwanda
believes that peacekeeping, which is the main tool of the
Organization in maintaining international peace and
security, should be adapted to today’s reality and the
evolving nature of conflicts. Indeed, Rwanda believes
that the responsibility to protect and the protection of
civilians should be at the heart of any peacekeeping
operation or any other United Nations-backed military
intervention.
Mr. President, as you rightly put it in the concept
note, we should uphold democracy and the rule of law

S/PV.7389

in international relations. To achieve this goal, we
should start by renewing our commitment to reform
of the Security Council, which is an undemocratic
organ by dint of its composition, inherited from the
outdated geostrategic reality prevailing at the end of
Second World War. We therefore believe that, in order
to ensure the legitimacy and efficiency of the Security
Council, its composition should be expanded in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories, with the
same rights and privileges.
Furthermore, while the main purposes outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations, arising from the
gunsmoke of the Second World War, were to respond
to wars between and within States, including through
peacekeeping operations, today threats to peace have
become more complex and multidimensional, with
new trends and types that are not found in the Charter.
The spread of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism,
religious radicalization, transnational organized crime,
disease outbreaks like Ebola and, in some cases, extreme
poverty and underdevelopment all have become major
threats to international peace and security in a way
that was never envisaged in the Charter. And those
issues have become regular items on the agenda of the
Security Council and the United Nations in general.
In 1948, the world was more concerned with the
security of States. Today, contemporary threats relate
to the security both of States and of people. In that
regard, we commend the founding Members for making
a link between peace and development in Article 55 of
the Charter, which is the cornerstone of the modern
human security project. We believe, however, that
adjustments are needed in order for the Organization
to deploy mechanisms that address the root causes of
those threats. We call upon the international community
and Member States to allow more room for multilateral
action against those threats that require a multifaceted
and integrated approach.
Conscious of the evolving role of regional and
subregional organizations, including the African
Union, it is our view that, if used effectively and fairly,
the United Nations can provide a proper avenue for such
actions. Due to the evolving nature of the modern threats
to peace, States, regional organizations and the United
Nations have been forging new ways of responding
to them. We believe that shifting their attention to
addressing the underlying causes of conflict, while at
the same time increasing their capacity to streamline
and implement their efforts to intervene when civilians

15-0483895/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

are endangered, including the ability to recognize
and disseminate the signs of impending or potential
conflicts, would increase the relevance of the United
Nations and lead the Charter of the United Nations to
realize its full purpose.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Kuwait would like to congratulate China on
assuming the presidency of the Council and to wish
you, Sir, every success in conducting your work during
the remaining days of the month. We would like to
thank you profusely for your initiative in organizing
this substantive debate on the question of reaffirming
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations under the item “Maintenance of international
peace and security”. We would also like to thank you
for the concept note you have prepared for this purpose
(S/2015/87, annex).
There can be no doubt that the wide participation of
Member States is the greatest proof of the importance
of this question and your judicious choice thereof. It
is an opportunity for Kuwait and all Member States
to reaffirm their commitment to the principles and
purposes of the Charter, such as non-interference in
internal affairs, the equality of sovereignty, non-use
or threat of force in settling disputes, seeking a
peaceful settlement of disputes and maintaining goodneighbourly relations. These principles together form
the foundation of the foreign policy of Kuwait and its
relations with other States.
As we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, the Organization is facing numerous
breaches and serious violations of the principles
of the Charter that have jeopardized regional and
international peace and security. The United Nations
has made a number of achievements in defending the
principles of the Charter when States Members evince
the necessary political will. This was manifest clearly
when the international community, through the Security
Council, stood up against the flagrant aggression
against the State of Kuwait in 1990 and the occupation
by the former Iraqi regime. Kuwait is indebted to the
international community and the Security Council for
this honourable stance championing the lofty principles
of the Charter and international law, which enabled it to
reclaim its sovereignty and independence.

96/103

23/02/2015

However, in addition to these highlights in the
history of the United Nations and its endeavours to
preserve international peace and security, there have
been crises and conflicts that have reminded us of the
world’s shortcomings in abiding by the Charter and
international law. The application of double standards
in dealing with some conflicts, the precedence given to
narrow national interests or the absence of political will
have prolonged many disputes, thereby aggravating the
suffering of people who have given hope of realizing
their legitimate rights to a free and noble life. The
absence of justice and accountability, in addition to
socioeconomic factors, fuels tension and instability
and feelings of hatred, intolerance and extremism.
The question of Palestine is the most vivid illustration
of that. The international community, through the
Security Council, has been unable for five decades to
put an end to the Israeli occupation, which runs counter
to the principles of the Charter and international law.
The real tragedy lies in the failure to compel the
occupying Power to implement the binding resolutions
of the Security Council.
The Syrian crisis, which is entering its fifth year,
provides another illustration of the need to impose
respect for the principles of the Charter and international
law. The gross violations of human rights continue
relentlessly half of the people are either internally
displaced or are refugees site and the major destruction
of the infrastructure on property is indescribable. The
question is: When will the Security Council activate
the tools available to put an end to this humanitarian
tragedy and bring pressure to bear for a political
sentiment ending this crisis, achieving the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and preserving the
unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria? The
Security Council is called upon to activate the tools
available to it to uphold its responsibilities. It is also
called upon to review and evaluate the appropriateness
these tools in achieving the desired objectives.
We welcome the comprehensive review of peacekeeping
operations by the Secretariat. We hope that there will
be increased recourse to the means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter, such as mediation and arbitration, in addition
to Chapter VIII, which affirms the importance of the
role of regional organizations in this regard.
Before concluding I must refer to the question of
amending the Charter of the United Nations, which is an
extremely delicate and important task. Articles 108 and

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

109 of the Charter provide for its possible amendment
in accordance with a number of steps and procedures.
Important amendments have been introduced to the
Charter to enhance the capacity of the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security, most
especially when its membership increased from 6 to 10
in 1963. However, in the light of the major developments
regarding membership, the changes in international
relations and the balance of power, and the major
challenges facing the international community in the
maintenance of international peace and security, all of
these factors underscore the need to reform the Security
Council and improve its working methods.
On the basis of our commitment to the principles
and purposes of the United Nations, especially in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Kuwait supports the reform of the Council so as to
enhance its capability and effectiveness in discharging
its responsibility and to make it more transparent,
representative and democratic. In this regard, we
reaffirm the importance of granting a permanent seat
to the Group of Arab States in any future expansion
and ensuring representation of Islamic States. We also
contend that the Council reform must take into account
the representation of small States, which account for
more than half of the membership of United Nations.
The membership of the Council should not be confined
to States of a certain qualification but should rather
include those capable of performing the tasks and
upholding the responsibilities under the Charter.
According to Article 24 of the Charter, the Council
acts on behalf of all Member States in maintaining
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I congratulate China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish you a happy new year, Sir.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern Africa Development Community.
We thank you, Sir, for having convened this open
debate on a matter which is central to the mandate of the
Security Council. Botswana attaches great importance
to issues of peace and security and, in this connection,
welcomes your initiative to continue the dialogue on
this subject matter.

S/PV.7389

Today is an opportunity to reflect, to celebrate
history and to look beyond as our Organization
continues to serve humanity. Seventy years ago, the
United Nations was born. Its purpose, according to
the Charter, was to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and to maintain international peace
and security. Today, these very noble objectives are as
relevant as they were prior to 1945.
My country Botswana joined the United Nations
in 1966, having just attained statehood. We have come
a long way and we have come of age. We owe our
existence to the guardianship and the tutelage of the
international community. Today, we look back with
pride while celebrating our traditions as a sovereign
and equal Member of this universal body. As we enter
the seventieth anniversary of the Organization, we
reaffirm our abiding faith in the fundamental rights,
dignity and worth of the human person. We commit to
serving the United Nations for the good of humanity.
We believe that peace and stability are prerequisites
for the attainment of sustainable development. Causes
of conflict include the absence of political tolerance,
democracy, good governance and the rule of law, but
most important is the inequitable distribution of national
resources. The creation of the United Nations and all
its organs, particularly the Security Council, as well
as the adoption of the Charter, provided a platform for
addressing grievances among States and strengthening
the rule of law. We cherish these ideals as we strive to
achieve a peaceful and just world.
We remain hopeful that the Security Council and
Council members will one day unite and act according
to the fundamental Charter objectives of safeguarding
humanity and defying selfish national interests. This
does not mean that the burden of responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
lies solely with the Security Council; States and their
citizens also have an important role to play. It is for this
reason that Botswana remains steadfast in its support
for strengthening institutions of accountability at the
national and international levels alike. It therefore
remains imperative that we ensure collaboration and
synergy in our efforts aimed at fighting threats to peace
and security.
As an African country proud of our continental
heritage and traditions, we commit to contributing
towards the attainment of world peace, not just from
the sidelines but also on the frontlines of this body,

15-0483897/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Security Council. To this end, we would like to see
Africa represented in the affairs of the Council in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. While
we believe in the primacy of the United Nations, we
would like the Organization recognize the role played
by the African region in the maintenance of peace and
security.
This debate takes place against a backdrop of
violence and bloodshed committed by ruthless and
heartless terrorist groups across the world. The
emergence of those violent groups is a huge challenge to
national, regional and international peace and security
and requires our concerted efforts to fight them.
Even as we serve the Organization, we remain
concerned by the rising scourge of violent extremism
and atrocious acts of terrorism perpetrated by radical
extremists such as the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram. Those
terrorist groups have been sweeping across the globe
and carrying out heinous acts against humanity. We
therefore pledge to cooperate with the international
community in the fight against terror and terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We owe it to the
millions of innocent people across the world who live in
fear and look to us to save humankind from extinction.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Waweru (Kenya): At the outset, allow me to
wish you, Mr. President, a prosperous year of the sheep.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the People’s Republic of China for
convening today’s important debate to reflect on the
founding purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations at its seventieth anniversary. I would
also like to take the opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his participation and briefing.
My delegation wishes to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and its key role in
maintaining world peace, common development and
justice and fostering international cooperation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We recognize that,
since the United Nations founding, 70 years ago, the
world has gone through profound and complex changes,
but the United Nations founding purpose and principles
remain valid. However, as the former SecretaryGeneral noted in the 2004 report of the High-level

98/103

23/02/2015

Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, entitled “A
more secure world: Our shared responsibility”,
“The different societies that make up the human
family are today interconnected as never before.
They face threats that no nation can hope to master
by acting alone — and opportunities that can be
much more hopefully exploited if all nations work
together.” (Foreword, p. vii)
My delegation notes that various attempts and
initiatives have been started to refashion and renew
the United Nations to rise up to meet the new realities
and be the indispensable common house of the entire
human family, as envisaged in the Millennium
Declaration. However, most of those attempts have
yet to be fully completed due to the intransigence and
lack of flexibility of a few Member States that continue
to benefit from the current status quo. Clearly, a new
approach to updating the noble purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations to fit the evolving
global dynamics, challenges and contexts is needed.
We need a more preventive approach to respond to
emerging challenges and to use reactionary tools only
as a last resort.
To that end, my delegation wishes to associate itself
with the African Common Position on United Nations
reform, particularly with due regard to the reform of
the Security Council. My country participates in the
African Union Committee of Ten on that issue. Now
more than ever, the reform of the Security Council is a
matter of paramount importance.
A more peaceful, secure world is possible only if
the least developed countries are given a real chance to
develop, since development and peace and security are
intertwined. Over the past 70 years, the United Nations
has been fairly successful in preventing inter-State
conflict. However, it is important to strengthen the
United Nations capacity to prevent the outbreak of
violence within countries, using the preventive tools at
its disposal, while observing the principle of territorial
integrity and sovereignty. That can be achieved if the
relationship with regional and subregional organizations
such as the African Union is strengthened and deepened
on the basis of mutual trust. Once collective security
is achieved through deeper cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and the Member States
themselves, a meaningful foundation for sustainable
development and peace will be established. We
are passionate about this because of our successful

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

experience in such partnerships in our region, such as
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development peace
processes for Somalia and South Sudan and the Arusha
process for Burundi, to name but a few.
Kenya, and indeed Africa, continues to partner
with the United Nations and other continental and
regional intergovernmental organizations, multilateral
organizations and stakeholders to strengthen the rule of
law, institutions of governance and human rights. While
the responsibility for conflict prevention and mitigation
lies with each State, transnational drivers of conflicts
must be collectively addressed by the international
community through the United Nations. We believe
that by strengthening our institutions of governance
and justice through the fair and impartial application of
international law, we will promote economic and social
inclusion. That will help in eradicating inequality and
exclusion at the local, national and international levels.
As we approach the expiry of the Millennium
Development Goals in September 2015 and continue
to design the post-2015 development agenda this
year, which marks the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations, we have a unique
opportunity to write a new chapter in our collective
history. Together, we can end poverty and inequality,
adapt to climate change, reduce inequality, enhance
inclusivity and justice and assure future generations of
collective peace and security on a sustainable basis.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my delegation
is fully committed to the founding purposes and
principles of the Charter and subscribes fully to the
greater unity of purpose in shouldering common
responsibilities and multilateral cooperation to tackle
global challenges.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The maintenance of international peace and security,
human rights and sustainable development lie at the
heart of the goals that the United Nations system strives
for. Switzerland is fully committed to the Charter and
to a strong United Nations. It is in that spirit that we
approach today’s debate and welcome it. I will address
four issues.
First, the Charter is the expression of our common
commitment to the supremacy of law over force. The

S/PV.7389

prohibition of the use of force, as set out in Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter is of fundamental
importance. It seeks to ensure the security of all
States — big or small, rich or poor. In addition, Member
States have the duty to protect their populations, in
particular from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. They must use appropriate
means, notably diplomatic and humanitarian ones, in
accordance with the Charter, to protect populations from
such crimes. Switzerland supports France’s initiative
to limit the use of veto in the case of mass atrocities.
We invite all members of the Security Council — both
permanent and non-permanent — to voluntarily to
refrain from voting against Council action aimed at
preventing or ending mass atrocities.
Secondly, the Charter recognizes that the respect
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms is crucial to guaranteeing and maintaining
international peace and security. Switzerland aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law. The duty to fight impunity when violations
of international law have occurred is inherent in the
Charter. To ensure that a set of jointly agreed rules will
last, we must ensure respect for them and sanction their
violation. Switzerland’s emphasis on the fight against
impunity demonstrates our commitment to the Charter.
United Nations fact-finding efforts, the International
Criminal Court and other mechanisms are crucial in
that respect.
Thirdly, achieving sustainable peace is impossible
in the absence of a political solution, as shown by
the situations in Ukraine and Syria in particular. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has promoted inclusive dialogue in order to advance in
the search for a political solution, in particular to the
Ukraine crisis.
Switzerland is convinced that political solutions
and inclusive dialogue are crucial. We welcome the
good-offices missions of the Secretary-General and
encourage the United Nations to continue enhancing its
capacities, in particular in the area of mediation, and to
strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations.
Fourthly, the Charter recalls the key importance of
multilateralism. Today’s challenges are too great and
too complex to be tackled by a single State. Threats
such as those posed by foreign terrorist fighters or the
Ebola epidemic are illustrations of the fact that now

15-0483899/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

more than ever we need a forum where all States can
work together for effective solutions.
Member States have conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for international
peace and security, and the Council acts on their behalf.
It is our common responsibility to ensure that the Council
fulfils its role in the most effective manner possible. As
the coordinator of the trans-regional Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, Switzerland
will continue its efforts to reform the working methods
of the Security Council. Switzerland aligns itself also
with the statement read earlier by Maldives on behalf
of the ACT Group.
Today the world is ridden by conflict, and civilians
are the primary victims. Human rights and fundamental
freedoms are cast aside. The Charter provides a unique
and universal framework to enhance and maintain
international peace and security. What is needed most
is genuine political will on the part of all Member States
to provide the United Nations with all of the relevant
capacities to promote international security, human
rights and sustainable development across the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country’s successful presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February and on the relevance of the
chosen theme, “Reflect on history, reaffirm the strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations”. It was a wise proposal
on your part, Sir, to invite Member States to reflect
upon history, because only history, with a little bit of
perspective and objectivity, can enable us to draw the
right lessons.
After two devastating and deadly World Wars,
which rocked the history of humankind in the twentieth
century, the founding fathers, with their experience of
this tragic chapter in our history, saw the future and
thus drafted the Charter of the United Nations and
signed it in San Francisco on 26 June 1945.
The goal is to maintain international peace and
security, ensure development and promote human
rights. These three principles must be translated into
reality through the adoption of a comprehensive, crosscutting approach based on the rule of law in all aspects
of international relations, especially through respect for
the United Nations Charter; the peaceful settlement of
100/103

23/02/2015

disputes, including through referral to the International
Court of Justice; respect for the sovereignty of States,
their national unity and territorial integrity; and
non-interference in their internal affairs. This was
reiterated in the declaration of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, adopted by the General
Assembly in September 2012, in which Member States
reaffirmed, inter alia, their respect for international
law and the provisions of the United Nations Charter.
Committed to the purposes and principles set out
in the Charter, the Kingdom of Morocco joined the
United Nations on 12 November 1956 and has since
been an active member of the international community
and a staunch defender of the purposes and principles
of the Charter, which have become the backbone of its
foreign policy and activities at the international level.
The Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations regarding the
peaceful settlement of disputes outlined in Chapter VI
and firmly supports the continued role played by the
United Nations as a universal Organization charged
with resolving and handing down decisions on matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, the promotion of human rights and sustainable
development.
The peaceful settlement of disputes remains one
of the fundamental pillars of the work of the United
Nations and one of its main objectives. That is why my
country firmly supports all efforts to consolidate the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Kingdom readily participates in efforts at
reconciliation and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as reflected in the mediation efforts by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI in resolving the crisis in the Mano
River region. Furthermore, tireless efforts have been
made by the Kingdom to stem crises in Africa and
elsewhere. As early as 1960, Morocco participated in
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, including through its participation in
peacekeeping operations in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, as well
as NATO operations and those of the European Union
mandated by the Security Council.
Moreover, since joining the United Nations and
during its three terms as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, most recently in 2012-2013,
Morocco has consistently upheld the purposes and
principles of the Charter and worked for African causes.
15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Morocco currently chairs the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Similarly, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter IX of the Charter, in addition to socioeconomic
policies and the implementation of the national initiative
for human development in 2005, aimed at raising the
standard of living of its population, the Kingdom has
shored up its relations with developing countries in the
framework of South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation, exchanging expertise and knowledge, in
particular with our African brothers.
In addition, the Kingdom of Morocco, in its
ongoing efforts to promote human rights and in the
new Constitution adopted by referendum in July
2011, emphasizes respect for human rights as globally
recognized, making the space for civil liberties broader
and recognizing the cultural diversity of the Kingdom.
Morocco was a founding member of the Human Rights
Council, created by the General Assembly in 2006, and
is currently discharging its second three-year mandate
following its election in 2013.
The marking in June of the seventieth anniversary
of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations is
also an opportunity to take stock and to reflect upon
the most effective means to revitalize the work of the
United Nations while also respecting the purposes and
principles of the Charter. While progress has been
made, much remains to be done so as to tackle the new
challenges brought about by new changes in the world,
including globalization, the socioeconomic impacts
of the global financial and economic crisis, climate
change, growing conflicts and, especially, the scourge
of terrorism.
As was well summarized by the late Dag
Нammarskjöld, the second Secretary-General of the
United Nations, “The UN was not created to take
mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell”.
Today we must act together, urgently, so as to avoid
hell. The fight against terrorism must be the top priority
of the international community. Terrorism spreads like
fire, threatening ever more international peace and
security, development and human rights. No country
is spared the terrorist threat. Atrocities, killings and
violations of the most basic rights, especially the right
to life, by terrorists, including Daesh, Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and their affiliates, should encourage us to
pool our efforts better so as to better combat terrorism.

S/PV.7389

My country reiterates its condemnation of terrorism
in the strongest terms, emphasizing that it should never
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. The response to this scourge and others
should not be limited to the security aspect but must
concern aspirations to a dignified life by guaranteeing
the right to work, health and equal opportunity.
These aspirations can be achieved only through good
governance, the promotion of the rule of law, access to
justice and respect for human rights.
It is also imperative to collectively and effectively
combat, in a coordinated manner, all forms of extremism,
hatred and xenophobia, provocation or undermining of
the faith or sensitivities of others, regardless of motives
or manifestations.
Finally, it is up to us all, Member States, to provide
the necessary means and to reaffirm the political will to
support our Organization and reform its structures and
its means of intervention, so as to make it an effective
tool to achieve peace, security and cooperation, and
to ensure the necessary dissemination of the values of
tolerance and coexistence for all of humankind.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of Iran has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): In exercising
my delegation’s right of reply, I would like to make the
following statement in response to the allegations made
by the representative of the Israeli regime this morning.
In general, by continually attacking my
Government, the Israelis seek to divert international
attention from their own unlawful policies and
practices. The Iranophobia and Islamophobia that they
try to spread are a smokescreen for hiding the atrocities
they perpetrate against Palestinian civilians, such as
occurred last summer in Gaza. It is indeed ironic that a
regime notorious for such unlawful acts, for terrorism
and apartheid policies and war crimes, well documented
by the United Nations, should allow itself to make such
sinister accusations against other countries. Moreover,
a regime that stockpiles all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction is not in a position to make false claims
about others in the region. The same goes for its baseless
accusations that my Government supports terrorism,
since the Israeli regime has an unparalleled and perverse
record of using terror to further its aims. Contrary to
what the Israeli representative claimed, the Islamic

15-04838101/103

S/PV.7389

Maintenance of international peace and security

Republic of Iran has always been a responsible and lawabiding member of the international community.
Where Iranian domestic affairs are concerned,
unlike the situation created by the apartheid policies
in place in Israel, harmony and regular elections
at all levels have always formed the sole basis for
the decision-making processes in the executive and
legislative branches of the Government. While Iran has
always tried to foster peace and stability in the region
and beyond, the Israeli regime has shown that it can
thrive only in a tense and troubled environment. Its
agitation and destructive approach to the negotiations
between Iran and the group of the permanent five
members of the Security Council and Germany is
indicative of the provocative policies it pursues.
A policy of occupation is a grotesque manifestation
of terrorism and a denial of human rights. We believe
that Israel’s occupation of Palestinian lands lies at the
heart of the Palestinian question. It is also responsible
for the greater part of the tension and conflicts in
the Middle East. The region cannot enjoy peace and
security while the occupation continues and the Israelis
persist with criminal acts designed to perpetuate their
grip on the land they occupy.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
who wishes to make a further statement.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I apologize for asking to speak again, in
view of the late hour, but my delegation would like to
comment on the allegations made by the representative
of Turkey in his statement.
Over the past four years of the crisis in Syria,
we have repeatedly informed the Council of Turkey’s
unrestrained support for terrorism and radical Takfiri
organizations, as well as its exploitation, along with
its allies, of foreign fighters, whom it trains, arms and
sends into my country. The Turkish regime has used the
pretext of protecting the shrine of Suleyman Shah to
justify its acts of aggression against my country. Who
can forget the leaked sound recording that unmasked
the plans of the current Turkish President, who at the
time was Minister for Foreign Affairs and the head of
Turkish intelligence, and of other figures in the Turkish
regime to target the shrine of Suleyman Shah with shells
fired by Turkish intelligence agents in order to provide
a pretext for military intervention in my country?

102/103

23/02/2015

My delegation would first like to affirm the
Syrian Government’s position on Turkey’s recent act
of aggression, which we have outlined in letters sent
today to the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, in which we state that the
Turkish regime’s acts constitute an act of aggression
against Syria’s sovereignty and a blatant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
They are also proof of the extent of the ties between the
Turkish regime and the terrorist organization known as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. I should also
add that the act of moving the shrine of Suleyman Shah
from one place to another within Syrian territory was
undertaken illegitimately and unilaterally by Turkey,
without the prior agreement of the Syrian Government,
and can in no way be justified or recognized. The
Turkish representative’s statement that he informed the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral about that move is unacceptable. With all due
respect to the President and Secretary-General, where
is the consideration of the principle of sovereignty of
the State concerned? Once again, we ask the Council to
condemn Turkey’s act of aggression, hold the Turkish
regime accountable for its support for terrorism and
its recent aggression, and compel it to end its practices
threatening international peace and security.
Secondly, regarding the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia, I would like
to once again affirm that a demonstration of interest in
Syria and concern for the Syrian people can in no way
consist in supporting terrorism or spreading extremist
Takfiri ideas, which have no relationship to humanity,
civilization or any religion. Nor can they involve efforts
to undermine the Syrian State, obstruct a political
settlement and spread chaos and terrorism.
Thirdly, concerning the statement made by the
representative of the Israeli occupying Power, I would
like to say briefly that occupation, aggression and
Israeli State terrorism have dogged the United Nations
from its inception seven decades ago to this very day.
The Israeli crimes will continue as long as the double
standards within the Organization do. We should
not forget that in and of itself the Israeli occupation
is a breach of the most fundamental principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey, who wishes to
make a further statement.

15-04838

23/02/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7389

Mrs. Özkan (Turkey): I have to speak in response
to one delegation’s statement.

Lastly, we categorically deny the baseless
allegations of the representative of the Syrian regime.

We do not deny the suffering that occurred during
the First World War over a wide geographic area beyond
the Caucasus and in the whole of Europe, including the
Balkans. The message of 24 April 2014 on the events of
1915 voiced by President Erdoğan, then Prime Minister,
and our current Prime Minister Davutoğlu’s more
recent statement at the commemoration of the late Hrant
Dink speak for themselves. The period is the subject
of legitimate scholarly debate. Under international
law, genocide is a precisely defined concept, and its
proof requires high standards of evidence. It cannot
and should not be used randomly or arbitrarily, as
defined by the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Israel, who wishes to make a
further statement.

It is important to face history in its entirety
and through impartial scientific examination of the
historical records so that the right lessons may be
drawn and a just memory retained. The narratives
of the parties as yet do not converge. We must forge
a shared memory instead of sharpening one-sided
narratives. In that context, our proposal to establish
a joint history commission remains on the table. As
underscored in the aforementioned statement of Prime
Minister Davutoğlu,
“Our desire to share in the pain, to heal the wounds
and to re-establish friendship is sincere. Our course
is set towards a horizon of friendship and peace.”
We also regret the fact that one delegation chose
to convey a selective and one-sided interpretation of
the history of the Cyprus question. Atrocities against
Turkish Cypriots are well documented in the United
Nations archives. The United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus was deployed on the island back in
1964. The Cyprus issue has entered its fifty-second
year. The Turkish Cypriot side, whose voice cannot,
unfortunately, be heard in this forum, can and will
certainly recall the facts that were conveniently left
untold, in order to help portray the full picture of
the Cyprus issue. Turkey fully supports the special
assistance of the Secretary-General’s good offices
mission to find a comprehensive and just settlement to
the problem, without further delay.

Mr. Heumann (Israel): Allow me to quote
Ecclesiastes 3:7: “There is a time for everything; a time
to be silent and a time to speak”. When we gather to
discuss the values of the Charter of the United Nations,
there is no doubt that for some of the countries whose
representatives we have just heard take the floor, it is
time to be silent and, I would add, to reflect.
We have just witnessed a march of folly of the
worst human rights abusers, taking a seat at the
Security Council table and attacking my country. It is
truly absurd to hear representatives of those tyrannies
lecture the only democracy of the Middle East.
As we speak here, Iran is continuing to oppress its
own people, while helping other tyrants in the region
to slaughter theirs. Iran supplies sophisticated weapons
to Hamas, Hizbullah and other terrorist groups in the
region and around the world. It is always an interesting
experience when the representative of the greatest
State sponsor of terror speaks out on the maintenance
of peace and security. As we are witnessing the rise of
anti-Semitism and xenophobia, I cannot forget that Iran
is holding an official Holocaust-denial cartoon contest
this year.
We are all accustomed to the lip service of Saudi
Arabia, preaching about peace and human rights while
continuing to oppress women and deny them their basic
rights, from driving to voting and from receiving an
education to travelling alone in public. But I would
also like to end by awarding the representative of Saudi
Arabia a special prize, due to his creative intervention
that we heard earlier, in the category of Best Sound,
for his ability to tune out the public outcry due to
the official stoning and lashing of innocent citizens.
Congratulations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.

15-04838103/103
