S/PV.8154

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8154th meeting

Wednesday, 10 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Letter dated 8 December 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/1037)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2017/1117)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-00688 (E)
*1800688*

S/PV.8154

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/53)
Letter dated 8 December 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/1037)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/1117)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in the
meeting. On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Óscar Naranjo, Vice President of
Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1037, which contains the text of a
letter dated 8 December from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/2017/1117, which contains the text of a
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault: I thank the members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to introduce to the first
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Columbia (S/2017/1117), which began its operations on
26 September last year, following the completion of the
agreement on the ceasefire, the cessation of hostilities
and the laying down of arms.
2/19

10/01/2018

Before going any further, let me say that it is a
great pleasure to share the floor with Vice President
Naranjo, who was a key actor during the protracted
negotiations that brought the conflict between Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the State to an end a little
over a year ago. Since then he has been key to the
implementation of the peace agreement. The Mission
has been privileged to have him as an interlocutor since
the beginning and he, together with the President, as
well as the FARC, are to be credited for many of the
achievements recorded in the Secretary-General’s
report against the difficult background in which the
implementation process unfolds.
The Secretary-General’s report was issued a couple
of weeks ago in the middle of the holiday season, but
I am glad to inform the Council early in the new year
of follow-up on some of the measures adopted late last
year. On 8 January, the Interior Minister convened the
first meeting of the interagency body responsible for
ensuring that the early warning by the Ombudsman’s
Office of impending violence against individuals or
communities is quickly acted upon in accordance with
an important decree issued on the 18 December.
On 5 January, the National Protection
Unit — which, among other tasks, looks after the
security of FARC members outside the training and
reintegration areas — decided to establish additional
protection teams in those areas so that a greater number
of ex-combatants can travel safely outside those areas.
The Council will recall that while no serious incidents
took place in those training and reintegration areas as a
result of protection measures by the security forces, the
number of killings outside those areas has been a matter
of growing concern in recent months. While there is no
clear pattern behind those incidents, the increase in the
number of protection measures is very appropriate.
Finally, the Council should also note that on
President Santos’ instructions, the disposal of FARCEP arms caches has resumed, under the responsibility
of the military and with the cooperation of former
combatants of the FARC. The outcome is still modest,
with approximately 60 caches. It will therefore be
important that the operation continue in order to keep
weapons out of the reach of illegal groups.
I stress that security in conflict zones must be
enhanced because, as the Council is aware, an upsurge
in violence in those areas in recent months, widely
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

acknowledged and condemned by the Government,
civil society and the international community alike,
has brought about several of the most significant
developments noted in the Secretary-General’s report.
Among those, first and foremost, we stress the decision
to proceed with the long-term deployment of security
forces and about 600 of the more vulnerable rural
districts in the areas most affected by the conflict,
including the district where community leaders, human
rights defenders, promoters of crop substitution and
land restitution advocates were assassinated.
In our view, it is difficult to overestimate the
importance of that decision. The control of the territory
by the State is inseparable from the permanent physical
presence of State institutions those areas. An occasional
presence is bound to leave the old or new illegal power
structures intact. Of course, the deployment of security
forces is not a panacea. One of the specific objectives
of such deployment is precisely to pave the way quickly
for more proactive social and economic support by
civilian State institutions.
The demands of the communities that have borne
the burden of the war are simple, few and well known.
They call for tertiary roads to break the isolation, health
and education services and the titling of their land,
without which integration into the legal economy is
seriously hampered. That is the objective and we, along
with the President and the Vice President, are convinced
that the recovery of the zones of conflict, the reduction
of violence against communities and their leaders and
the long-term success of counter-narcotics efforts
start with the stabilization programme undertaken last
month. As outlined in the new plan, the Mission will
regularly and carefully assess progress, together with
the Government and the security forces. As mentioned
in the report, we are making slight adjustments to our
deployment to that effect.
While the building blocks of stabilization are being
put in place, we cannot lose sight of the challenges of
reintegration. The political reintegration of the former
guerilla organization is on course in the context of
the parliamentary and presidential elections this year.
It is hoped that local and department elections in less
than two years from now will be the opportunity to
consolidate further the political integration of the new
FARC political party, but we continue to view with
concern the socioeconomic reintegration of the 14,000
former combatants.

S/PV. 8154

We are fully aware of the challenges and we
praise the efforts that have been made by Government
agencies, the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace
and the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization
in relation to several reintegration measures referred
to in the report. However, we must not forget that we
are dealing with a large group of former fighters whose
level of accumulated frustration with their reintegration
process, illustrated by the number of members still in
jail, is not easy to overcome All of us — Government,
United Nations agencies, international community and
civil society — must be diligent and thorough in our
support for their reintegration and the development of
communities in which they are inserted.
The President has taken the important step of
recognizing the need for access to landownership as
a major incentive for reintegration and as a staple of
many reintegration processes. For their part, many
FARC members have demonstrated on the ground that
they are willing and able to engage in agriculture,
environmental protection and crop substitution. Those
are promising developments — but only that. The next
few months must be the opportunity to turn the corner
and establish what continues to be a fragile process
upon a more durable foundation.
Let me now turn briefly to the temporary ceasefire
between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional (ELN). A few weeks ago, and
even more so today, we would have liked to be in a
position to make recommendations with regard to the
Mission’s involvement in the supervision of the ceasefire
beyond 9 January. We are not yet in that position. The
ELN voiced very strong reservations concerning the
implementation of the temporary ceasefire and the
humanitarian commitments attached to it. Although
the ELN leadership has proposed negotiating a firmer
ceasefire, they have remained, until only recently, silent
on their posture following the temporary ceasefire’s
expiration yesterday. Barely 24 hours have elapsed
since the two delegations resumed their discussions in
Quito, and it is therefore perhaps a little too early to
venture estimating what the future holds for the longterm in terms of negotiations.
In the country, the call for the continued suspension
of military action has been unanimous, notwithstanding
the many imperfections of the ceasefire. Social
organizations, members of academia, the private sector
and local authorities hailing from various regions have
called on both parties to maintain the ceasefire. In a

18-006883/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

statement issued the day before yesterday, and in line
with the appeal contained in the Secretary-General’s
report, the Mission and the Episcopal Conference of
the Catholic Church, who were invited as members of
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, stressed the need
to maintain the reduced levels of violence that have
prevailed over the past three months.
We had hoped that the talks in Quito would have
delivered an outcome consistent with those aspirations,
and we would have suggested allowing some — but not
too much — time for the Secretary-General to make
his recommendations to the Council based on those
discussions. Unfortunately, it was just announced only
a few minutes ago that ELN attacks against pipelines
have just resumed. We will follow developments closely
in that regard, and keep the Council informed.
In conclusion, let me convey to the Council
the following.
First, there is a conviction that, at the highest
level of the Colombian Government and within the
leadership of the FARC, the commitment remains to
moving forward with the peace process regardless of
the many difficulties that have been in evidence — and
sometimes dramatically so — during the past few
months. Much is still needed to keep the process on
track and make it stronger, but, with such political will,
the appropriate resources and a sustained effort, much
can be accomplished.
Secondly, although the outcome of peace
negotiations has generated controversy and divisions,
and continues to do so to an extent, building peace is
a project for which its constituency goes beyond the
signatories. We see that in the efforts of many from
local authorities to universities, the private sector and
civil society, who are eager to partake in opportunities
offered by the peace process. The recent meetings
held by the commission on truth, coexistence and
non-repetition, under the inspiring leadership of Father
Francisco de Roux, with prominent representatives of
the private sector, victims, civil society and the highcommand of the army, are one of many examples of the
broader ownership that the process of peacebuilding
is developing.
Lastly, let me reiterate the conviction that in these
promising and trying times, the unanimous support of
the Council, and through it, that of the international
community remain a great source of encouragement,
resilience and strength.
4/19

10/01/2018

The President: I thank Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me extend
a very warm welcome to Vice-President Naranjo. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the Vice-President and, through him, to President
Santos Calderón for their tireless commitments to
peace in Columbia. I also thank Jean Arnault, for his
briefing and presentation of the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1117) detailing the
progress that has been made under the mandates of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
I commend him and his team for their continued
efforts both in supporting the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peacebetween the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) and the Government of Colombia
and, more recently, in participating in the Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism for the ceasefire by the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN).
The courage and diligence of both parties have
allowed many positive steps to take place since the Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the FARC was signed. More than 11,000 FARC members
have registered with the United Nations, and are now
beginning their reintegration into civilian life. The new
political party — the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común — will be able to participate in Colombia’s
elections this year, and the FARC has handed over its
last caches of weapons to the United Nations. Those
are remarkable achievements, but we are now getting
to the hardest part. Much work remains to be done. As
President Santos Calderón said in Cartagena last week,
less than 10 per cent of the time set out for the peace
agreement to be delivered has passed.
We welcome the continued commitment of both
parties to achieve a sustainable peace. We encourage
them to continue to work together to overcome the
challenges, which are only to be expected following
more than 50 years of conflict. As we just heard, those
challenges include increasing levels of violence in some
areas affected by the conflict and the killing of human
rights defenders and former FARC members. I share
the concerns that the Secretary-General mentioned in
his report, and I therefore welcome the important steps
taken by the Colombian Government to tackle them.
They include the establishment of a more permanent
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

and visible presence by the police and security forces,
a strengthened early warning system and a renewed
focus on investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor.
Security must be established in those areas to allow
communities to realize the full benefits of the Peace
Agreement. I also welcome come the Government’s
commitment to addressing the issue of access to
land for former FARC combatants. All those steps
taken together are a clear signal of the Government’s
commitment to implementation.
Looking ahead, I encourage the Government to
Columbia to maintain its focus on adopting the remaining
peace legislation through Congress. An early ruling by
the Constitutional Court on amendments made to some
key laws will be important to maintaining momentum.
That includes the ruling on amendments to the special
jurisdiction for peace, which are vital to making
progress in the transitional justice system. I had hoped
that today we would be discussing the announcement
of a renewed ceasefire between the Government and
the ELN. Instead, I am concerned and disappointed by
the recent news that the ELN has broken its ceasefire
and squandered the chance of bringing about sustained
peace. I urge both sides to work together to find a way
of avoiding further civilian suffering.
President Santos Calderón, together with Columbia’s
leaders, took a bold step in coming to the Security
Council for help in 2016. Our support for a sustained
peace in Colombia will not waver, and, as Columbia
holds elections later this year and goes through political
change as all democracies do, it is important to remember
that the Peace Agreement belongs to all Colombians,
not to any specific Government. The United Kingdom
will continue to encourage focus on and commitment
to the peace process to bring about real lasting change.
That process is unique and will continue to inspire us
for years to come, as it has inspired me during all of my
time in the Security Council.
This is my final scheduled public statement in
the Security Council. I am very pleased to be able
to finish my time in New York with a meeting on
Colombia — one of our greatest success stories. I wish
that all the conflicts that we work on could achieve
the peace that has been achieved in Colombia. It is
essential that we learn the lessons of that success and
apply them to the countless other issues on our agenda,
which, frankly, could do with a little bit of that success.

S/PV. 8154

As I leave this role, I want to thank all members
of the Security Council with which I have shared this
horseshoe table in this famous Chamber and all of their
predecessors. I thank them for their cooperation, their
insights and all their support over the past nearly three
years. I should also like to thank everyone who works
for the United Nations, be it here in New York or around
the world. I have been continually impressed by their
expertise and fortitude. They really are the unsung
heroes of the Organization.
Finally, I should like to thank my own team at the
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations, which
has supported me with skill, expertise and dedication. I
wish all of them the very best for the future.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his committed and brilliant work
in the Council.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for the convening of this
informative meeting on the situation in Colombia and
the briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We especially
welcome the participation of Vice-President Óscar
Naranjo and, through him, convey our gratitude
to President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón and his
Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
Ambassador Mejía Vélez.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm Peru’s
commitment to the peace process in the sisterly Republic
of Colombia — a commitment based on a shared history
and vision of the future, and active cooperation aimed
at sustaining peace and the development of our peoples.
We highlight once again the example that the
Colombian peace process offers to the international
community and to strengthening Latin America and
the Caribbean as a zone of peace. Peru expresses its
appreciation to the Colombian people and Government,
as well as to the various parties involved in the process,
their authorities and leaders, for their courage and
determination and for having placed the supreme value
of peace above all their differences. It is obviously a
complex process that faces many challenges at this
stage of implementation — no doubt more complex
than the previous one — but it looks to the future
with hope and conviction that sustaining peace is
inseparable from sustainable development. With
respect to the latest developments, we want to share the
following comments:

18-006885/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

Peru supports the comprehensive strategy based
on a preventive approach, led by the Government in
partnership with local authorities and civil society, to
mitigate the factors of risk and vulnerability. In that
sense, we highlight the efforts to address organized
crime in rural areas formerly controlled by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), within
the rule of law and in full respect for human rights.
The laying-down of arms has undoubtedly been
a milestone in the peace process. We welcome the
efforts of the national authorities aimed at the full
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace so
as to minimize the cases of dissidence of the former
militants of the FARC. At this stage of the process, we
highlight the actions of the Office of the Prosecutor
and the importance of the measures adopted by the
Government to guarantee the security of all citizens,
particularly in the framework of the National Protection
Unit and the implementation of the new Horus plan. It
is of the utmost importance to prevent and avoid the
occurrence of further deaths of social leaders, human
rights defenders and former members of the FARC.
We agree with Mr. Arnault that reintegration
constitutes a guarantee to prevent the perpetuation
of the conflict. In that regard, we consider that the
reconversion of the FARC to legal political life and
the accreditations granted by the High Commissioner
for Peace, with the guarantees that have been provided
and other support, are key aspects of the process that
undoubtedly require the tolerance and commitment
of all Colombian society, which are supported and
underwritten by all countries, in particular the members
of the Council.

10/01/2018

its origins, as well as the important work carried out by
the Verification Mission in that regard.
From our Latin American perspective, we would
also like to acknowledge the work accomplished on this
topic by Ambassador Elbio Rosselli Frieri of Uruguay,
under whose presidency of the Security Council a visit
to Colombia was organized. We also pay tribute to
the role played by Ambassador Mattew Rycroft of the
United Kingdom on this issue.
As a non-permanent member that only recently
joined the Security Council, Peru reiterates its full
support for the authorities and the people of Colombia
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jean
Arnault, for his briefing this morning, and assure him
that we continue to support his efforts and the work of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Vice-President of Colombia, Mr. Óscar Naranjo, with
us here today. I thank him for his personal dedication
and the key role he has played and continues to play for
peace in Colombia.
(spoke in English)

Along the same lines, we value the efforts of national
authorities to promote access to land and productive
projects in rural areas. These measures go beyond
the commitments assumed in the Peace Agreement
and complement other reintegration mechanisms and
training programes offered by the Government with a
view to achieving sustainable peace.

Over a year has now passed since the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace was ratified by the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) and the conflict came to an end. However,
ensuring that peace is sustained requires a continuous
effort. We commend the political courage and strong
commitment to peace of both parties, and their efforts
to overcome challenges in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. Last year saw the successful laying
down of arms and the conversion of the FARC-Ejercito
del Pueblo into a political party. These were truly
historic achievements. The security and reintegration
of former combatants will mark the next milestone in
the journey to consolidate a sustainable peace.

We wish to conclude by welcoming the open,
transparent and inclusive way in which the Colombian
peace process is being conducted, with the support
of the international community. We also welcome
the united commitment of the Council, which, at the
request of the parties, has monitored the process from

The increasing number of incidents of intimidation,
reprisals and killings of human rights defenders,
community leaders, FARC members and their families
continues to be worrisome and underscores the need
for the State to fill the power vacuum and safeguard the
rule of law. We welcome the updated stabilization plan

6/19

18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

as one measure to address that, and look forward to its
speedy implementation.
A redoubled and sustained effort is now needed
on the part of all parts of the State, in support of the
wider Peace Agreement, including comprehensive
rural reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible
peace dividends for all Colombians. The development
of a national reintegration plan would be key in that
regard by providing a renewed impetus and ensuring
coherence among all actors and initiatives. At this
critical time in the implementation of the agreement, the
United Nations and Colombia’s international partners
must lend our full support to the parties, and engage
proactively to assist them in reaching their goals.
We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the work
of the Mission on the inclusion and participation of
women. We welcome the gender-sensitive analysis in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1117). Women’s
meaningful involvement in the ongoing reconciliation
and peacebuilding efforts is essential to attaining
long-term peace and stability. In that regard, we see
Colombia as serving as a model.
Finally, we note the positive impact on the
humanitarian situation of the temporary ceasefire
between the Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN). We regret that the ELN has resumed
attacks and urge it to renew its ceasefire commitment
as soon as possible, and we reiterate that the United
Nations and the Security Council must stand ready
to assist the parties in monitoring a new agreement.
Sweden, as a member of the Grupo de países de
apoyo, acompañamiento y cooperación a la Mesa de
conversaciones, will assist the process as much as it can.
The Colombian Peace Agreement represents the
culmination of an historic process, which brought more
than 50 years of conflict and violence to an end. It shows
that through political courage and leadership, through
dialogue and diplomacy and with supportive regional
involvement, even the most entrenched conflicts can
be brought to an end, setting an irreversible course
for peace. The agreement also acts as a basis for the
wider economic and social reforms that will benefit
the entire country and all Colombians. It is a visionary
ambition and it seems in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and how it connects to the
sustaining peace agenda. By remaining committed to
the peace agreement, the parties are keeping faith with

S/PV. 8154

the hopes and aspirations of the Colombian people for
the future of their country. It also bridges divisions
inside the country. We must therefore continue to do all
we can to support them.
Finally, I would like to say to my dear friend,
Matthew Rycroft, how much we will miss him. We
appreciate his contribution to this dossier, but also his
efforts on so many other issues that the Council has
been dealing with. We wish him all the best in his
future endeavours.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his comprehensive
briefing this morning. I would also like to acknowledge
the presence of the Vice-President of Colombia,
Mr. Naranjo — a key player in the peace process. We
thank him for honouring us with his presence and for
his personal commitment to the implementation of the
peace agreement.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a close
neighbour of Colombia — as Aruba and Curaçao are
off the coast of Colombia and are autonomous countries
in the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In view of that
good-neighbourly relationship, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands has politically supported the peace process
in Colombia from the start, and we will continue to
do so. We are also providing financial support for the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Before going into the issue of Colombia, I would
also like to acknowledge that this is the last meeting
of my good friend and neighbour, Matthew Rycroft.
I honour the contribution he has made to peace and
security in the world through all of his activities on the
Council. We will miss him.
Today, I will address three issues — the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, some of the challenges and
the ceasefire.
First, with regard to the Peace Agreement, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the historic
peace agreement between the Colombian Government
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). We pay tribute to the achievements of both
parties in the peace process. They are remarkable.
The peace process is not only about Colombia; it gives
hope to many people in many other regions of the
world that are torn up by war. Our financial support

18-006887/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

to the implementation of the peace agreement focuses
on human rights and gender, transitional justice,
democratization and land rights.
We thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2017/1117). It contains a clear and realistic overview
of the results of the Mission and the progress of the
implementation of the peace agreement in general.
That brings me to my second point — remaining
challenges and achievements. Of course, the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement is key. However
difficult it may seem, challenges need to be confronted
and dealt with without delay. Only the full commitment
to peace by all parties can overcome the challenges
that Colombia still faces. A solid national reintegration
plan is necessary to make the political, economic and
social reintegration of former combatants into society a
reality. We hope both parties will be creative in finding
ways to give demobilized ex-FARC-members access to
land. In that regard, we very much welcome the recent
steps of President Santos.
We would also like to stress the important dimension
of gender. Given the important role that women have
played in the peace process, they should also be able to
participate fully in the drafting and implementation of
the reintegration plan. The participation of women has
proven to be effective and it is crucial to the success of
the reintegration plan as well.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned
about the security situation in certain regions and the
increase in violence against human rights defenders,
community leaders and former combatants. Therefore,
we welcome the redesign of Plan Victoria into Plan
Horus, which includes the national police and focuses
more on areas where the security situation is most
critical. We welcome the first steps taken by the
Colombian Government to set up a transitional justice
system and we look forward to the full implementation
of chapter 5 of the peace agreement. In order to reach
sustainable and lasting peace, impunity should be put to
an end and reparations and guarantees of non-repetition
to the 8 million victims should be ensured.
On the ceasefire, we deeply regret the fact that
negotiations have been unable to reach an agreement
on an extension of the ceasefire. This morning’s two
attacks took place shortly after the ending of the
ceasefire. It would be unfortunate if these attack were
the consequence of the decision by the ELN (Ejército
de Liberación Nacional) to resume its actions against
8/19

10/01/2018

the Colombian Government. As a member of the
group of countries supporting the negotiating table
of the peace negotiations between the Colombian
Government and the ELN, we call upon both parties
to renew the ceasefire. The first ceasefire has greatly
improved the humanitarian situation in areas affected
by the conflict. A renewal of the ceasefire is in the best
interest of the Colombian people and is a necessary
precondition for the full participation of civil society in
the peace negotiations.
(spoke in Spanish)
In conclusion, as a neighbouring country, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains fully committed
to the Colombian peace process and is ready to support
the Colombian Government in the implementation of
the agreements. We face significant challenges, but we
are convinced that the peace process is irreversible.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his briefing, as well as the Vice-President
of the Republic of Colombia, Mr. Óscar Naranjo, for
participating in today’s meeting. I also thank them
for the negotiations and the implementation of the
peace agreement reached with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC).
Despite various obstacles, the Colombian
Government has been able, over a few years, to launch
an historic peace agreement with the FARC that France
also believes to be irreversible. This is an agreement that
the United Nations in general and the Security Council
in particular have supported. After the disarmament
and the political transition of that armed group, we
have, for a few months, been involved in a crucial
phase for the future of the process — the reintegration
of ex-combatants.
In the light of the mandate conferred by the Council
on the second United Nations mission to Colombia, I
would insist on three points.
First and above all, we welcome the mobilization
in recent months of the Colombian Government in
order to adopt the necessary legislation to implement
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, especially with
regard to Special Jurisdiction for peace. We hope that
the jurisdiction will have ways to ensure and authorize
equitable and independent justice, in keeping with the
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

commitments undertaken when the peace agreement
was signed. Whatever the results of the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections, France calls
on all Colombian political actors to embark upon
that path.
My second point concerns security assurances.
Although former FARC combatants are relatively well
protected within the areas of training and reintegration,
France regrets an increase in violence in territories
previously under the control of the guerilla forces,
particularly directed at human rights defenders and
civil society representatives. France welcomes the new
measures announced by the Colombian authorities
prioritizing the fight against that negative trend.
Finally, France wishes to stress a key issue for
reintegration and the future of the peace process
and welcomes the action of President Santos in that
regard — access to land and income sources. We do not
underestimate the difficulty of this question. However,
it clearly constitutes the key to successful economic
and social reintegration of former fighters and to the
pacification and lasting stability of territories plagued
by half a century of conflict.
In conclusion, I would just like to note that the
peace Agreement between the Government of Colombia
and the FARC has taken place in the arc of history. Its
implementation can encourage other armed groups, led
by the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), to follow
suit. In this regard, France hopes that the temporary
ceasefire between the Colombian Government and the
ELN will be promptly renewed and that the negotiations
can help to deliver a historic peace agreement.
Finally, I to would like to commend Ambassador
Rycroft and his dynamism in the Council. I wish him
every success in his new functions at the head of the
Department for International Development.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Like my
colleagues, I would like to offer a very special welcome
to Vice-President Naranjo. His work on the peace
process in Colombia really is part of history and we
are very honoured to have him in the Chamber with us
today. I also thank Special Representative Arnault for
his and his team’s outstanding work to support a lasting
peace in Colombia.
As we enter the second year of the historic Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
stable and Long Lasting Peace, we look back at the

S/PV. 8154

progress both sides have made in bringing peace to
the Colombian people. Before 2016, a majority of
Colombians had never lived in a country at peace. All of
that changed with the signing of the peace agreement,
which brought Latin America’s longest war to a close.
The Peace Agreement was hailed as a huge success
and indeed it was. Colombia became the country that
defeated kidnappers and cocaine kingpins and stepped
back from the brink of becoming a failed State.
Colombia now faces the immense task of securing
the peace and consolidating these gains. In the past
year, significant progress has been achieved in one key
aspect of the peace accord: disarmament. Nearly 7,000
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC) were relocated to United Nationsmonitored disarmament zones and the FARC has
transitioned into a political party. Rebels have turned
in their weapons and the homicide rate is at its lowest
level in four decades. These are visible and concrete
signs of progress that benefit all Colombians. But
as the past year has shown, ending the war was just
the beginning. Colombia is now working to establish
the justice that is necessary to preserve the peace.
Colombian President Santos Calderón himself has said,
“Constructing peace is more than ending the attacks
and much more difficult”.
The implementation of the peace agreement has
turned to political reconciliation and reintegration.
Colombia must balance demands for justice with the
need for reconciliation to ensure that peace endures
and that means the taking on the hard work of securing
proper accountability for those responsible for
violations and building trust among a people deeply
scarred by decades of conflict.
A particular concern is the security vacuum left
by the FARC demobilization. The lack of security in
formerly FARC-controlled areas, as well as the lack
of governance, has led to an up-tick in violence that
is very worrisome. New armed groups are battling to
fill the space left by the FARC, and there have been
continuing attacks on community leaders and human
rights defenders.
We welcome the Colombian Government’s efforts
to expand its presence in former conflict areas to
keep paramilitary and illicit groups from replacing
the FARC as sources of killing and violence. Effective
military and civilian agencies that provide security
and Government services in remote areas are critical

18-006889/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

to sustaining peace. Meanwhile, the reintegration of
FARC combatants into Colombian society is also very
crucial. As a number of former FARC soldiers have left
the rural camps where they were expected to begin their
transition back to civilian life, it is urgent for Colombia
to execute a reintegration plan that provides both
security for the Colombian people and opportunities for
former combatants.
We have also seen some legislative progress, as
others have noted, including the approval of the law
regulating the Special Jurisdiction for peace, and we
hope to see the implementation of other key provisions.
The United States is fully committed to supporting
Colombia and the implementation of the peace accord.
We would also like to echo the disappointment of
others about the resumption of attacks by the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional, as we saw this morning, and
we hope that a new ceasefire can be concluded in the
coming days.
We will continue to be a friend and partner to
Colombia. We will continue to support security,
justice, prosperity and respect for human rights of
all Colombians. The people of Colombia know better
than most that peace is precious, but fragile. We stand
shoulder to shoulder with them in working to preserve
this peace and build a better future for Colombia.
I must join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador
Rycroft for his service on the Security Council.
Ambassador Haley asked me to present this statement
to him in front of the Council this morning. It has been
a real pleasure and an honour working with him. I think
that we all got a little bit choked up during his remarks.
We will all miss him very much.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): My delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having kindly agreed to convene this
important briefing on the situation in Colombia. This is
a major concern for all members of our Council.
Before I continue, I would like to hail the presence
of His Excellency the Vice-President of Colombia in the
Chamber and welcome him to the Security Council. We
congratulate Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Jean Arnault on the excellent briefing he just
gave us, which affords us a clearer picture of the peace
process under way in Colombia. We would also like
to thank him and encourage him in the light of the
tremendous work undertaken by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.
10/19

10/01/2018

Côte d’Ivoire joins its voice with those of previous
speakers in welcoming the remarkable progress that
has been achieved in the peace process uunder way
in Colombia. This progress is especially reflected
in the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a stable and Long Lasting Peace
of November, 2016 and the effective disarmament of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) and its transformation into a political party.
It is also reflected with the ceasefire reached between
the Government of Colombia and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN). We further commend the
determination of the various parties to work to achieve
peace and national reconciliation.
Notwithstanding these gains, Côte d’Ivoire remains
troubled by the delays observed in the implementation
of certain relevant provisions of the Peace Agreement,
specifically the political, economic and social
reintegration of the FARC and the implementation of
the necessary reforms to improve the living conditions
for people in the areas of Colombia that have been
plagued by war — people who aspire to better lives.
Côte d’Ivoire deplores the relapse into insecurity,
violence and myriad forms of trafficking in the areas
previously occupied by the FARC. Criminal groups and
militias are now vying for control of these areas. My
delegation further notes that the numerous murders of
social leaders and the observed return of former FARC
combatants to the areas they previously occupied,
which is the result of their lack of prospects, compound
the situation in Colombia. We are convinced that
peace and security are prerequisites for all harmonious
and sustainable development, and we call upon all
Colombian stakeholders to commit themselves further
to the political process under way. All parties must
assume their responsibilities and obligations.
My delegation welcomes the tremendous efforts
already undertaken by the Government of Colombia in
implementing the Peace Agreement, and we encourage it
to persevere in order to ensure the success of this process
through tangible measures and the implementation
of the structures set up within this framework. In
that regard, the next parliamentary and presidential
elections, in March and May, should strengthen the
national reconciliation process and guarantee genuine
peace, by ensuring adequate security conditions for all
participants. Peace can be sustainable and lasting only
if the reconciliation process is inclusive and involves
all Colombians.
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

My delegation urges the Government and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional to continue their
negotiations with a view to a swift renewal of the
ceasefire as part of a comprehensive peace agreement.
We regret the fact that they have violated the ceasefire,
according to the most recent reports available to us.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the readiness
of my country, which has emerged from a decade of
crisis thanks to the support of the United Nations and
the international community, to do its part, with all
other members of the Council, for the success of the
peace process in Colombia.
Finally, allow me personally to thank the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom, my friend
Matthew Rycroft, for the friendship and the support
that he has willingly afforded our delegation since our
arrival here in New York. He is leaving us, but I believe
that his spirit will continue to support us. We wish him
well in his new responsibilities.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me start by thanking
Mr. Jean Arnault for a very informative briefing. As
well, I thank him and his team for their dedication
and commitment in helping Colombia to bring about
peace and reconciliation. He has our full support for
his efforts aimed at accomplishing the objectives of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia. I am also very
pleased to welcome Mr. Óscar Naranjo, Vice-President
of Colombia.
It has been more than a year since the signing and
entry into force of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). We
are happy to see that the peace process has brought
about tangible positive results. Poland welcomes
resolution 2381 (2017), which expanded the scope of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
We believe that the role of the United Nations Mission
is critical to the next phase of the implementation
of the peace agenda, especially the reintegration
process of FARC combatants and the verification of
the temporary bilateral ceasefire with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional.
A proper reintegation remains key in order to
guarantee that conflict does not reoccur and to ensure
a successful political, economic and social integration
of the members of the FARC. We would like to stress
the importance of the participation of women in the

S/PV. 8154

political process. Durable peace can be achieved only
when all people — women and men — are equally
involved in the formulation of a solution — which, after
all, affects their lives.
The Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
played an essential role in maintaining the trust
between the Government and the FARC. We believe
that it should serve as a model for conflict resolution
in other conflict-affected areas. The success of the
peace process in Colombia remains essential for the
region of Latin America. However, it also serves as
an example of the positive involvement of the Security
Council and a much-needed success story of a United
Nations-brokered peace deal. Intense political will is
still required on both sides in order to drive the peace
process forward. We strongly believe that the parties
will remain united in their desire to bring about a
brighter future for all the citizens of Colombia.
Poland would like to underline the role of the United
Nations Mine Action Service through its programme in
Columbia, aimed at ending the suffering of Colombians
from widespread landmines. Last year, driven by
the outstanding work done by the United Nations
Mission in Columbia, Poland decided to contribute to
the multi-year appeal of the Department of Political
Affairs. We hope that that donation will also help with
preventive efforts in Colombia. We are also confident
that we, as the international community, will spare
no effort to provide assistance for lasting peace to be
achieved in Columbia.
In conclusion, allow me to join my colleagues in
congratulating Ambassador Matthew Rycroft. Poland
has been a member of the Security Council for only
10 days, but I can say that I am truly impressed by
his professionalism and his very constructive spirit. I
express my greatest appreciation.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes, first
of all, to pay tribute to the presence of Mr. Óscar
Naranjo, Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia,
and to welcome him to the Chamber. We also thank
Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, for sharing with the Council
the first quarterly report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/1117). I also wish to welcome the presence of
the many Ambassadors from Latin America and the

18-0068811/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

Caribbean who are here with us at this meeting. Their
presence clearly demonstrates the commitment of Latin
America and the Caribbean to this peace process.
In the various conflicts that figure on the agenda of
the Security Council, we greatly regret the fact that there
have been political processes under way for years without
showing any tangible progress and peace agreements
that are ignored or are not really implemented. Colombia
provides us with a different reality. Of course, that does
not mean that there have not been difficulties along the
way — there have — but the goodwill and leadership
shown by the Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) in implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace is something that we would like to see in other
conflicts. That same conviction is needed to overcome
the difficulties that exist, or that will arise in future.
We are starting a new year, and it is always worth
evaluating the cycle that has been completed. The year
2017 was the year of peace in Colombia. That process
brought about positive news and demonstrated concrete
progress for the Security Council and the international
community. The agreement reached by the Government
and the FARC represents a tremendous achievement
by Colombians, which fills the entire region of Latin
America and the Caribbean with pride.
Thanks to that agreement, 53 years of armed conflict
came to an end. The FARC laid down their weapons,
became the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común and exchanged arms for political participation.
Those three specific facts are easy to say, but those of
us who are aware the suffering of the Colombian people
during that half-century know the value of every minute
step that was taken and the effort and cost involved in
laying the foundations for peacebuilding. Only those
three facts make that process irreversible.
Three months ago, the most complicated stage
in the implementation of the Final Agreement
began — the political, economic and social reintegration
of the ex-combatants of FARC into society, in
accordance with points 3.2 and 3.4 of the agreement.
That stage is facing difficulties, but should not stop
or diminish the significance of the progress made in
implementing the Agreement.
Colombia has adopted 107 laws and decrees on
reinstatement and security guarantees, on the victims,
and on truth, justice and reparation. It has established
12/19

10/01/2018

dozens of institutions and specialized mechanisms and
development plans. The support of the international
community is paramount. For their part, the United
Nations and the Security Council must continue to
support this process every step of the way and work
to maintain peace. But of course it is Colombians
who should be the main defenders of the process. The
difference between now and previous attempts is that
the Government and the FARC are getting real results.
Given all of this, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
believes that we should first redouble our efforts to
ensure the reintegration of former FARC combatants
into civilian life, starting with the legal reinstatement
that is the foundation needed for achieving political,
social and economic reinstatement, as established in
the Final Agreement. Secondly, security should be
strengthened in the areas formerly occupied by the
FARC. The latest figures for murders of social leaders
and former FARC members are alarming, and we should
move faster to establish measures that will ensure a
Government presence and protection for residents of
those areas. Thirdly, concrete steps must be taken to
advance comprehensive rural reforms. In our view,
formalizing access to land is fundamental to ensuring
stable and lasting peace. With regard to the negotiations
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), we
regret the fact that the process has been suspended, and
we hope and call for the talks to be resumed as soon
as possible.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
efforts of Special Representative Jean Arnault and his
team. Their commitment has been proven both in the
implementation of the Final Agreement between the
Government and the FARC and in their own work in
pursuing talks with the ELN. We would also like to
express our special gratitude to three Ambassadors who
are in this Chamber today: Ambassador Rosselli Frieri,
of Uruguay — not just for his leadership in the work
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia but also for
his commitment to the issue — Ambassador Rycroft,
of the United Kingdom, for his role in the Council’s
special mission in Colombia, and Ambassador Mejía
Vélez, who has been a pillar of the peace process. We
would also like to reiterate Bolivia’s total support to the
peace process led by the Government and FARC. The
determination shown both by President Juan Manuel
Santos and the FARC’s leaders in consolidating peace
will go down in history as one of the most important
decisions that the Colombian people have ever taken.
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

The peace they are building belongs to Colombia, but it
also belongs to, and is the responsibility of, the whole
of the human family.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this discussion. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Naranjo
Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and we are
grateful to Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We believe it is
important to receive updated information in a timely
manner from the source.
In the year since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), the situation in
Colombia has shown positive momentum. The main
achievements have unquestionably been the completion
of the process of the rebels’ surrender of their arms,
the transformation of the FARC into a political party
and the agreement on a temporary ceasefire with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional. We firmly believe
that the main reason for those achievements has been
Colombians’ declared national responsibility for their
peace process. With regard to the agreement with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional, we hope that the
Colombian side will show the necessary political will
and take decisions as soon as possible that will enable
the Council to renew the corresponding mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
In general, we share the the Secretary-General’s
assessments in his recent report on the situation in
the country (S/2017/1117). However, we do have some
comments to make.
We would like to draw attention to a paragraph in
the report about the security situation in various parts
of the country. The information refers not only to the
police and other national bodies, but also to the data
of some non-governmental organizations. We would
like an explanation as to why this information is not
presented as coming from the Secretary-General. The
same paragraph indicates that the data provided by
non-governmental organizations is consistent with
information in the possession of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, but the
Security Council did not request data from that body.
That is concerned more with organizational issues.
With regard to the situation in Colombia, the Secretary-

S/PV. 8154

General’s report suggests that there are signs that the
main task — the disarming of the FARC — has already
been accomplished. We consider that to be an extremely
dangerous delusion, especially in the absence of an
agreement with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional.
Colombia will not succeed in achieving a durable
peace until every segment of society is satisfied with
the situation. Needless to say, on that front, we support
the work of the Verification Mission, which is now
focusing on just that — ensuring that Bogotá fulfils
its obligations. Those efforts should be intensified,
especially in the run-up to the forthcoming elections.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would first like to thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his valuable briefing, in which he informed us of the
most important achievements and challenges facing the
peace process and ceasefire in Colombia.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Óscar Adolfo
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice President of Colombia, to the
Security Council. His presence here today is in itself
a testament to his Government’s interest in achieving
stable and lasting peace in Colombia and a confirmation
to the Council of the importance that the Colombian
Government attaches to that peace. I also thank and
acknowledge his important and vital role in the current
peace process in Colombia.
Regarding the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
we take this opportunity to praise the significant
achievements realized since it was signed by the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC), ending a conflict that had lasted
more than half a century. Meanwhile, we emphasize
the importance of ensuring that both sides continue to
honour their commitments.
After 50 years of conflict, achieving peace will face
difficulties and obstacles. We welcome the temporary
bilateral ceasefire between the Government and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), which expired
yesterday, 9 March, and which has facilitated a number
of achievements on several fronts, as acknowledged
by both parties, the Catholic Church and the United
Nations Mission, including a significant reduction in
armed clashes between Government forces and those
of the ELN, bringing with it a reduction in the level
of violence and improvements in the humanitarian

18-0068813/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

situation. We have also seen the participation of a wide
group of social organizations in public meetings with
a view to convening a national dialogue in the future.
However, we are concerned about reports received
this morning, indicating that the ELN has resumed
fighting after the expiry of the ceasefire deadline. We
urge both parties to extend it and to put the best interests
of Colombia and the Colombian people first. We
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
be renewed to ensure the continuation of the ceasefire
between the Government and the ELN, in view of the
Mission’s important role in achieving stability in the
interests of the Colombian peace process.
In this regard, I thank the countries that have
contributed international observers; Cuba and Norway,
the two guarantors of the peace process; and the two
supporting countries, Chile and Venezuela, as well
as Colombia, for their vital and important role in
sponsoring the ceasefire negotiations. We reiterate our
commitment to continuing to support the Colombian
Government, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Mission in
their endeavours to bring peace to Colombia.
Finally, I wish the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom, Matthew Rycroft, every success in the new
role that awaits him.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for having convened today’s
meeting. We listened carefully to the briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault, and I
welcome Vice-President Naranjo to today’s meeting.
The Colombia peace process is a good example of an
instance in which the Council’s cooperation has made
a difference in addressing hotspot regional issues. This
peace process is of the utmost importance for peace and
development in Colombia and of great relevance for the
maintenance of regional stability. China commends
the efforts made by the Colombian Government and
President Santos Calderón in this connection.
The full implementation of the final Peace
Agreement between the Government and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) is
at the core of the Colombian peace process. The
implementation of the peace agreement is currently
facing challenges that are due to complex factors. After
half a century of conflict and strife in the country,
14/19

10/01/2018

healing the wounds left by war will not be an easy task.
The full implementation of the agreement encompasses
political, security, development and social integration
aspects. It is akin to a systematic engineering project
and requires sustained efforts on the part of Colombia
and the international community.
There is a high degree of consensus among different
sectors in Colombia and on the part of the international
community that the peace process there is irreversible.
China is confident that the Government and FARC will
be able to overcome the current difficulties and work
towards the same goal, staying the course in the peace
process so as to create conditions favourable to the full
implementation of the Agreement by the Colombian
Government and FARC and maintain the current
positive momentum.
China also hopes that the Security Council and
the international community will continue to focus on
and support the peace process in Colombia, respect the
leadership of the Colombian Government and people of
the process, and provide constructive assistance to help
along the way.
China commends Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Arnault and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia for the important
role they have played in this connection. We hope that
the Mission will continue to enhance contacts and
communication with the Government and FARC and
make greater efforts to enhance trust and dispel doubts.
With a view to promoting the implementation of
the agreement by the Government and FARC, China
also hopes that the Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (National Liberation Army) will
overcome the current difficulties and reach agreement
without delay on an extension of the ceasefire.
China is ready, together with other members of
the Council, to continue to play its role in promoting
the peace process in Colombia and to achieve
comprehensive peace and stability in that country at an
early date.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
expressing our thanks to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Arnault for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2017/1117).
I am pleased to welcome the Vice-President of a
country that is, despite the well-known challenges, on
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

S/PV. 8154

the cusp of making history in peacemaking. We wish him
success; we need that success as an example. Colombia
has indeed been the good news in the Council, and we
all have been applauding the remarkable achievement
made by the country in turning the page on a longstanding conflict.

We note that the parties are committed to addressing
this challenge, and they can only be encouraged to stay
the course. The Council should continue to provide
all of the necessary support, and we remain fully
committed to supporting the Colombian parties in the
implementation of their Agreement.

As we have come to understand, and as stressed
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, there are formidable challenges in terms of
implementation that require patience and perseverance
to achieve sustainable peace. We have always known
that the road ahead would be difficult and complex, and
that it would not be a cakewalk.

On the ceasefire agreement between the Colombian
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(National Liberation Army) ,we can only hope that
things will improve for the better despite the latest
setback. We know how strongly the Government is
committed in this regard.

We certainly welcome the positive progress made
over the past year, including the laying down of arms,
which was successfully completed just a few months
ago and represented a significant milestone in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
However, we are conscious of the fact that there
are sensitive issues that need to be handled carefully,
including the reintegration of Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) combatants into
civilian life; the implementation of personal and
collective security and protection measures in the
absence, or with an inadequate presence, of State
institutions in places left by FARC combatants; and other
issues highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
that might potentially create political complications.
We take note of the approval of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the backbone of the Peace
Agreement, on 30 November. We are convinced that
the approval of the Agreement alleviates the concerns
of former combatants and facilitates their reintegration
into society.
The Constitutional Court’s endorsement of the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition, on 14 November, as well as
FARC’s registration as a legal political party and its
announcement that it would participate in the 2018
presidential and congressional elections, are very
significant. While we commend the continued political
will being demonstrated by the Government and FARC,
we understand that more needs to be done in order
to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement
and sustain the gains made in the first phase of the
peace process.

We express our appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Arnault and to United Nations
personnel in Colombia for all their efforts in support of
the Peace Agreement. We also reiterate our appreciation
to the countries of the region and other international
partners that continue to closely support and accompany
the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Finally, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
support for the full implementation of the Colombian
Peace Agreement and continue to stand in solidarity
with the people and the Government of Colombia in
their efforts to transition to a sustainable peace.
I want to stress how critical the success of this
process is, not only for the people of Colombia but
for us all, particularly for those of us in parts of the
world where we have the major challenge of keeping the
guns silent. Colombia should continue to serve as an
example. For that to happen, it is important that nothing
happen to dim the hopes that have been engendered,
which we had the opportunity to witness during the
Security Council mission last May.
I want to conclude by taking this opportunity to
express profound appreciation to Matthew for his
friendship and for the notable contribution he has made
to the work of the Council. As everybody knows, with
Matthew one can always be sure about the position
he takes, and therefore one can always count on him,
as we have. I am personally indebted to him for all of
that. I wish him success as he assumes a responsibility
back home that is in no way less important than the
responsibility he has had as the representative of his
country on the Council. He will be missed very much,
and I share the sentiment expressed by the representative
of the United States in that regard.

18-0068815/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to preface my remarks by
extending a very warm and cordial welcome to the
Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Óscar Adolfo Naranjo. I would like to
convey to him and to President Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón my country’s appreciation for the tireless
efforts they have devoted to bringing about lasting peace
in Colombia. I would also like to convey my gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his presence with us
today and for his succinct briefing. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and detailed
report (S/2017/1117) on the situation in Colombia
published on 27 December 2017.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the successful progress
in the peace process under way in Colombia among the
country’s various social and politicial stakeholders.
That success is due to the determination exhibited both
by the national authorities, led by President Santos
Calderón, and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). We
would also like to underscore the courage shown by the
entire Colombian people in facing the situation and, in
favour of peace, taking the steps to leave behind more
than five long decades of conflict. We feel particularly
sensitive to the situation in that brotherly country due
to the historic ties that link us as a result of our common
Hispanic cultural heritage.
The high-level ceasefire agreement and the Final
Peace Agreement on ending the conflict and building
a stable and lasting peace between the Colombian
Government and FARC-EP is the best example in
that the national peace process is making satisfactory
progress and has undoubtedly served as a source of
inspiration and positive encouragement for the peace
talks begun between the Colombian Government and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, which has created
the conditions conducive to, and exciting expectations
of, the realization of comprehensive and lasting peace
and stability in Colombia.
In that regard, Equatorial Guinea endorses and
welcomes the unanimous adoption resolution 2381
(2017) by the Security Council on 5 October 2017
and supports the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral on how the United Nations can best support
the Mission charged with monitoring the temporary
ceasefire between the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
16/19

10/01/2018

and the Colombian Government. The resolution allows
all members of the Security Council to provide the
necessary support to the work of the Verification
Mission in the process of monitoring the ceasefire,
which undoubtedly represents a very important measure
in building the necessary trust between the parties. We
hope it will lead to definitive and lasting peace, which
would allow that brotherly country to make the most of
all its immense potential.
While significant progress has been made,
significant challenges remain, such as the effective
reintegration of former guerrillas and the adaptation
and approval of legislative initiatives to allow for
the effective reinsertion and participation of former
combatants in political, economic and social life of
the country. To achieve that end, a positive approach
and contribution by all parties involved is crucial. The
judicial, political and legislative authorities have a
decisive role to play, both in tackling present challenges
and in preventing them from recurring in the course of
the process. In that regard, I recall the remarks of His
Holiness Pope Francis on 7 September 2017 in Bogotá,
during his visit to Colombia:
“Despite obstacles, differences and varying
perspectives on the way to achieve peaceful
coexistence, this task summons us to persevere in
the struggle to promote a culture of encounter.”
The ultimate success of the peace process
in Colombia will depend in large part upon all
parties involved in the negotiations respecting their
commitments, including those not covered by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We
therefore appeal to the political goodwill of all parties
in that regard.
I cannot conclude my statement without once
again expressing our gratitude to all those components
of Colombian society that have made it possible for
us today to speak of peace in Colombia, while also
underscoring the role of the Catholic Church and also
the invaluable support of a number of countries of
the subregion.
I end by expressing my thanks to our friend
Matthew for his warmth and the new life he breathed
into the work of the Security Council, as well as my
thanks for his support to my country in its first period
serving as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. We wish him the greatest of success in his
future endeavours.
18-00688

10/01/2018

Colombia

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
I would like to begin by welcoming to the Security
Council His Excellency Vice-President Óscar Naranjo
of Colonbia. We would also like him to convey our
best regards to President Santos Calderón, whom we
met during the Security Council mission to Colombia,
as well as our appreciation for his courage and
commitment to the peace process. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault for his comprehensive briefing and to commend
the contribution made by him and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia to the implementation
of the Peace Agreement.

S/PV. 8154

We regret that the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) has resumed its attacks and missed the
opportunity to amplify the truth. However, Kazakhstan
still hopes that the Colombian Government and the
ELN will ultimately find a way to extend the ceasefire.
We fully support Colombia in its endeavour to ensure
the complete elimination of the half-century war and
move towards fostering reconciliation. The very fact
that the Colombian Government and the FARC are
united in their determinaiton to end the conflict and
bring about peace allows us to remain optimistic that
subsequent stages in the peace process have no option
but to succeed. Kazakhstan absolutely supports all
those efforts.

It is more than a year since the Government
of Colombia and the Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) signed a
historic peace deal ending more than half a century of
armed conflict. We have now entered the second year
of the Colombian peace process, which is a milestone
achievement — not only for the Colombian Government
and the FARC-EP, but also for the entire international
community. However, we still have a long way ahead,
and we are all aware of the challenges they face.

In conclusion, I join my colleagues in the Council
who spoke very warmly about the professional and
personal qualities of the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom, Mr. Matthew Rycroft, and stated
that he will be missed here. We wish him all the best in
his future endeavours.

As Under-Secretary-General Feltman rightly
indicated during his visit to Colombia, there is a sense
of growing concern about how the peace process has
been evolving over the past several months. At the same
time, we truly appreciate the frank assessment and
acknowledgement by the Government of Colombia of
the existing difficulties and its sincere and firm stand
on the irreversibility of the peace process.

Mr. Naranjo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
After a year of implementing the agreement that
ended the armed conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), the Government
of Colombia has come to the Security Council with the
belief that that milestone in the history of peace is the
best piece of news our citizens received and that our
country conveyed to the world during the latter half of
the previous century.

Yet some shortcomings in reintegration activities
still persist that might jeopardize effective realization of
the peace process. Both the Government and the FARCEP have to do their best to ensure a proper reintegration
process in order to prevent former combatants from
being recruited by dissident groups or former rivals. In
order to avoid the undermining of public confidence,
it is essential to strengthen the security-development
nexus, especially in former FARC-EP territories longaffected by the armed conflict.
We reiterate our firm commitment to the
Colombian peace process and look forward to the
overall implementation of the peace-related legislative
agenda, including reforms and all other necessary
constitutional amendments and provisions to address
the challenges of peacebuilding.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.

It is for that reason that we begin by thanking
the United Nations and the Security Council for their
effective support and dedication to peacebuilding efforts
in our country, through its Special Verification Mission
in the areas of reincorporation and security guarantees.
We thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for
his professionalism, effective work and leadership as
the Head of the Mission. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft for his commitment and
dedication to the peace process in Colombia. With his
peers present, we reiterate that we never will we forget
him for his efforts in bringing about peace in Colombia.
Today, I would like my statement, in my capacity
as the Vice-President of Colombia and representative of
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, to be viewed

18-0068817/19

S/PV.8154

Colombia

as the manifestation of a vision brought forth by the
efforts of various generations that sought peace. We are
now building and ensuring such peace. As an officer
of the Colombian armed forces, I witnessed at first
hand the tragedies caused by a war that lasted many
years. I attended the funerals of many civil servants
and innocent Colombians. There were 240,000 violent
deaths caused by the conflict and more than 8 million
victims throughout the decades. Today I am pleased
to inform the Council that the peace process was
effective and allowed the lives of at least 3,000 people
to be spared in the last year alone after the agreement
was signed. That is without a doubt another piece of
good news.
Based on an assessment of the implementation of
the agreement one year after it was signed, we can state
without hesitation that the peacebuilding process is
progressing in structural terms and that the agreement
has been an effective covenant for ending the war and
silencing the guns. As the Council knows, we have been
able to develop an effective process of laying down of
weapons, which heralded the end of the FARC as an
armed organization and its transformaton into a political
party. To meet the new challenges of the post-conflict
and peacebuilding era, we have established various
Government institutions and rolled out mechanisms
for interaction and coordination that have enabled us to
respond to the challenge we face.
Over the past year, the legislative agenda of
the Congress of the Republic of Colombia led to the
adoption of six pieces of legislation that introduced
constitutional reforms and various laws and decrees
including more than 100 norms and decrees, which laid
the foundation for peacebuilding in our country.
Let me now mention the progress made in the
areas of reintegration and security guarantees, which
are included in the Mission’s mandate. With regard
to reintegration, I must underscore that Colombia has
more than 14 years of experience. More than 50,000
Colombians have passed through our programmes,
who left criminal organizations and reintegrated into
society. We can therefore safely state that our country
can serve as a model in that area. That experience is
the starting point for ensuring the reintegration of the
FARC’s former combatants. We now have 12,848 former
combatants involved in the process, of whom — and
this is very important — 11,362 already receive a basic
monthly stipend. We have sought to provide literacy
and primary and secondary education courses in the
18/19

10/01/2018

territorial areas for training and reincorporation. More
than 5,000 people were involved in the first phase of the
initiative — former combatants and members of local
communities alike.
To facilitate reincorporation, Ecomun was
established. It is the main cooperative for former
members of the FARC, which is now a political
party. Forty-two other cooperative organizations
have been established through a special system for
former combatants. We established the National
Reincorporation Council and 26 territorial councils
to coordinate reincorporation efforts from the local
to the national level. At the same time, there has been
a major change in the political sphere, with FARC
elements disappearing as an armed organization and
now becomig a new political party that will take part in
the upcoming parliamentary elections in March. It has
already decided to field a presidential candidate.
With regard to security, we think it essential to
inform the Council that 2017 was the least violent
year in Colombia in the past 42 years, with the lowest
murder rate recorded in four decades. That is another
piece of good news. Sadly, it is true that people linked
to the former FARC organization, community leaders
and human rights defenders have been murdered.
Nonetheless, during the negotiations, in order to end the
conflict, we were careful to design new institutions and
mechanisms that ensure that life and personal integrity
would always be protected. To protect former FARC
combatants in particular, 160 protection schemes have
been approved and more than 800 former combatants
have been included and trained to serve jointly in
inter-agency bodies alongside State staff in personal
protection services.
I would like to reassure the Council that the
Government shares public concerns about the murder
of former FARC combatants, community leaders and
human rights defenders. We do not deny the situation.
We acknowledge and highlight it. However, we are
taking action and hope to do so with determination and
efficiency. The President himself chairs the National
Commission for Security Guarantees, in which civil
society, the public prosecutor’s office, the office of the
ombusdman and other members of the Government take
part, in order to assess and take decisions on securityrelated issues. Such efforts have enabled us to accelerate
investigations undertaken to combat impunity and
ensure that those responsible are held accountable.
18-00688

10/01/2018

S/PV. 8154

Colombia

We believe that we must not only work on speeding
up investigations, but also on the prevention of such acts.
To that end, we have designed and implemented a new
prevention and rapid reaction system for the regions,
which, with the help of the Ombudsman’s Office, seeks
to ramp up a preventive capacity that will truly allow
us to prevent the violent deaths of social leaders. Here
before the Security Council, I can affirm that, as we
have done in the past in order to combat organized
crime that has emerged from drug trafficking, we will
not let up in our efforts to overcome such networks.
My presence here today coincides with the strategic
decision taken by my counry’s President to move
forward the consolidation of a secure and peaceful
Colombia. Plan Victory, implemented by the military
forces, and the safe communities and peace plan of
the national police have just been overhauled so as
to respond comprehensively in neutralizing any type
of violence in the country reported by Colombians.
Over the next several days beginning now, we will be
deploying approximatley 80,000 soldiers and police
officers whose duties will be focused on controlling
territory abandoned by the FARC so that it is not taken
over by any criminal entity.
Lastly, the President of Colombia wishes to
acknowledge that he has received and taken due note
of the first report (S/2017/1117) of United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, and, at the same
time, reaffirms his resolve and full commitment to
comply with the Final Peace Agreement. We are certain
that the historic achievement of ending the conflict will
prevail over obstacles and major challenges inherent in
its implementation.

We regret and genuinely deplore recent events,
but the Council must know that the Government has
maintained a willingness to pursue a negotiation
process with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
in order to extend the bilateral ceasefire in order to
allow us to make progress, pursue dialogue and bring
to fruition the Peace Agreement. Inexplicably, the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional has not only rejected
the good-will gestures of the Government, but it has
also failed to consider the appeals of the Catholic
Church, non-governmental organizations, academics
and the international community to continue talks and
relaunch a ceasefire that would ensure its sustainability.
Nevertheless, I reaffirm before the Council that the
Government will not waver in its mission to bring
about peace — given that peace is the expression of the
collective will that must prevail over concrete acts.
Accordingly, the events of the past few hours and
minutes have led the chief Colombian negotiator to
consult with the President to assess the situation, and
under no circumstances will we ever abandon a goal
that is of the utmost importance to our Government,
which has unequivocally demonstrated to the entire
world that its leader, the President of the Republic, is a
champion of peace, peacemaker and peacebuilder.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 p.m.

18-0068819/19
