A/65/PV.55

United Nations

:

General Assembly
Sixty-fifth session

55

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 30 November 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/65/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/380 and
A/65/380/Add.1)
Draft resolutions (A/65/L.14, A/65/L.15,
A/65/L.16, A/65/L.17 and A/65/L.24)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that at the end of this morning’s meeting I
announced that we would begin our meeting this
afternoon with a statement by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic in exercise of the right of reply.
Before giving him the floor, I remind him that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
French): Before I address the substance of my
statement, I express the hope that such technical
problems will never again recur under your presidency.

(spoke in Arabic)
Allow me at the outset to read some titles of
articles published recently in the Israeli press. These
articles are a direct response from the Israeli press
itself to the erroneous allegations put forward by the
Israeli representative against my country.
The first article was published by the Israeli
newspaper Ha’aretz on 24 November. In the article,
one can read the following:
“The referendum concerning the occupied Golan
and East Jerusalem is one further insult to the
international community and significantly
changes Israel’s commitment to respecting
resolutions of international legitimacy.”
The second article, which appeared in the Israeli
paper Israel Today on 25 November, states:
“The Israeli Government is attempting to
undemocratically prevent by law the signing of a
peace agreement with Syria and the achievement
of reconciliation with Palestine with regard to
Jerusalem.”
The third article, which was published on
28 November, that is, two days ago, in Ha’aretz, is
entitled “We Israelis, Sons of the Chosen People, will
decide the fate of another people living for generations
under occupation. This is Israeli insolence in its most
hateful form”. These are comments that were made in
Ha’aretz; they are not my words. In that article, one
can also read:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-66016 (E)

*1066016*

A/65/PV.55

“Under Israeli democracy in its clearest form, the
people as a whole will decide the question of
settling the conflict but not the question of
settlements or the questions of annexation, war or
conflict.”
Here again, we see Israeli attempts to mislead us.
As a result, the Israelis legislate the settlement of
the conflict with a view to deferring the settlement date
again and again. The Israelis should have asked the
following questions of their Government: Where are
you taking us? Where are we headed? The settlements
will continue to be built, the occupation is deepening
and becoming further rooted, but what will happen
after that?
Israeli State terrorism is clear and documented by
a number of international institutions, which have
assembled a black record of massacres, crimes,
aggressions and occupation of Arab territories
extending back more than 60 years. As such, Israel
excels at State terrorism, carrying out the most
atrocious crimes against civilians in Palestine, the
Golan, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia and the Sudan.
Undoubtedly, we all remember what happened in
Qana, Jenin, Nablus, Gaza, Bahr el-Baqar, Deir Yassin
and al-Quneitra. Israeli State terrorism has not even
spared the representatives of the United Nations, from
the killing of the mediator Count Bernadotte to the
crimes committed against peacekeepers serving in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and
ultimately the destruction of the headquarters of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza in 2008 and the
killing of the peace activists this year. We cannot list
here all Israel’s practices throughout its history, such as
war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing.
Perhaps Israel can deceive and lead some to
believe its lies for some time, but it cannot do so
forever, because its racist aggressive policies are now
well known and have been condemned by the majority
of the States in the world. The word “Israel” has
become synonymous with such words as “aggression”,
“killing”, “racism”, “occupation”, “terrorism” and
“assassination”. The most recent assassination took
place in Dubai, as everyone knows.
Israel will need a great deal of forgiveness and
pardon from its victims. Israel needs to be more
introspective and must be accountable for terrorist

2

crimes committed for decades by successive
Governments before the international community,
officials and civilians alike, can think about stopping
their condemnation of it.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
inform members that, upon request of the author, the
Assembly will take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.24, entitled “The one-State solution”, at a later
date. I would also like to inform members that action
will be taken on draft resolutions A/65/L.14 through
A/65/L.17 immediately after consideration of agenda
item 36, “The situation in the Middle East”.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.
Agenda item 36
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/379,
A/65/380 and A/65/380/Add.1)
Draft resolutions (A/65/L.18 and A/65/L.19)
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolutions A/65/L.18 and A/65/L.19.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly is today taking up agenda item 36,
“The situation in the Middle East”, emphasizing its
inherent role in addressing the conflict and constant
tension in the Middle East resulting from Israel’s
illegal occupation of Arab occupied territories since
1967, and its refusal to accept the will of the
international community and to implement relevant
United Nations resolutions and the rules of
international law and international humanitarian law,
despite all regional and international efforts to reach a
negotiated
solution allowing for a lasting,
comprehensive and just peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine, the core of the conflict.
Undoubtedly, the Middle East is now passing
through an extremely dangerous phase as a result of the
intransigent positions of the Israeli Government. Lately
we have witnessed an increase in Israeli violations of
international law, reflected by the illegal expansion of
settlements, particularly in and around East Jerusalem,
especially with the end of the so-called moratorium on
settlements. Israel has done this despite calls by all
stakeholders, including the United Nations, the

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

international Quartet and the European Union, for it to
desist.
Israel’s violations of international law, human
rights law and international humanitarian law have
been increasing, as manifested by many practices, such
as the detention of 10,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails
and detention facilities without any legal grounds; the
continued construction of the racist separation wall, in
defiance of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice; the tight siege of the Gaza Strip,
contrary to Security Council resolution 1860 (2009)
and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18; the
barriers and checkpoints in the West Bank; the Jewish
loyalty oath instituted by the Israeli Cabinet to isolate
the Arab-Israel population in Israel; the recent Knesset
legislation setting stringent new conditions on any
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories annexed
to Israel except through a referendum or the approval
of a two-third majority of the Knesset; and many other
violations that time will not permit us to list.
What is especially disappointing is the fact that
all of those violations are linked to Israel’s deliberate
quest to undermine all attempts to resume the direct
negotiations that were agreed and endorsed by the
Palestinian side, indicating its unwillingness to reach a
peaceful settlement. That refusal will have dire
consequences not only for the Israelis and Palestinians,
but for the whole region and indeed the world.
In the light of those violations, the international
community, represented by the General Assembly, is
called on today more than ever to provide political
support to efforts aimed at resuming the negotiating
process, to emphasize the illegality of settlement
building and the acquisition of others’ territory by
force, and to compel Israel to fulfil its commitments
and to enter into serious negotiations on the six core
issues of the Palestinian track. We must call on Israel
to work towards a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict on all
tracks, on the basis of the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map and relevant
United Nations resolutions.
By the same token, the international community,
represented by the General Assembly, must also stress
and reaffirm the illegality of all measures taken or to
be taken by Israel to alter the legal status or the facts
on the ground in the occupied Syrian Golan, and that
all those and other measures, including the most recent

10-66016

bill before the Israeli Parliament, are illegal and
therefore null and void because they represent a clear
violation of all pertinent United Nations resolutions.
The General Assembly should also demand that Israel
fully comply with Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
In order to express the international community’s
rejection of Israel’s ongoing occupation and illegal
practices in the occupied Arab territories and to
confront the grave deterioration in the peace process, I
am pleased to present to the General Assembly under
agenda item 36, “The situation in the Middle East”,
two draft resolutions, one on Jerusalem (A/65/L.18)
and the other on the Syrian Golan (A/65/L.19).
The first draft resolution, on Jerusalem, reaffirms
that the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions remain the main terms of reference
for the special status of occupied East Jerusalem, and
again confirms the renunciation and repudiation of all
legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel to alter the character and legal status of
the city. It also affirms that any just and comprehensive
solution to the question of Jerusalem should include
internationally guaranteed provisions to ensure the
freedom of religion and of conscience of its
inhabitants. That freedom is restricted by settlement
activity and by Israeli settlers, unlawful attempts by
Israel to impose a Jewish character on the city,
violations of the right of the Palestinians to have access
to places of worship, repeated aggressions against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound and threats to its
structures, and the excavation in the old city of
Jerusalem, including in and around the holy places.
The second draft resolution, on the occupied
Syrian Golan, recalls Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and underlines the deep concern of the General
Assembly about Israel’s continued non-compliance
with its implementation. It also confirms the
applicability of The Hague Convention of 1907 and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to the Syrian
territory occupied since 1967 and the illegitimacy of
both the decision to apply Israeli laws in that territory
and the settlement activities there. The draft resolution
also renews calls upon Israel to withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967 and to respect previous pledges in that regard.

3

A/65/PV.55

The sponsors of the two draft resolutions believe
that it is high time for the international community to
deal with the question of the Middle East
comprehensively. The peoples of the region, who
continue to suffer the scourge of war and aggression,
aspire to achieve peace, stability and coexistence.
These cannot be achieved without Israel’s political will
and serious commitment to fully withdraw from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, based on the
principle of land for peace, the rules of international
law, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map, and
on the basis of all terms of reference stated in the
Madrid principles and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
To that end, the sponsors look forward to the
support of all States members of the General Assembly
and their votes in favour of the two draft resolutions in
support of the important goals that they enunciate, in
order to reaffirm the steadfast international will to
achieve the set goals and to uphold the lofty purposes
and principles of the Charter.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind members that we have many speakers on our
list. I therefore suggest that speakers shorten their
statements and distribute their full texts in the Hall. If
time permits, I would like us to take action on the draft
resolutions today. If we cannot, we will have to meet
tomorrow morning at 10 a.m.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, I would like to align our
delegation with the statement made by our colleague
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I would also like to thank
him for introducing draft resolutions A/65/L.18 on
Jerusalem and A/65/L.19 on the Syrian Golan.
How long will the General Assembly continue to
consider the agenda item on the situation in the Middle
East? The General Assembly began its consideration of
this item in 1970 at its twenty-fifth session. It has
considered it every year since, without making any
tangible progress. How long will the General Assembly
at each and every session call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to put an end to its occupation of the Arab
territories, stating that any steps taken by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories to impose its jurisdiction,
administration and laws in the Syrian Golan or
Jerusalem have absolutely no legality and are null and
void.

4

Is it not high time for the General Assembly to
play the part it is given in the Charter by ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security,
especially given the fact that the Security Council has
failed to ensure implementation of its unanimously
adopted resolutions, including resolution 476 (1980) on
occupied Jerusalem and resolution 497 (1981) on the
occupied Syrian Golan? These two resolutions reject
the provocative and unilateral decisions of the
occupying Israeli authorities to annex Jerusalem and
the occupied Golan and determine that they were
illegal and null and void. Is the international
community not aware that Israel is flouting
international law and humanitarian and ethical
principles? Over 1,000 resolutions have been adopted
by the United Nations system and agencies over the
past 40 years.
Today once again, we find ourselves considering
this same agenda item on the situation in the Middle
East. It is a very dangerous moment, and the chances
of war seem to be trumping the chances for peace due
to increasing Israeli aggression and an unprecedented
level of settlement construction. Most recently, last
month Israel decided to build more than 1,300 housing
units in East Jerusalem with a view to undermining all
Arab, regional and worldwide hopes for achieving a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East at the
very moment when the entire world is working to
achieve that peace, declaring that peace is an absolute
prerequisite for achieving regional and international
security and stability.
The world is absolutely shocked at Israel’s
ongoing talk of war. Israel continues its belligerent
practices, pursues its Jewish settlement construction,
profanes holy sites, has imposed a blockade on Gaza
and is threatening to evict millions of Palestinians from
their land. Such behaviour is discriminatory, racist and
based on archaic political ideologies that call for
religious and ethnic cleansing in order to give life to
the mirage of Israeli Judaism.
Israel continues to pursue such practices as the
building of the racist separation wall and is moving
ahead with the Judaization of Jerusalem. It is also
making decisions based on racism, the most recent
being the Jewish loyalty oath to be taken by non-Jews.
And they call this a democracy.
All of these laws reflect the racism of Israel and
represent the very antithesis of all calls of the

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

international community for freedom and equality in
the twenty-first century. These laws also expose the
falsehood of the claim that Israel is an oasis of
democracy in the Middle East. Israel wants to create a
new form of democracy — a racist, colonialist,
expansionist, occupying and aggressive democracy.
Syria and the Arab States have adopted peace as a
strategic option. We adopted the Arab Peace Initiative
in 2002 at the Arab summit in Beirut. The Initiative
entails everything that peace implies: recognition of
Arab rights, recuperation of land, Israel’s withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories to the borders of
4 June 1967, the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with its capital in East Jerusalem, and
the return of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
Now, what has been the Israeli response to the
Arab Peace Initiative? Israeli’s response has been to
simply ignore the appeals, to invade the West Bank and
to perpetrate massacres in Jenin and Nablus in 2002.
Israel has continued its expansionist settlement
policies, seizing more territory and resources. Not
content with what it had already done, Israel waged its
barbaric aggression against Lebanon in 2006 and
against Gaza in 2008. It then attacked the freedom
flotilla carrying humanitarian assistance to Gaza,
killing nine political activists.
The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is part
and parcel of its very dark policy. Israel still refuses to
return the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland of
Syria. It refuses to comply with international legality,
particularly Security Council resolution 497 (1981).
Just a few days ago, the Israeli Knesset promulgated a
law calling for a referendum on its eventual withdrawal
from Syrian Golan and occupied East Jerusalem.
These actions have been taken with respect to
territories where Israel has no right to make decisions.
They are a violation of international law and a rebuff to
the political will and position of the international
community, which has decided unanimously in two
Security Council resolutions that Jerusalem and the
Syrian Golan are occupied Arab territories. The
international community has also decreed that the
Israeli decisions to annex those two territories are null
and void. The Israeli position has been rejected and
cannot alter the fact that the Syrian Golan is occupied
territory. This is non-negotiable, and the 4 June 1967

10-66016

borders of the Syrian Golan must be restored. This is a
prerequisite for peace.
There are some who still harbour the illusion that
the current Israeli Government is truly seeking peace.
On the basis of that belief, Israel has been granted
favours, known as packages, but it pursues it
repression and terrorizing of Syrian citizens. It has
imprisoned citizens of the Golan, seized land and built
more settlements; it has pillaged the Golan’s resources,
distorted its history and planted mines there. There is
also the question of the Israeli theft of water. The
Syrian Foreign Minister recently sent two identical
letters to the Presidents of the Security Council and the
General Assembly (A/65/542) regarding Israel’s theft
of the water of Mas’adah Lake in the Golan, leading to
the loss of approximately $20 million worth of
resources.
I reconfirm from this rostrum that Syria has a
sovereign right to the occupied Syrian Golan up to the
borders of 4 June 1967. This right is neither negotiable
nor subject to bartering. Peace must be based on that
right. Syria reconfirms that this is a prerequisite for the
achievement of peace. We are not merely calling on
Israel to make what it calls painful concessions. This is
purely and simply a matter of a right that has been
usurped and land that must be returned. The people of
Syria and the Arab countries are truly committed to a
just and comprehensive peace as a strategic option,
along with everything that implies, including the
complete restitution of rights and the full return of
occupied territories.
However, it is not possible for us to ignore reality
and legitimate questions about the future. It would be
illogical and inadmissible for us, as Arabs, to continue
to manifest our true desire for peace when Israel is the
party occupying our territories. Israel is the party
committing aggression against our peoples and our
rights and continuing to threaten to unleash war. Thus
we, along with the international community, would ask
the following question: Can a State that was founded
on illegal occupation and the continual murders of
native Palestinian citizens; that has committed
massacres in Lebanon, the West Bank, Gaza, the Syrian
Golan and elsewhere; and that has undertaken acts of
State terror that have overwhelmed several regions, act
in favour of peace? Can a State whose successive
Governments have publicly and privately prevented the
achievement of a settlement through the peace process
be a full partner in the peace process, particularly when

5

A/65/PV.55

the Head of that State represents one of the most
extremist Governments in the history of that country?
There is an even more important question to be asked
and answered within this forum. How long will Israel
place itself above the law? How long will Israel
continue to act with impunity, pursue its aggressive
practices and persevere on that path?
We believe that, today more than ever, the
international community must take concrete measures
to deal with Israel’s horrific actions and compel it to
put an end to its aggressive practices, halt its
settlement construction, lift the blockade against the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, end to its
occupation of the occupied Arab territories, and
withdraw to the borders of 4 June 1967.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba fully supports and will vote in favour of the draft
resolutions (A/65/L.18 and A/65/L.19) introduced by
the representative of Egypt.
The unstable situation in the Middle East —
characterized by the expansion of Israeli settlements in
the West Bank, the ongoing construction of the
separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
the complex situation in Lebanon and the occupation of
the Syrian Golan, inter alia — is a reality that affects
not only the region but the entire international
community.
Israel’s disregard for international law and its
ongoing illegal occupation of Palestinian territories and
other Arab territories remain the primary obstacles to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region. Cuba reiterates its grave concern over the
further deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly as a result of Israel’s excessive use of force
against the Palestinian civilian population and its many
other illegal policies and practices, such as the
inhumane and destructive measures of collective
punishment against the civilian Palestinian population,
including the blockade of Gaza.
Cuba reiterates its appeal to the international
community to compel the Israeli authorities
immediately to lift the cruel and illegal blockade of the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, open the border
crossings and allow the free circulation of goods from
and into the Gaza Strip. Humanitarian access must be
guaranteed on a regular basis and in compliance with

6

legal obligations pursuant to the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant United Nations resolutions.
Cuba reiterates its deep regret over the
Palestinian people’s ongoing suffering during the more
than 40 years of brutal Israeli military occupation of
their land, and due to the continued denial of their
fundamental human rights, including the right to selfdetermination and the right of the Palestinian refugees
to return to their land.
The international community’s efforts, including
United Nations actions to continue the peace
negotiations for a just, peaceful and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question, remain unsuccessful. The
Israeli authorities — in clear rejection of international
law and open disregard for the resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Security Council — have pursued their aggressive
policies in the region. We call for the immediate
cessation of Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem.
Ending these practices is an absolute prerequisite for
achieving a peace agreement.
Cuba reaffirms that any measures or actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in an
attempt to alter the legal, physical or demographic
status or the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as measures to apply its
jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void
and without legal effect.
We reiterate that all these measures and actions,
including the construction and extension of Israeli
settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, are clear
violations
of
international
law,
international
agreements and the resolutions and Charter of the
United Nations. Cuba calls on Israel to abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and to
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders existing prior to 4 June 1967.
Cuba reaffirms its support for the Middle East
peace process on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map and the formula of land for peace.
We reject attempts to modify the mandate of the peace
process, as well as unilateral Israeli measures and
strategies aimed at imposing an illegal unilateral
solution.
The Palestinian people have the inalienable right
to establish an independent and sovereign State with

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

East Jerusalem as its capital. We demand the
unconditional return of all Arab territory occupied in
June 1967. That is the only way to achieve a just and
lasting peace for all the peoples of the region.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation for Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
sincere efforts to revive the peace process in the
Middle East. We were grateful for yesterday’s
opportunity to reaffirm our support and solidarity for
our Palestinian brothers during the commemoration of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.
The Middle East continues to suffer from
instability owing to the occupation of Arab land by
Israel and its actions against Palestinians, including
killing and displacement, which is dragging the region
into conflict and war. Our debate here is the result of
Israel’s continuing disregard for the will of the
international community, its resolutions and various
international efforts, including the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002, that are aimed at achieving a just
peace and real security and stability in the region.
Furthermore, as set out by President Barack Obama in
his statement to this session of the General Assembly
(see A/65/PV.11), the United States has called for
direct negotiations between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel for one year, leading to an end to much of
the Arab-Israeli conflict through the declaration of a
fully sovereign Palestinian State.
Israel’s actions and its violations of the rights of
the besieged Palestinian people in Gaza, whom they
prevent from getting the basic resources needed to
sustain life and to whom they refuse all humanitarian
assistance, are further evidence of Israel’s continuing
violation of international laws and norms and
humanitarian principles. The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is at a
dangerous stage and will pose a threat to international
peace and security if we cannot arrive at a just solution
based on the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions — in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009) — and the land-for-peace formula.
In the same vein, with regard to the
implementation of Security Council resolution 497
(1981), my country calls on Israel to withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan and to return to the 4 June

10-66016

1967 line. We reiterate that Israel’s occupation of parts
of sisterly Syria is a serious obstacle to achieving
peace and security in the Middle East. The State of
Kuwait also renews its commitment to stand by
Lebanon and to support its efforts to safeguard its
stability and security. We call on Israel to cease its
constant violations of Lebanese land and air space,
implement Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
and withdraw completely from occupied Lebanese
territory.
International efforts are continuing to find a
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieve peace
and security in the Middle East. Yet Israel’s continued
prevarication and intransigence continue to impede
those efforts, including efforts by the United States to
restart negotiations between Palestine and Israel, by
insisting on extremist policies that defy the will of the
international community. Its most recent such action
was the decision to resume building illegal settlements
in occupied Palestine.
Efforts by various Israeli Governments to
disassociate themselves from peace negotiations with
Arab countries have created a sense of frustration and
pessimism in every country of the world. The
international community faces a great challenge today,
namely, compelling Israel to implement the relevant
international resolutions, cease its illegal settlement
activity on Palestinian territory and move forward with
the peace process in order to reach an agreement that
provides for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State and for Israel’s complete withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories.
Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the sisterly country of Egypt for
introducing the two draft resolutions before the
Assembly, on Jerusalem (A/65/L.18) and the occupied
Syrian Golan (A/65/L.19).
As a result of Israel’s illegal occupation of Arab
territory since 1967, year in and year out since the
twenty-fifth session, in 1970, the General Assembly
has considered an agenda item on the situation in the
Middle East. During every session since, the Assembly
has called on Israel to end its occupation of Arab land
and accept the will of the international community by
implementing the relevant international laws and
United Nations resolutions.

7

A/65/PV.55

The Middle East is at a very dangerous
crossroads and faces considerable challenges. A
comprehensive and just peace is still unattainable
owing to Israel’s intransigence in dealing with the
peaceful route that Arabs have embraced; but it has
nevertheless become an urgent requirement for
maintaining international peace and security.
Nevertheless, Israel still treats this option with
contempt, believing that such behaviour will gain it
more power and more time.
Israel’s continued building of settlements makes
the situation even worse. It recently announced its
decision to build 1,360 new housing units in East
Jerusalem — a decision that runs counter to numerous
United Nations resolutions condemning the building of
settlements in the occupied territories and emphasizing
the invalidity of acquiring or annexing land by force,
including Security Council resolutions 446 (1979), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980). These flagrant practices run
counter to article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and article 55 of The Hague Regulations concerning
the Laws and Customs of War on Land. They also
illustrate Israel’s disregard for the peace process,
whose resumption we all hope for in order to achieve a
negotiated settlement on the basis of two States living
side by side within the pre-1967 borders.
There is no doubt that the Israeli Government is
continuing with its intransigent positions and
provocations, which are more evident when new
negotiations loom on the horizon. All of those actions
reflect the fact that Israel is not seriously committed to
achieving a just and permanent solution to the question
of Palestine, which remains the crux of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
Given Israel’s position, the General Assembly is
called upon today to provide the necessary support for
the Middle East political process in order to revive
peace negotiations. More than ever before, the
Assembly is also called upon to exercise its cardinal
principles in support of the peace process and to force
Israel to honour its international commitments with a
view to achieving a just, comprehensive and permanent
solution to all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict on all
tracks on the basis of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and in conformity with the Arab
Peace Initiative, the principle of land for peace, the
Road Map and other relevant international decisions.

8

At each of its sessions, the General Assembly has
called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to end its
occupation of Arab territories. The Assembly has also
emphasized that the measures taken by Israel in the
West Bank, particularly in occupied Jerusalem, as well
as in the occupied Syrian Golan, are illegal, and thus
null and void. The resolutions adopted annually by the
Assembly as well as the Security Council’s own
resolutions — in particular resolution 478 (1980), on
occupied Jerusalem, and resolution 497 (1981), on the
occupied Syrian Golan — all focus on the impact of
Israel’s illegal action. Those two Security Council
resolutions also rejected Israel’s unilateral decisions to
annex Jerusalem and the Golan, determining that such
decisions were null and void and lacking international
legal basis.
It is clear that the illegal settlement policy
pursued by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, which is based on
the pretext of natural growth, is both unwarranted and
unjustifiable and runs counter to international law and
United Nations resolutions.
It is absolutely clear that Israel’s policies —
which include blockading the Palestinian people,
storming places of worship, collective punishment, the
scorched earth policy and the construction of the racist
separation wall — constitute flagrant violations of
international law. They complicate the situation on the
ground while at the same time revealing an attempt to
impose a fait accompli in order to improve Israel’s
position in any future negotiations on a final settlement
of the conflict. Moreover, those policies risk
hampering negotiations towards the comprehensive,
just and lasting peace to which we all aspire.
In order for just, comprehensive and lasting peace
to prevail in the Middle East, the Kingdom of Bahrain
once again calls on Israel to withdraw completely from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the border of 4 June
1967, in implementation of Security Council resolution
497 (1981), which asserts the illegality of Israel’s
imposition of its laws and settlements there. Israel’s
continued occupation of Syrian Arab territory
constitutes a genuine obstacle to the achievement of
peace in the Middle East.
With regard to Lebanon, the Kingdom of Bahrain
calls upon Israel to halt its continued violations of
Lebanon’s land and air space and to implement
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and fully

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

withdraw from the occupied Lebanese territory in
Sheba’a farms and Al-Ghajar village. Bahrain
emphasizes the need to preserve Lebanon’s unity,
territorial integrity and political independence.
We call upon the international community and the
Quartet to make every diplomatic effort to give new
impetus to the peace process in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines commends you, Mr. President, for giving
priority to the discussion on the situation in the Middle
East. In our highly interdependent world, the situation
in the Middle East cannot be overlooked, even by
geographically distant countries like mine. As a major
source of oil and a big market for services for many
countries, including the Philippines, the stability and
progress of the Middle East is essential for world peace
and security. More than 2 million of my country’s men
and women live and work in the Middle East. The
Philippine Government therefore attaches great
importance to the security and safety of every Filipino
citizen in that region.
The Philippines is a strong advocate and
supporter of the Middle East peace process, and we
aim to contribute in any way we can. The Philippines
has always supported the establishment of a free and
independent Palestinian State. The Philippines has for
many years joined the global clamour for the
establishment of a Palestinian homeland to help
alleviate the dire situation of the Palestinian people. In
that regard, the Philippines sees merit in the two-State
solution for peace proposed by our partners. We hope
that both Israel and Palestine will join hands to achieve
a meaningful, long-lasting and durable solution to the
problem.
The Philippines is cognizant of the fact that
bringing stability and long-lasting peace to the Middle
East is easier said than done. Despite huge investments
in energy, time and resources, a solution to the Middle
East problem remains elusive. Past failures, however,
should be seen as the foundation for future success. We
should not halt our quest to find the right solution to
the predicaments that plague the region.
One concrete measure in laying a solid
foundation for peace and stability in the region would
be the creation of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. It
may be recalled that a proposal was agreed upon at the

10-66016

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) via the 1995 resolution on the Middle
East. That proposals was recently reaffirmed by the
2010 NPT Review Conference, specifically in part IV
of the section on conclusions and recommendations for
follow-on
actions
of
the
Final
Document
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), entitled “The Middle
East, particularly implementation of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East”.
The Philippines views the outcome of the 2010
NPT Review Conference as a significant contribution
to the Middle East peace process. In that context, I
wish to highlight some of the vital elements agreed
upon that need urgent attention and action. First, we
must convene an international conference in 2012 on
the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Secondly, we must appoint a facilitator with a full
mandate to support the implementation of the 1995
resolution by conducting consultations with States in
the region and making preparations for the 2012
conference. Thirdly, we must designate a host
Government for the 2012 conference. Lastly, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
should play a key role in the preparations for the 2012
conference.
The Secretary-General and the three depositary
States of the NPT should be moving with dispatch to
implement the actions expected of them in last May’s
NPT Review Conference Final Document, with
specific reference to the 1995 resolution on the Middle
East. The year 2012 is fast approaching.
The other part of the foundation rests on the
commitment of the countries in the region to respect
each other’s rights to exist, to live free from the threat
of destruction and annihilation and to live in peace
with their neighbours. Through these steps and other
confidence-building measures, we can start laying the
groundwork for the peaceful and stable Middle East
that all Member States desire.
The steps that I have just enumerated present
enormous challenges. But I am afraid that, if
something is not done quickly, the countries of the
region are bound to repeat a cycle of conflict and strife
that will eventually destabilize the whole world. What
is needed is a change in thinking and attitude and the

9

A/65/PV.55

development of greater trust and understanding. Such
trust and confidence between erstwhile enemies will
need to be built patiently. Indeed, it will take time,
energy and resources, as well as goodwill and
commitment to sustainable peace.
The 2012 conference is one such concrete step. It
presents a rare chance to show the seriousness and
goodwill of stakeholders. I strongly encourage the
countries in the region and the three depositary States
of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East to participate
and strive to achieve a meaningful outcome. Not only
is it important that they attend, but they must go to the
conference with an open mind and heart. The
conference will be a fresh start for all. Let us seize the
opportunity. The 2012 conference could be an
important step towards finding a viable solution to the
situation in the Middle East.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The international community is still focused
on the Middle East but, despite its efforts, the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process is still stagnating. The
situation concerns us greatly.
This past year has demonstrated that if the
chronic mutual distrust of the parties is not dealt with
and if there is no clear understanding of the fact that
there is simply no alternative to strict compliance with
the international legal basis for a Middle East
settlement, then we will be faced with a situation in
which hopes for peace in the region wither. As a
member of the Quartet of international mediators, the
Russian Federation is actively trying to overcome the
current protracted pause in the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, which has had a negative impact on the
region and feeds the various radical and extremist
forces that are not at all interested in a resumption of
the peace process. It is important that all parties
demonstrate restraint and not indulge in violence.
We cannot accept unilateral acts in advance of a
settlement. They cast a pall on the momentum for a
resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. It is
perfectly clear that unilateral actions cancel out the
efforts made by the international community to create a
viable Palestinian State with territorial integrity and
living side by side in peace, security and cooperation
with the State of Israel. What we have to do is find a
mutually acceptable formula that would allow for the
resumption of direct talks and ensure that they proceed

10

successfully. A policy of fait accompli is not
acceptable.
We categorically reject the settlement policy of
Israel. We believe that the acquisition of territory by
force is inadmissible. This is one of the fundamental
principles of contemporary international relations. The
key to establishing the right climate for negotiations is
an Israeli moratorium on settlements, without arbitrary
timeframes or geographical limits.
The overall situation becomes gloomier when we
see the flare-ups of tension around Gaza. We are
concerned by the frequent rocket attacks on southern
Israel. They cause civilian suffering and must end. On
the other hand, we also call for an urgent humanitarian
effort to improve the social and economic situation of
the Palestinian people. More effort must be made to lift
the blockade on Gaza. The international community
must help the Palestinian leadership in its efforts to
establish security and order, reform its law
enforcement structures and thwart all forms of
terrorism. As a practical contribution in that direction,
the Russian Government decided to provide a
$10 million financial contribution in humanitarian
assistance for the Palestinian National Authority. The
question of Palestinian unity is also crucial. It is central
to ensuring progress in the negotiations. The Russian
Federation, together with regional partners, in
particular Egypt, is seeking to resolve this matter.
Overall, we welcome the Israeli decision to
withdraw troops from the northern part of the village of
Al-Ghajar, and we look forward to them doing so. Yet,
we note that other steps are necessary to achieve a final
settlement. This is a difficult situation and the
international community must be more involved. The
Quartet can certainly be helpful, and it has proven its
value. We also attach particular importance to
interaction between the Quartet and the League of Arab
States. We would like to confirm that our proposal for a
Moscow conference on the Middle East still stands. If
the direct substantive talks between Palestinians and
Israelis become more sustainable, that would create the
necessary preconditions for convening the conference.
The international mediators and all interested
parties must now urge the Israelis and Palestinians to
resume dialogue as a way of achieving our common
goal of establishing an independent and viable
Palestinian State with territorial integrity coexisting in
peace and security with Israel. The international legal

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

groundwork for that exists, namely, the numerous
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative. As Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev said in his message to
Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian
Authority, on the occasion of the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, achieving that
goal would help to stabilize the region and promote
peaceful coexistence and mutually beneficial
cooperation among all countries and peoples.
Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this important meeting,
which is the annual reaffirmation by the General
Assembly of its commitment to the legitimate struggle
and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. This
meeting coincides with the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, which was
observed yesterday. The Day reminds us that the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine has
remained one of the major challenges for the
international community for the past six decades.
As we are now into the seventh decade of our
collective failure to meet that challenge, prospects for a
final settlement are still elusive. The collective voice of
peace and compassion emanating from various quarters
at the United Nations continues to be ignored. Such
open defiance of the international community
diminishes the prospects of peace and prolongs the
suffering of Palestinians living under occupation.
One institution in the United Nations that has
held aloft the cause of peace in the Middle East is the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. Yesterday, we were briefed on
its annual report (A/65/35). We greatly value the work
of the Committee under the able leadership of the
Permanent Representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Abdou Salam Diallo. We also thank its Rapporteur,
Ambassador Saviour Borg of Malta, for his invaluable
contributions.
The resumption of direct negotiations between
Israelis and the Palestinians in September this year had
rekindled hopes for all of us for sustainable peace in
the Middle East and a permanent political settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian question. But I fear our hopes
and optimism appear to be short-lived, as the window
of opportunity for meaningful and sustained
negotiations is once again closing.

10-66016

Settlement activity by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory is the major hurdle to a long-term
sustainable political process. Settlement activity is a
major provocation, violates international law, vitiates
the atmosphere conducive to negotiations and mutes
voices calling for peace and compassion. For us, the
most disquieting aspect of settlement activity is the
ongoing effort to remove traces of Palestinian heritage
by altering the status of centuries-old mosques,
cemeteries and churches. That effort is endemic in East
Jerusalem, Hebron and Bethlehem. It is being done in
the name of creating new housing spaces or
commissioning other types of buildings. East
Jerusalem is witnessing renewed settlement activity in
the neighbourhoods of Ramot and Pisgat Ze’ev.
Violence by the settlers against their Palestinian
neighbours is a regrettable corollary of this activity.
Israel must stop this illegality. It must also end its
calculated ambiguity on settlements in the West Bank,
with a categorical renunciation of any new project.
Until Israel renounces the construction of new housing
and commercial projects in occupied territory,
settlement activity will continue to derail the
negotiations and cast its ugly shadow on the peace
process.
Any meaningful and viable negotiating process
must run in parallel with improvements in the lives of
the Palestinian people. Millions of Palestinians in the
occupied territories currently live under the shadow of
checkpoints, roadblocks, military siege and separation
walls. Recent measures taken by the Israeli authorities
to ease restrictions on movement in the West Bank and
improve access to Gaza offer some hope. Such
measures must be sustained by a deeper political
commitment to improving livelihoods in Palestine
through respect for human rights, freedom of
movement and the unrestricted flow of trade.
The delegation of Pakistan wishes to take this
opportunity to call upon the international community to
increase its assistance to Palestinian authorities,
especially in connection with plans for building State
institutions. Many independent studies, including the
World Bank’s Economic Monitoring Report, have
praised Palestinian authorities for their efforts in
institution-building and the delivery of public services.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
have projected an 8 per cent growth rate in the West
Bank and Gaza. The economic boom and
entrepreneurship, both of which reflect the resilience of

11

A/65/PV.55

the people of Palestine, can also be a solid edifice for
Palestinian Statehood. It holds immense promise for
lasting peace in the region and must be complemented
by generous development assistance.
We would also urge Member States to address the
financial challenges faced by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). Despite its financial constraints,
caused by unprecedented floods this year, Pakistan will
continue to provide all possible support to UNRWA
and the Palestinian Authority.
The international community must act to rekindle
the hopes of peace through a meaningful negotiating
process. As stated by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, we
must remain united in our demand that Israel respect its
legal obligation as an occupying Power. We believe
that a lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
cannot be achieved without addressing the root cause
of Israeli occupation of Arab territory. The solution
therefore requires the complete withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan and South Lebanon.
We also look forward to a substantive and
objective investigation by the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Inquiry on the freedom flotilla incident of
31 May. The Panel must diligently pursue the matter.
Justice must prevail and those affected must be duly
compensated.
Pakistan shares the collective objective of the
international community for an independent, sovereign
and viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, living side by side and in peace with all
its neighbours. We support lasting peace for all the
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of religion,
ethnicity or nationality. Peace has eluded the region for
far too long. Peace cannot elude the region forever.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wishes to speak on several items — first,
with regard to the peace process.
The continuation of settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, violates international law and undermines
the peace negotiations. We once again call upon Israel
to immediately cease all illegal activities and to
comply with its international obligations. Negotiations

12

must be promptly resumed so that priority can be given
to identifying mutually acceptable arrangements on
borders and security. The Geneva initiative offers
solutions in those two areas that fully respect the
interests of Israel and a Palestinian State, which we
once again call for.
Secondly, with regard to inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, restoring Palestinian unity is essential
for the completion of the peace process and the
reconstruction of Gaza. Switzerland calls on the parties
concerned to redouble their efforts to rapidly reach a
reconciliation agreement. Establishing an electoral
timetable must be at the heart of such an agreement.
Thirdly, with regard to Israel’s restrictions on the
movement of goods and people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the restrictions in Gaza are clearly
disproportionate to the military advantage sought. They
are therefore illegal. There are other solutions for
preserving the security interests of Israel.
It is also imperative that economic and
commercial exchanges and the movement of people
between Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, be restored and that the private sector in
Gaza be able to export to foreign markets. In that
context, we note with interest the recent Israeli
announcement that it will soon allow regular exports of
goods from Gaza. All stakeholders concerned must
work to implement Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) as soon as possible.
To help improve the situation, in June we
proposed an access regime that meets both the needs of
the civilian population in Gaza and the security needs
of Israel. This proposed regime can be adapted for
access by sea.
To continue denying or tolerating this
unacceptable policy of restrictions, whose negative
effects in political, security and humanitarian terms are
glaring, is not a viable option. The continuous
deterioration of the situation in Gaza can only
exacerbate the risk of escalating violence and serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
Finally, Switzerland wishes to express its concern
over the rising tension in Lebanon. It believes that the
interests of justice and stability can be harmonized and
calls on the stakeholders to exercise restraint. Each
victim has a right to justice; impunity is not an option.

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

The Special Tribunal for Lebanon contributes to
that objective. It is, however, important to emphasize
that the presumption of innocence applies to each
defendant as long as he or she has not been found
guilty.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to you,
Mr. President, for convening meetings on this agenda
item, namely, the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.
Despite serious efforts on the part of the
international community, including the international
Quartet and other supportive States, which have sought
to press ahead with the peace process and gave rise
initially to indirect negotiations and later to the
launching of direct negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians, the intransigence of the Israeli
side, Israel’s persistence in constructing settlements
and its disregard for international appeals to stop the
construction of settlements, at least as a goodwill
gesture to boost the negotiating process, have
frustrated all efforts and no tangible achievements have
been arrived at thus far.
The Arab States have demonstrated their serious
desire for peace and have provided an atmosphere
conducive to peace negotiations, but that will not
continue ad infinitum.
It is quite clear that Israel’s military occupation is
the main reason for the problem, although it will not
provide security for Israel. On the contrary, it is the
worst violation of human rights against a defenceless
and persecuted people and is being used as a pretext to
combat violence and terrorism, but, in fact, it is one of
the reasons for terrorism.
The pretext of using excessive military force in
the name of ensuring the security of Israel is false and
pointless, as the struggle of people for liberation from
foreign occupation is a legitimate right and cannot be
equated with military aggression by the occupier. The
Israeli authorities persist in perpetrating numerous
human rights violations against the Arab population
inside the so-called Green Line and continue their
challenges to and defiance of the international
consensus by expanding the illegal settlements with a
view to annexing de facto more Palestinian territory.
That constitutes a blow to international mediation
efforts, particularly those on the part of the Quartet.

10-66016

The State of Qatar believes that solving the question of
Palestine should be through a two-State solution, with
the two States living side by side in peace. Qatar is of
the view that Israeli Government attempts to expand
settlements, particularly around East Jerusalem, thwart
the achievement of a two-State solution on the basis of
the 1967 borders.
The settlements in East Jerusalem threaten the
contiguity of the Palestinian land, a main pillar of the
establishment of the Palestinian State. The Israeli
Government has tried to justify the expansion of
settlements by referring to the so-called natural growth
of settlements. We completely reject that concept.
Settlement activity is illegal and the so-called growth
is not natural.
Israeli public policy encourages settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in East
Jerusalem, through Government bonuses and incentives
to encourage the transfer of Israeli civilians to
Palestinian territory, in contradiction to international
law.
We must also mention continued Israeli violations
of Lebanese sovereignty and refer to Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), as well as to the Israeli
occupation of Lebanese territory and the Syrian Golan.
We would like to reassert the invalidity of Israel’s
decision to annex the Golan and the need to return it to
Syria, as well as to return the remaining Lebanese
territories to Lebanon.
We also wish to re-emphasize the need for a
complete Israeli pull-out from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the 4 June 1967 borders. The international
community has to impose steady pressure on Israel so
as to ensure respect for Security Council resolution 497
(1981), which rejects Israel’s decision to annex the
Syrian Golan and considers it null and void. Three
decades later, that resolution is still awaiting its
implementation by Israel.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the
decision taken by the Council of the League of Arab
States entitled “Occupied Syrian Arab Golan”, adopted
at the Arab Summit at Doha on 30 March 2009. It
emphasizes the need to return the occupied Syrian
Golan to Syria for the sake of achieving a lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
For stability to prevail in Lebanon, Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) must be respected and

13

A/65/PV.55

implemented by all parties, with no discrimination or
selectivity. Constant Israeli flights over Lebanon
constitute the most significant violations of that
resolution, in addition to its continued occupation of
the Shebaa Farms and the Al-Ghajar village.
That threatens the credibility of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as well as the
ability of the Lebanese Government to extend its
sovereignty over its territory. On the other hand, in
order to guarantee the establishment of peace, security
and stability, we emphasize the need to make the
Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction, without exception.
We would like to emphasize our categorical
rejection of the illegal measures taken by Israel in
occupied East Jerusalem and its attempts to alter the
Arab identity of the city, its demographics, its legal
status and its religious character. All these attempts are
null and void and have no legal effect.
The international community is duty-bound to
express its rejection of the Israeli Government’s
attempts to adversely affect Christian and Islamic holy
sites, to demolish homes and evict the Arab population,
and to confiscate their identification papers with a view
to Judaizing the city. Those attempts run counter to
Israel’s obligations as the occupying Power under
international law and run counter to relevant United
Nations resolutions, and threaten any chance of a
peaceful solution to the question of Palestine and the
Arab-Israeli conflict. In addition, they torpedo
international efforts carried out by the Alliance of
Civilizations.
The achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East region can
only be based on the principle of land for peace, the
terms of reference represented in relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Therefore, the Israeli Government has to refrain
from taking extremist positions and from exploiting the
Arab side’s sincere intention to find a way to end the
Middle East crisis.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need
to involve all factions of the Palestinian people in
efforts to bring about the success of peace efforts. Our
Palestinian brothers have to try seriously to foster
national unity in a manner that serves the interests of
the Palestinian people while safeguarding the

14

geographic and political unity of the Palestinian land.
We wish to address proud expressions of our esteem to
our Palestinian brothers for their steadfast stand against
occupation, injustice and persecution.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): We are once again at a
pivotal moment in the Middle East. There are two
paths ahead. One is towards a bright future, the other
towards more of the same. Much will depend on which
path is taken. History will not judge lightly those who
pay lip service to peace but act to perpetuate conflict.
Turkey welcomed the resumption of direct
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority back in September. Since then, we have been
deeply concerned that no tangible progress has been
possible. Turkey continues to support efforts to ensure
a resumption of the direct negotiations. We are
cognizant of the inherent difficulties, but too much
time, energy and political capital have been invested in
that process to let it fail now.
On the other hand, negotiations cannot
realistically continue in good faith as long as the
rampant
illegal
settlement
activity
continues
unchecked, potentially undermining the whole notion
of a two-State solution. Turkey, like countless other
nations, calls on Israel to adhere to its Road Map
obligations and cease and desist from all settlement
activity, including in East Jerusalem. The patience and
the will of the international community on that score
should not be tested. Ultimately, there will have to be
consequences. The Security Council and the Quartet
cannot remain silent forever.
At this point, let me underline that the status of
Jerusalem is one of the core issues of the peace
process, along with borders and refugees, and is
subject to final status negotiations. We therefore
reiterate the importance of preserving the status as well
as the social, cultural and religious fabric of Jerusalem
and call on Israel to refrain from any provocative acts
in the city.
On the other hand, the unlawful blockade on
Gaza has to end. The relevant Security Council
resolutions must be implemented without delay. How
can we effectively combat the spread of extremism in
the Middle East while the unjust and inhumane
collective punishment of a civilian population
continues in Gaza? The Security Council has stated
clearly that the situation in Gaza is unsustainable, and
yet it continues. Like the settlement issue, that

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

continuation raises issues of credibility for the
international community and the United Nations.
With the hope that direct negotiations, once
resumed, can make rapid progress, it is also important
to continue to uphold the basic framework for peace, as
embodied in the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map obligations. It is clear that
there is an international consensus on those
fundamental parameters: a comprehensive peace based
on two States — Israel and an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State — living side by side in
peace and security, with agreed borders based on those
of 1967, Jerusalem as the capital of both States and a
just settlement for refugees. The reaffirmation of those
elements will serve to bring about a timely solution
that addresses the concerns of all.
On the other hand, all the issues in the region are
interlinked, and that is why a comprehensive peace is
necessary in order to ensure that stability prevails in
the region. Therefore, meaningful progress on the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks will be crucial as well. In
that regard, we call for the full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In order for there to be popular support for direct
negotiations and ultimately for the realization of a twoState solution, the conditions of occupation have to be
eased and a positive environment created on the
ground, one that allows for the State-building exercise
in Palestine to make progress.
We welcome the World Bank’s pronouncement
that, at the current pace and performance, the
Palestinian Authority is well-positioned for the
establishment of a State at any point in the near future.
In order for the Palestinian Authority to become
economically viable, obstacles to private sector
development and sustainable growth have to be lifted.
Palestinians need to be able to use more of their land.
They also have to enjoy their fundamental rights and
freedoms.
In short, as the basis for a State is rolled out, the
measures of occupation must be rolled back. In the
meantime, the considerable progress already made by
the Palestinian Authority in State-building must
continue to be supported by the international
community.

10-66016

Developments in Lebanon are also crucial to
peace and security in the region. Turkey attaches great
importance to maintaining the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, and we
support the efforts of the Government. Turkey has been
concerned about rising tensions. As evidenced by
Prime Minister Erdoğan’s visit to Lebanon last week,
we will continue to work to help promote calm.
The Special Tribunal for Lebanon is an
independent body established by the Council at the
request of Lebanon. Its work is of a legal nature and
should not be used to further political agendas. The
hard-won internal peace and stability in Lebanon and
the rule of law must be preserved and respected by all.
Turkey will continue to play its part in a bilateral and
regional context aimed at defusing existing tensions.
Six months have passed since Israel attacked an
international humanitarian aid convoy on the high seas,
killing nine civilians and wounding many others.
Turkey continues to cooperate fully with the Panel of
Inquiry established by the Secretary-General in
accordance with the Security Council presidential
statement of 1 June 2010 (S/PRST/2010/9). After
having received the Turkish interim report, the Panel
submitted its first progress report to the SecretaryGeneral in mid-September. However, four months after
the establishment of the Panel, Israel has yet to present
its findings. Meanwhile, the International Independent
Fact-Finding Mission formed by the Human Rights
Council has issued its report (A/HRC/15/21), which
contains alarming findings, compelling legal arguments
and striking conclusions. We continue to expect Israel
to live up to its responsibilities, acknowledge its
mistakes and act accordingly.
In conclusion, let me emphasize our conviction
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies at the heart of
all of the problems in the Middle East and that, as
such, the current pause in direct negotiations between
the parties cannot last forever. There is no acceptable
alternative to a just and comprehensive settlement. The
status quo is not viable. The relative security that
prevails cannot be taken for granted. Uncertainty
breeds instability, and time is running out. The people
of the region need leadership, not brinksmanship. The
time to act is now.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Please allow
me, at the outset, to express our sincere appreciation
for the scheduling of this discussion on an important

15

A/65/PV.55

subject that demands our collective attention — the
situation in West Asia, a region of great importance and
concern to the entire international community.
Being part of our extended neighbourhood, the
West Asia region is of vital interest to India. The region
is home to nearly 5 million Indians, and is an important
source for meeting India’s energy needs and a region
with which we have deep and intricate ties.
We share the perception that the conflict in West
Asia is essentially political in nature and cannot be
resolved by force. In line with our support for Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), India
supports a negotiated solution that results in a
sovereign, independent, viable and united State of
Palestine, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side with and at peace with Israel, as endorsed
by the Quartet Road Map and Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
India has supported the Arab Peace Initiative,
which calls for the withdrawal of Israel to pre-1967
borders, the recognition of Israel and the establishment
of the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital. India is aware that genuine peace in the region
also requires the resolution of other issues on the
remaining tracks of the Middle East peace process,
including the restoration of other Arab lands that
remain under occupation. Progress on the Lebanese
and Syrian tracks of the peace process is important for
achieving comprehensive and durable peace in the
region.
India welcomes the direct talks between Israel
and Palestine and reiterates its full support for efforts
to achieve a durable, comprehensive and just
settlement. We sincerely hope that the talks and
negotiations will lead to a comprehensive peace
process for a final resolution of the Middle East
conflict.
Given the complexity of the task, unprecedented
determination, goodwill and the capacity to offer and
accept compromises and concessions are needed on all
sides. We sincerely hope that wisdom will prevail and
that, in the resolution of conflicts and differences,
dialogue will triumph over confrontation.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): While this meeting is being held,
international efforts are being intensified to establish
the necessary environment for the resumption of direct

16

negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians with a
view to reaching a two-State solution that includes an
independent State of Palestine with the 4 June 1967
borders and East Jerusalem as its capital, living in
peace and security with the State of Israel. We in
Jordan support those efforts, and we call upon Israel to
reciprocate, so that direct negotiations can resume at
the earliest possible date and deal with all final status
issues, including Jerusalem, refugees, security and
borders. That perspective necessitates the de facto
cessation of all unilateral and condemned Israeli
actions in the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem,
particularly the settlement activities carried out by two
Israeli organizations Ateret Cohanim and Elad, whose
activities constitute violations of the rules of
international law and international humanitarian law
and relevant United Nations resolutions, and violations
of Israel’s obligations as the occupying Power.
The international community should shoulder its
responsibility by compelling Israel to cease
immediately and once and for all of those violations
aimed at imposing faits accomplis, which have been
rejected and threaten the chances for peace. Jordan
calls upon the international community to ensure that
no irresponsible actions are taken that could undermine
the chances for resuming direct negotiations between
the two sides.
The Arab and Islamic States, which constitute
more than one third of the membership of the United
Nations, have expressed their collective commitment to
the pursuit of peace by adhering to the Arab Peace
Initiative, adopted at the Beirut summit conference in
2002, which constitutes the basis for dealing with all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Today, we call upon everyone to take the historic
opportunity provided by this initiative to end the
conflict and establish a just and comprehensive peace
on the basis of two States, end the occupation of
Lebanese and Syrian territory and achieve international
security and stability for all countries and peoples of
the region.
The achievement of peace necessitates radical
change in the tragic situation in which the Palestinian
people have been living, especially in the Gaza Strip.
We call upon the international community to stand by
the Palestinian people and provide them with
humanitarian assistance, end their humanitarian
suffering and move immediately and effectively to

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

make sure that Israel abides by resolution 1860 (2009)
and lifts the blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. We in
Jordan will spare no effort in continuing to provide all
kinds of support to our Palestinian brothers or in
drawing attention to their deep suffering.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People met yesterday to commemorate
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. China’s Premier Wen Jiabao sent a message to
the meeting in which he reiterated China’s firm support
for the people of Palestine in their just cause for
national independence.
At present, the situation in the Middle East
remains complicated and volatile. The question of the
Middle East not only affects the overall situation of the
region, but also has a bearing on the peace and stability
of the world.
The question of Palestine is the crux of the
question of the Middle East. All peoples of the region,
including the peoples of Palestine and Israel, are in
favour of efforts to achieve a political solution to the
question of Palestine, which will contribute to lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East region.
China has always firmly supported the
Palestinians in their just cause to restore their
legitimate national rights and has always advocated for
the settlement of the differences between Palestine and
Israel through dialogue and negotiation and on the
basis of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map for peace in the Middle
East, with the ultimate purpose of creating an
independent State of Palestine, with Palestine and
Israel living in peace with each other.
In early September, direct talks were relaunched
between Palestine and Israel, which offered a new and
important opportunity for a political settlement of the
question of Palestine. China had hoped that the talks
would be able to continue and yield substantive results
at an early date. Regrettably, however, as a result of
Israel’s resettlement activities, the talks were brought
to a complete standstill in less than a month, which has
caused widespread concern and anxiety in the
international community.
The resumption of the talks will not come about
easily. All the parties should treasure this opportunity

10-66016

in the overall interest of achieving peace, stability and
development of the Middle East region. Constructive
measures should be taken and interference avoided, so
that the talks can move forward without interruption.
We call upon Israel to cease immediately all its
settlement activities and the construction of the
separation wall on occupied Palestinian territory,
including the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
At present, the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories remains grave and the
plight of the Palestinian people continues to worsen.
That is neither conducive to regional stability nor
conducive to creating the proper conditions for the
resumption of talks between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. We hope that the parties concerned will
implement the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations in good faith and that the Israelis will
completely lift the blockade of Gaza at an early date,
so that the people of the Gaza Strip will regain the
necessary space for a normal and dignified existence,
with employment and development opportunities. The
international community should continue to play close
attention to the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
and provide more assistance and support to the
Palestinian people.
China is concerned about the continued existence
of internal division among Palestinians and hopes that
the Palestinian parties will place the overall interest of
their people above anything else and settle their
differences through dialogue and consultation, so as to
achieve reconciliation and unity in a joint effort to
create an independent State of Palestine and bring
peace, stability and development to its people.
The Syria and Lebanon tracks are important parts
of the peace process in the Middle East. A
comprehensive settlement of the situation in the
Middle East is impossible without progress on those
two tracks. China firmly supports Syria and Lebanon in
their just cause to safeguard their national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and recover their
occupied territories. China supports the Arab States in
their initiative aimed at achieving comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a responsible major Power, China has contributed
positively to the peace process in the Middle East by
working in its own way to promote peace and
negotiations, including by providing financial and

17

A/65/PV.55

humanitarian assistance within its capacity. China
appreciates the untiring efforts of the international
community over the years to bring about peace for the
benefit of Israel, the Palestinians, Syria and Lebanon
and is ready to join other parties in working to bring
about a lasting, comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East region at an early date.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As we all know, the
Middle East has been subject to conflict for far too
long. For too long, the peoples of that region have been
unable to lead their lives in anything that even vaguely
approaches peace and security. That should be an
unbearable judgment on all of us.
Any lasting peace, of course, can only be brought
about through peaceful means. A just and enduring
peace between Israel and the Palestinians must be
predicated on a two-State solution: a viable and secure
State for the Palestinians and a secure State for Israel,
within defined borders. To achieve that, a great deal
must be done, of course. There have already been
unnecessary delays. Israel’s decision in September not
to extend its settlement moratorium did not help the
peace process. We are encouraged by reports that Israel
is considering a further moratorium on settlement
construction in the West Bank, and we urge it to do so.
A freeze on settlement activity would unquestionably
assist peace efforts.
Australia’s own strong position remains that
Israel and the Palestinians need to meet their respective
obligations under the Road Map. We commend the
efforts by the United States in that regard. We urge all
parties to begin negotiations as soon as possible and to
address final status issues, including the status of
Jerusalem and settlements. We call on all parties not to
undertake any unilateral actions that seek to prejudge
the outcome of those negotiations. The positive
engagement of the broader international community,
including the Quartet members and the countries of the
region, is also essential. That is why Australia
particularly welcomed the Arab Peace Initiative as a
very
constructive
contribution
towards
a
comprehensive peace.
At the same time, Australia unambiguously
supports Israel’s sovereign right to exist within secure
and internationally recognized boundaries. We support
Israel’s right to self-defence, including in the face of
Hamas rocket attacks into southern Israel. Terrorism
should simply be condemned wherever it occurs. It is

18

unfortunate that not everyone in this Hall always does
so.
However, our support for the principle of selfdefence in no way alters our continuing, very
fundamental concern about the humanitarian situation
of the people of Gaza. While we recognize the steps
that Israel has taken recently to ease its restrictions on
goods entering Gaza, it must do more to help increase
the flow of necessary goods and supplies. We have
spoken elsewhere of our concern that schools in Gaza
have not been able to open and that there are United
Nations organizations still facing difficulties in getting
goods into Gaza for their work. The situation in Gaza
remains serious. It must be addressed. We again call on
the parties to act urgently to alleviate what is an
unacceptable humanitarian situation.
We support those who are standing strongly
against those who offer only the false hope of
confrontation, violence and terrorism. The continuing
rejection by Hamas of the Quartet principles and its
refusal to recognize Israel are major obstacles to peace.
We call on Hamas to release Gilad Shalit
unconditionally and without delay.
One way Australia has been demonstrating its
commitment is through the development and
humanitarian assistance that we give to the Palestinian
territories — around $150 million in the past few
years. On the humanitarian side, a long-standing part
of Australia’s contribution to peace has been through
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, to which
we have provided around $90 million since 2001. The
Australian Foreign Minister will visit the region in the
coming weeks, and he will have more to say about
Australia’s ongoing strong support to the agency.
Briefly, with regard to Lebanon, we are
concerned at recent rhetoric. We remain firm in our
support for the sovereignty, the political independence
and the unity of the Lebanese State and its people. The
independence of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon as
an international judicial instrument needs to be
respected. It should be allowed to complete its work.
We reiterate our call for Hizbullah to disarm in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1559
(2004). We welcome Israel’s in-principle announcement to
withdraw from the northern part of Al-Ghajar. We call
for the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
by all sides. There must be an end to the smuggling of
arms.

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

In conclusion, Australia — like all of us —
recognizes that the path towards peace will inevitably
be very hard. It will require strong political leadership
and, above all, courage and vision. It is very easy to be
glib when people speak of a historic opportunity.
Glibness and cynicism unfortunately often make
history, but they do not make progress. We have a
chance now for progress. Compromise is essential on
both sides, as well as genuine, not ritualized, support
from the broader international community.
When this item is debated again next year, my
delegation looks forward to there being two principal
speakers: the State of Israel and the State of Palestine.
As my Foreign Minister said here in the general debate
this year, all Member States should welcome the
prospect of both an Israel and a Palestinian State at the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
newly released reports on the question of Palestine,
particularly the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/65/35), once again bear witness to the
unfortunate reality that, in the period under
consideration, the Israeli regime has continued with its
crimes against the defenceless Palestinian people and
has been systematically altering the Palestinian land
through unlawful policies and practices. It is evident
that such a regime cannot be a righteous and trusted
partner in negotiations for a peace agreement.
The arrogant and occupying Powers have made
use of all their force, distortion and violence over the
past decades in order to establish their control. They
are trying to make the Middle East a platform for their
expansionist policies for other regions of the world.
They are not satisfied with anything less than bending
the region to their will.
In that respect, I have to make it clear that in the
history of the existence of the Zionist regime, there has
been nothing but crimes: the killing of men, women
and children in Palestine, the use of banned weapons
and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons, indiscriminate
assassinations, attacks on civilians and aid convoys in
international waters, and war crimes in Lebanon and
Palestine. All those ugly acts have become routine
affairs for the occupying regime.
The arrogant and occupying Powers have long
attempted to create divisions in the Middle East region.
They want to divide peoples composed of varied

10-66016

religions and denominations that have lived together in
harmony and coexistence. They want to harm brotherly
relations among nations and peoples, such as the
friendly relations that so happily exist among the
Lebanese, Syrian, Iranian and other nations and
peoples in the region.
In Lebanon, we find that the sinful hand of
treachery assassinated the former Prime Minister, a
respected person, and then we see how news is
fabricated to direct accusations at other respected
groups and leaders in an effort to sow seeds of division.
Creating sectarian sensitivity and denominational
tension and division is a well-known tactic. The
enemies of humanity did not and do not want the
people of the region to be united, independent and
developed. However, the region’s nations know well
that the symbols of might are unity and solidarity.
The only way to solve the Palestinian issue and
establish peace rooted in the region is to admit the
sovereign right of Palestine and to end the occupation.
The Palestinian people should be allowed to freely
express their opinions regarding their future. There is
no doubt that the Palestinian people can exercise their
national sovereignty themselves.
In November last year, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 64/10 on the follow-up to the report
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict. But no concrete action has been taken
to bring to justice the Israeli perpetrators of the crimes
reported in the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).
The question remains, when and where impunity
for the criminals will end. The time has come for the
United Nations to prove that it is an effective
organization representing the will of the people of the
world. Rather than recognizing occupation, the United
Nations should recognize the legitimacy and right of
the Palestinian people to exercise their sovereignty and
should bring the criminals to justice.
Those are prerequisites to lasting stability in the
Middle East. Trust and confidence, together with the
active engagement of the international community, is
the only way forward to peace.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to address
the situation in the Middle East in the General
Assembly.

19

A/65/PV.55

The United Nations has been addressing the
situation in the Middle East since the Organization was
founded. It is not easy, but we believe achieving peace
between Israel and its neighbours is one of the most
important challenges we face today. Japan is convinced
that progress towards a comprehensive peace in the
Middle East will ease tension in the region and
contribute to further prosperity.
Japan supports a two-State solution in which
Israel and a future independent Palestinian State live
side by side in peace and security. Japan remains
convinced that a two-State solution achieved through
sincere negotiations is the only way to achieve durable
long-term peace. We strongly encourage both parties to
continue the direct negotiations that started at the
beginning of September. We support the United States
efforts to restart the negotiations.
The two parties must abide by their obligations
under previous agreements, most importantly the Road
Map. We call on Israel — as we have done on so many
previous occasions — to freeze its settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. We
strongly urge it to extend the settlement freeze. Any
step that could prejudice the final status negotiations
should not be taken.
At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfil its commitment to cease violence and work
against incitement.
Japan strongly supports the State-building efforts
of the Palestinian Authority under the leadership of
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad. During
his visit to Japan last week, Japanese leaders expressed
to Prime Minister Fayyad our continued commitment
to assist the Palestinians. We are providing
approximately $100 million in assistance during the
current fiscal year.
Japan will continue to advance the “corridor for
peace and prosperity” initiative with a view to building
an agro-industrial park in Jericho by the end of 2012.
Japan is also considering working together with East
Asian countries to assist Palestinian State-building
efforts.
Japan supports the vision that the borders under
the two-State solution should be defined through
negotiations and be based on the 1967 lines, with
mutually agreed swaps, in a way that will achieve the

20

peaceful coexistence of a viable Palestinian State and
Israel, both with secure and recognized borders.
The final status of Jerusalem should be resolved
through negotiations in a way that reconciles the
positions of both parties on their future capital. Japan
stresses that it will not recognize any act that may
prejudge the final status of Jerusalem, including Israeli
annexation of East Jerusalem. We express deep concern
about acts that change the existing conditions of East
Jerusalem, such as the demolition of Palestinian
houses.
The Palestinian refugee issue should be resolved
through negotiations between the parties concerned.
Japan appreciates and commends the activities of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East. Japan has
decided to make a contribution of $10 million, in
addition to the regular contributions we have made so
far.
With regard to the Gaza Strip, the measures taken
by Israel to ease the blockade is a positive step, but
Japan remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation there. We stress the importance of further
easing the blockade while preventing the inflow of
weapons into the Gaza Strip.
Japan welcomes Israel’s easing of restrictions on
movement and access in the West Bank, which has
contributed to the development of the Palestinian
economy, and hopes that Israel will further ease such
restrictions.
Japan has recently made clear its stance on peace
in the Middle East, as I have just elaborated in a policy
paper. In addition to the assistance we provide to the
Palestinians, we have also invited promising Israeli and
Palestinian youths to spend time together in Japan as
part of a confidence-building measure.
Regarding Lebanon, we reaffirm our support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon and the full implementation
of all relevant Security Council resolutions. We are
alarmed by some of the statements made within
Lebanon about the present situation, and we call on all
parties to act responsibly. We strongly support the work
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for the
full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and in
maintaining calm in its area of operation. We also
firmly support the work of the Special Tribunal for

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

Lebanon, an independent international judicial body.
The Tribunal should continue to carry out its mandate
without any interference, which will contribute to
ending impunity. We also look forward to early
resumption of talks on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our call
on both parties to make the difficult decisions now to
advance peace. We believe that waiting may create
circumstances that will make it more difficult to
achieve peace. Japan will continue to make its efforts
to realize a just and comprehensive peace in the region
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Road Map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
I would like to inform members that the
Assembly will take action on draft resolutions
A/65/L.18 and L.19, under agenda item 36, after taking
action on draft resolutions A/65/L.14 through L.17,
under agenda item 37.
Agenda item 37
Question of Palestine (continued)
Draft resolutions A/65/L.14, A/65/L.15,
A/65/L.16 and A/65/L.17
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held a debate on this item at
its 53rd and 54th plenary meetings, on 29 and
30 November.
Before the Assembly takes action on the draft
resolutions one by one, I remind members that they
will have an opportunity to explain their votes on all
four draft resolutions before and after action is taken
on all of them.
The Assembly will now proceed to take action on
draft resolutions A/65/L.14 through A/65/L.17.
We turn first to draft resolution A/65/L.14,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to

10-66016

announce that since the introduction of draft resolution
A/65/L.14, Cyprus has become a sponsor.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.14.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,

21

A/65/PV.55

Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay.
Draft resolution A/65/L.14 was adopted by 112
votes to 9, with 54 abstentions (resolution 65/13).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour; the delegation of Japan advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President (spoke in French): We turn next to
draft resolution A/65/L.15, entitled “Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”. I now give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the introduction
of draft resolution A/65/L.15, Cyprus and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela have become sponsors.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.15.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Chile, China, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines,

22

Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, New
Zealand, Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/65/L.15 was adopted by 110
votes to 9, with 56 abstentions (resolution 65/14).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in French): We turn now to
draft resolution A/65/L.16, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the introduction
of draft resolution A/65/L.16, Cyprus and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela have become sponsors.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.16.
A recorded vote has been requested.

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.

10-66016

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Tonga.
Draft resolution A/65/L.16 was adopted by 167
votes to 8, with 2 abstentions (resolution 65/15).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now turn to draft resolution A/65/L.17, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the introduction
of draft resolution A/65/L.17, Maldives and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have become
sponsors.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.17.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,

23

A/65/PV.55

Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Tonga.
Draft resolution A/65/L.17 was adopted by 165
votes to 7, with 4 abstentions (resolution 65/16).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in French): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): As it does every year,
Israel voted against the draft resolutions under agenda
item 37, on the question of Palestine. Our position has
not changed precisely because the one-sided language
and one-sided narrative of those resolutions remains
the same. Indeed, they are completely divorced from
reality. Let me give three examples.

24

The first concerns resolution 65/16, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
How can we adopt a resolution about a peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine that calls on
only one side to make compromises? How can we
adopt a resolution about a peaceful settlement that
neglects to mention the fundamental security threats
that stand in the way of that peaceful settlement, such
as the fact that 1 million Israeli civilians live in daily
fear of rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip, the constant
arms smuggling to the Gaza Strip and so on.
The resolution before us says nothing about
Hamas violence towards Israeli citizens or against its
people or against United Nations personnel and
facilities.
How can we talk about a peaceful settlement in a
resolution that does not mention that Corporal Gilad
Shalit has been held captive by Hamas for the last four
and a half years, his whereabouts unknown and his
rights denied? Why is there no reference to the positive
developments that have taken place over the past year?
This resolution, for example, says nothing about
the measures enacted by Israel to promote economic
activity for the Palestinians. Despite legitimate security
concerns and continued terrorism, Israel has removed
hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints in the West
Bank. According to the International Monetary Fund,
that helped to spur economic growth of 9 per cent in
the area during the first half of 2010. The resolution
ignores the fact that as of June 2010, Israel allows
entry of all goods into Gaza, except for dual-use items
that can be used for military purposes.
Those are only a few examples of the many
egregious flaws in that resolution.
I turn now to resolutions 65/13 through 65/15,
which refer to the many United Nations bodies
dedicated to the Palestinian issue. The disproportionate
number of entities focused on that issue reflects a clear
misallocation of United Nations resources, given the
many important challenges facing the Organization.
Israel believes that Member States should focus
on supporting entities that provide real support for the
Palestinian people, instead of continuously using
United Nations bodies to perpetuate and politicize its
agenda.
For all those reasons and others, Israel voted
against these resolutions.

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

Mr. Erdman (United States of America): With
respect to the situation in the Middle East, the United
States is working vigorously towards a comprehensive
Arab-Israeli peace, resulting in two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. In
that context, we are disheartened to be presented with
unbalanced resolutions that place demands on Israel
but fail to acknowledge the obligations and difficult
steps required of both sides.
The resolutions under today’s agenda items, in
combination with 13 other draft resolutions that will
come before the General Assembly once again this
year, clearly illustrate a pattern of institutional bias
directed at one Member State of the United Nations.
That pattern is unlike that of the General Assembly in
its handling of any other issue. These resolutions are
biased, wasteful and redundant, and do nothing to
advance the peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict that we all seek.
Let me again highlight three annual resolutions
that renew the mandate of United Nations bodies
established more than a generation ago and that
perpetuate this institutional bias.
The resources expended by the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories should be directed towards more pressing
issues, including direct assistance to Palestinians. We
reiterate our call for all Member States to review
seriously how, if at all, the continued existence of those
bodies actually contributes to a solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict.
The draft resolutions related to the Arab-Israeli
conflict that the Assembly will be consider in the
coming weeks presuppose the outcome of permanent
status negotiations, making it that much more difficult
for the parties to resolve them. Those issues properly
belong in bilateral negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians.
The United States is committed to working with
the parties to achieve a comprehensive Arab-Israeli
peace, including a two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We believe that through good-faith
negotiations, the parties can mutually agree on an
outcome that ends the conflict and reconciles the

10-66016

Palestinians’ goal of an independent and viable State
based on the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps,
and the Israeli goal of a Jewish State with secure and
recognized
borders
that
reflect
subsequent
developments and meet Israeli security requirements.
Those who want a Palestinian State should do all
they can to support the parties’ efforts to bring about a
just and lasting peace and should do nothing to hinder
them. Again, the United States sees no contradiction
whatsoever between support for the Palestinian people
and support for Israel.
The United States recently announced an
additional $150 million in direct assistance to the
Palestinian Authority, bringing our total direct budget
support for the year to $225 million. In addition, the
United States remains the largest single donor to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, having contributed
$237.8 million to date in 2010.
It is impossible to see how support for the
resolutions before us today contributes to a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. We cannot support these
resolutions, but we will remain focused on direct
negotiations — the only means by which the parties
will be able to conclude an agreement to achieve
Palestinian aspirations for sovereignty while ensuring
the long-term security of Israel.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/65/L.18 and A/65/L.19)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held a debate on this item
earlier in today’s plenary meeting.
The General Assembly will now take decisions on
draft resolutions A/65/L.18 and A/65/L.19.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.18. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

25

A/65/PV.55

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America.

26

Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Panama, Tonga.
Draft resolution A/65/L.18 was adopted by 166
votes to 6, with 4 abstentions (resolution 65/17).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in French): We will now
consider draft resolution A/65/L.19, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the introduction
of draft resolution A/65/L.19, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia and Maldives have become sponsors.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.19. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Draft resolution A/65/L.19 was adopted by 118
votes to 7, with 52 abstentions (resolution 65/18).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in French): Three Member
States have requested the floor to speak in explanation
of vote after the voting. Before giving the floor to
those speakers, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of
Argentina and Brazil on the situation in the Middle
East. I wish in particular to explain the votes of the
delegations of Argentina and Brazil on resolution
65/18, on the Syrian Golan, which the General
Assembly has just adopted.
Argentina and Brazil voted in favour of that
resolution because we believe that its essential aspect
is linked to the illicit nature of the acquisition of
territory by force. Article 4, paragraph 2, of the United
Nations Charter prohibits the threat or use of force

10-66016

against the territorial integrity of a State. That is a
standard of international law.
At the same time, I wish to clarify the position of
our delegations with regard to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the contents of
that paragraph, in particular the reference to “the line
of 4 June 1967”.
Argentina and Brazil believe that it is important
to make progress in the search for a solution in the
Syrian-Israeli track in the Middle East conflict in a
manner that will put an end to the occupation of the
Golan Heights. That is why on this occasion, once
again, on behalf of the Governments of Argentina and
Brazil, I wish to urge the authorities of Israel and Syria
to resume negotiations in order to find a definitive
solution to the Syrian Golan situation, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation expresses its deep appreciation
and gratitude to the General Assembly, which since
1981 has continuously voted in the majority for peace,
justice and law and which has now adopted resolution
65/18, entitled “The Syrian Golan”, as well as the other
resolutions relating to the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East.
The continuing response of the international
community in support of these resolutions shows the
adherence of Member States to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and their
rejection of foreign occupation, backing thereby our
legitimate right to recover our territory occupied by
Israel for more than 40 years.
Voting for these resolutions by the overwhelming
majority of the Member States sends a clear
international message to Israel to the effect that
occupation, assassination, expansionist and aggressive
policies, the construction of settlements, the imposition
of faits accomplis and annexation of the territories of
others by force are all rejected practices that violate the
Charter as well as the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949.
For those reasons, those practices have been
condemned by the international community. The world
says with one voice that comprehensive and just peace
can be achieved by going back to the terms of
reference, including the resolutions that have just been

27

A/65/PV.55

voted upon. That presupposes the need for an Israeli
partner in order to achieve peace, which is not the case
right now. It also means the return of all occupied Arab
territories, including the Golan and Jerusalem, to the
lines of 4 June 1967, and the establishment of an
independent Palestine with Al-Quds as its capital,
because the continuation of occupation runs counter to
peace and requires exhausting all means to terminate
that occupation.
Israel’s provocative actions of late, particularly
with regard to conducting a so-called plebiscite on the
destiny of the Golan and Jerusalem, are completely
rejected and internationally deplored. Moreover, they
are illegal. Nor do they change the fact that the Golan
is an occupied Syrian territory and is thus
non-negotiable. The recovery of the Golan in full to the
4 June 1967 line is the only basis for establishing
peace.
Once again, I reiterate my country’s thanks to all
the States that sponsored the draft resolution entitled
“The Syrian Golan”. I wish also to express our
gratitude to those who voted in favour of it.
By the same token, I would like to reiterate my
country’s call for achieving just and comprehensive
peace on the basis of resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), as well as the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative. I also wish to assert Syria’s insistence, more
than ever, on liberating the Golan to the line of 4 June
1967, purging it of settlements and terminating Israeli
occupation by all means guaranteed under international
law, under the aegis of which we are meeting here.
Once again, we would like to emphasize that
Syria’s calls for peace do not mean concessions to be
made by Israel and pronounced by it as painful. Rather,
these are usurped rights and lands that must be returned
in full to their original owners. This is the meaning of a
genuine, just and comprehensive peace around which
there is international unanimity.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to put on record here in the Assembly that my
delegation, in the spirit of solidarity with the
Palestinian people and cause, and with other peoples
under occupation, voted in favour of all the resolutions
just adopted — resolutions 65/13, 65/14, 65/15 and
65/16 — under agenda item 37, “The question of

28

Palestine”, and also resolutions 65/17 and 65/18, under
agenda item 36, “The situation in the Middle East”.
Nevertheless, I would like to express my
delegation’s reservations on those parts of the
resolutions that might be construed as recognition of
the Israeli regime.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to begin
by expressing to you, Mr. President, the deepest
appreciation for the patience and principled
commitment to justice in our region that you have
demonstrated yesterday, during the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, and today, by
being with us in both the morning and afternoon
meetings of the Assembly. The delegation of Palestine
would like to put on record our deepest appreciation
for such a principled position.
We would also like to express our gratitude and
thanks to all countries that sponsored the resolutions
related to the question of Palestine and to the situation
in the Middle East, and to all those who voted in
favour.
We believe that the results of the voting serve as
a clear demonstration of where the international
community stands on the issue of justice as it relates to
the question of Palestine. We are very grateful for that
support. It gives our people additional strength to
continue their struggle to end occupation and,
hopefully, to actualize the dream of all of us. President
Barack Obama so accurately articulated that dream in
September (see A/65/PV.11) when he said that maybe
next year, around this time, a new State will be joining
the United Nations.
Some people think these resolutions, when they
are adopted by such an overwhelming majority, are
one-sided. The entire international community and
huge blocs of nations — the Non-Aligned Movement,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Arab
Group, the European Union, the African Group, the
Caribbean Community — in short, everywhere one
looks, there is a huge number of countries that voted in
favour. Are all of those people pushing an agenda with
a one-sided viewpoint? I do not believe so. I think that
assertion is ridiculous, and I do not believe that anyone
can take it seriously.

10-66016

A/65/PV.55

With regard to the issue of asking one side to
make concessions, I think we, the Palestinian people,
made historic concessions in 1974, when we accepted
the notion of the two-State solution. We legislated that
in our proclamation of independence in 1988.
I think that when the Arab nations adopted the
Arab Peace Initiative — which calls for the total
withdrawal of Israel from all the areas it occupied in
1967 and for the independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in exchange for the
normalization of relations with the State of Israel —
we made painful concessions, while the other side is
not even accepting small concessions as are reflected
in a resolution that is so balanced, such as the one on
peaceful settlement.
The last comment I want to make is: what is the
value of these resolutions? These resolutions uphold
international law, and that is the biggest help that can

10-66016

be provided to a serious negotiation process leading to
peace between us and the Israelis. That is the value of
these resolutions, and if some think we are not in the
business of upholding international law in the United
Nations, I would like them to explain to me and to all
of us what kind of business, then, we are engaged in. I
think that upholding international law is a huge
contribution to any peace process and to the success of
that process.
We thank you again, Mr. President, and would
like to say that it has been a very inspiring two days for
us, the Palestinian people. I am sure that this will help
us to accomplish our objectives as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 36.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

29
