S/PV.7947

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7947th meeting

Tuesday, 23 May 2017, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14652 (E)
*1714652*

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.

were recently killed in the Central African Republic.
They accordingly deserve that we pay tribute to them,
but they also deserve our best efforts to ensure that our
peacekeepers are afforded the best possible conditions
in which to discharge their mandates and protect the
population, which they must serve now.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Lieutenant General Derrick Mbuyiselo Mgwebi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Major General Jai Shanker Menon, Head of
Mission and Force Commander of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force; Lieutenant General
Balla Keïta, Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic; and Major General
Salihu Zaway Uba, Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: At the outset I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting with the Force
Commanders of our peacekeeping operations. We have
the pleasure of welcoming the Force Commanders to
New York this week for our annual conference. This
occasion is an opportunity for very useful and valuable
exchanges with them. I think that it is particularly
relevant and important to hold this meeting under the
authority of the Secretary-General and in line with
the orientation that has been provided to us. We are
stepping up our efforts to make peacekeeping more
efficient and effective.
Before deferring to the Force Commanders, I would
like to express to them, their officers and soldiers our
gratitude for their service, and I would like in particular
to pay tribute to the sacrifices made by soldiers under
their command.
As you know, Sir, yesterday another two of our
peacekeepers from Chad were killed in northern Mali,
following other incidents both in Mali and in other
countries. Sadly, I also had the occasion to attend the
ceremony that paid tribute to the five peacekeepers who
2/31

23/05/2017

Without any further delay, I would suggest giving
the floor to the four Force Commanders. Each of
them will shed light on the specific aspects of their
respective missions. Lieutenant General Mgwebi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, will address the challenges of conducting
military operations in a peacekeeping operation. Major
General Menon, Head of Mission and Force Commander
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, will talk about the challenges of a mission
that does not fall under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations but is known as a Chapter VI
mission. Lieutenant General Keïta, Force Commander
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
will address the challenges of robust peacekeeping.
We recently had the opportunity together to directly
witness those challenges. Lastly, Major General Uba,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, will talk about the drawdown of a peacekeeping
operation, which, as everyone knows, is the case for our
operation in Liberia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for the information that he has provided us.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Mgwebi.
Lieutenant General Mgwebi: It is an honour and
privilege for me to have been asked to brief the Security
Council today. I have been with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for the past 15
months. MONUSCO is a very complex and politically
charged mission. I am going to attempt to cover the
challenges that have faced us over the past 15 months.
I trust that the challenges of which we will be speaking
will be similar to those facing my colleagues who are
Force Commanders elsewhere.
One of the most important aspects is the mandate
itself. When it comes to the actual drafting of the
mandate, it is also critical that its authors take into
account that its implementation will be critical for its
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

success and that any possible exit strategy should be
understood at the earliest stages, while taking into
account the complexities of the conflict and specific
factors, such as the country’s size, the fault lines
leading to and defining the conflict in its present state
and the allocation of resources needed so as to be able
to conduct the mission itself. That speaks to the nature
of the mandate itself.
Once the mandate has been issued, the Secretariat,
the mission and the force’s formulation and
interpretation of the mandate become critical, because
if there is a failure to understand the mission’s concept
of operation, which underlies campaign planning by
the force, challenges and differences of opinion might
result in connection with how to move the mission
forward. The MONUSCO mandate has just been
extended pursuant to resolution 2348 (2017), which
calls for the reduction of the force to a troop ceiling of
16,215. That is happening at a very interesting time in
the sense that, as a mission and a force, we are expected
to deal with the issue of the protection of civilians in
a country approximately the size of Western Europe,
added to which we are tasked with the objective of
supporting the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the holding of elections — which was
not included in the previous mandate. If that is what
is expected of us while we are called on to reduce the
force, that becomes challenging.
With regard to current developments, the force
was initially deployed to a greater degree in the east,
whereas there are currently more problems in the
southern sector. Moving the force is becoming difficult,
as the statement of unit requirements issued by the
Office of Military Affairs and the memorandums of
understanding (MOU) signed by Member States tend to
confine the troops at my disposal to a greater degree in
the east. Therefore, if I must move forces from the east
to where there is a challenge, it means having to speak
to the Office of Military Affairs and the Permanent
Missions that must communicate with their capitals
so as to obtain agreement allowing the forces to move.
In terms of reaction-and-response time, that process
takes time and causes delays. It becomes critical for
the language of the statement of unit requirements and
the MOUs to allow the Force Commander to use forces
available to him in the part of the country in need and
not in specified areas.

S/PV.7947

That represents a challenge in terms of commandand-control, policy-writing and giving direction to the
Force Commander to use the forces at his disposal.
Aware that we are expected to deal with armed
groups, especially the foreign armed groups within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the way in which
the MONUSCO mandates are written tends to provide
for two forces. One is the Intervention Brigade, which is
mandated to conduct targeted operations, whereas the
rest of the Force, commonly known as the framework
brigades, is expected to conduct only normal, and not
targeted, operations. In terms of the cohesion of the
force, that then becomes a challenge to command-andcontrol, which then makes the Force Commander’s task
a bit of a challenge to achieve what needs to be achieved.
With regard to the assets and capabilities that are
available, the absence of infrastructure such as roads in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo makes moving
forces from one area to another very difficult. The way
in which the mandate is written expects the force to be
agile, flexible, versatile and mobile. In order to achieve
that, the assets must be available in order for the
mandate to be implemented. Unfortunately, such assets
are often not available on the ground. In the Kasais,
for example, I had to move a force from South Kivu
to the Kasais. Because of the limited Mission support
available, including the people required to provide
the assets that were are not available on the ground,
I was able to move only soldiers and their personal
equipment; no main equipment could be moved. The
soldiers have been on the ground now for the past three
weeks, still awaiting the heavy-lift aircraft to move the
vehicles. The Ilyushin 76, which is expected, is not yet
on the ground, and it has been almost three weeks. That
leaves the troops vulnerable on the ground. How then
do we ensure that the forces and the support element,
which falls under the civilian side of the operation,
are responsive to the requirements of operations? That
becomes a challenge when it comes to moving the
forces to where they are expected to be.
Missions are expected to protect civilians and
rightly so. A very good paper has been written on
the three tiers of protection-of-civilians mandates:
political strategy, physical protection and a conducive
environment. The Mission is made up of civilian,
police and military or force components. The challenge
within the mission itself is to achieve a comprehensive
integrated approach. Mission leadership must look at
that and ensure that all components begin to play their

17-146523/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

role, so as to avoid a situation where, when we reach
the physical stage, it is already a bit too late. At the
political level, we must ensure that we are able to, at
least, prevent and anticipate events occurring.
According to a report published by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, which is tasked with
evaluating the implementation and results of the
protection of civilians mandates,
“the chain linking the intent of the Security
Council to the actions of the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and peacekeeping
missions themselves remains broken when it comes
to the use of force” (A/68/787, summary).
The question of the use of force as mentioned by the
report must be looked at by the United Nations because
interpretations by some contingents on the ground are
not necessarily the same. They tend to be eager to use
force when it comes to self-defence, but the part of the
report that speaks to the use of force for the defence
of the mandate leads to different interpretations, which
we need to look at.
In addition, command-and-control is a challenge
because, once again, according to the same report,
there is a
“a de facto dual line of command involving mission
leadership and troop-contributing countries that
regulates the use of force by missions” (ibid.).
That means that, although they are not expressly
stipulated, there are caveats that are not visible and
come from the capitals. At times, forces are not eager to
move forward and do what is expected of them, wishing
to consider whether it is within their mandate or not,
which is a challenge for MONUSCO. With regard to
the issue of targeted operations by the Intervention
Brigade, the Brigade becomes an escape clause for
some of the framework brigades, which claim that a
specific operation is not their job; it is the job of the
Intervention Brigade. That is one of the areas that we
need to look at.
I would like to point out that the principles of
peacekeeping are still valid, but with regard to what
happens on the ground, some of the armed groups are
foreign, criminal and without any political agenda. In
my view, if we speak of consent, that does not apply
to them. If we speak of impartiality, that does not
apply to them. If we speak of the use of force, where
do we stand with them? Impartiality and all of the
4/31

23/05/2017

principles are valid, more so perhaps in peacekeeping.
In peace enforcement, however, where no agreement
has been signed, how do we address the principles of
peacekeeping in today’s conflict situation, in which
we find ourselves dealing with criminal groups, as
opposed to political groups trying to fight for freedom
or independence from the host country?
It is a challenge for us to work with the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially
in politically charged areas such as the Kasais.
Cooperating with them becomes difficult when they are
also found to be committing human rights violations,
but we are expected to support them. How then do we
approach the situation when they are participating in
such abuses? The credibility of the United Nations is
at stake if it is seen to be working with them. In our
experience, when we are present and work closely with
them, their behaviour tends to change; they become
more positive, but in areas in which we are not present,
violations are committed and the environment then
becomes very politically charged.
I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to
speak. I have tried to very briefly highlight some of the
challenges that my colleagues in other areas might be
experiencing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Lieutenant General Mgwebi for his briefing. I recall
that some of thoese subjects were referred to during the
Council’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last year and are certainly relevant to the Council’s
work.
I give the floor to Major General Menon.
Major General Menon: The challenges of
Chapter VI peacekeeping have been acknowledged.
Indeed, that acknowledgement goes as far back as
Dag Hammarskjöld, when he referred to peacekeeping
operations as belonging to “Chapter VI and a half” of
the Charter. However, while we accept that challenges
exist, it is important to state that many improvements
have been made as peacekeeping operations have
evolved, concepts have changed, and legal and operative
guidelines have been transformed. They include, among
others, An Agenda for Peace in 1992, the Supplement
to an Agenda for Peace in 1995, the Brahimi Report
in 2000, the Capstone Doctrine in 2008, the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
in 2015 (S/2015/446) and the work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

It is also notable that as challenges emerge and
the very nature of Peacekeeping Operations evolves
the core principles of peacekeeping have remained
constant, particularly under Chapter VI of the Charter:
consent, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in legitimate defence. Arguably, an expanded
understanding of what constitutes a threat to peace,
as defined in Article 39, has led to a fourth principle.
Violence against civilians has reached levels of cruelty
in conflict beyond comprehension. It includes ethnic
cleansing, genocide, the rape of women and children,
forced displacement, the use of chemical and other
banned weapons and the crisis of refugees and the
displaced. The fourth principle is that of protecting
civil populations, human rights and the protection
of humanitarian operations. The constant vigilance
and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse
represent an unfortunate but necessary example of
where even peacekeepers, seen as a beacon of hope in
the most desperate of circumstances, can fall prey to
the worst aspects of human nature.
Is it possible to determine the conditions required
for successful peacekeeping? That has proved elusive,
as history has taught us. It is my intention in this
short statement to attempt to group the challenges
of Chapter VI peacekeeping operations under three
familiar strategic concepts: ends, ways and means. I
will use my personal experience in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) — which
I have the privilege and honour to lead in a difficult
and challenging period — to highlight the challenges
that exist. Finally, I will conclude by highlighting the
importance of peacekeeping, beset as it is by challenges,
and how we can move forward with that critical task.
It is important for the success of any peacekeeping
operation to have a clear vision for the end — that
is, the outcome. I do not necessarily refer to an “exit
strategy” — although that is important — but, rather, to
a clear idea of what constitutes success. That might be
the observance of a ceasefire or the voluntary settlement
of a dispute. However, even in traditional observation
and monitoring missions, like UNDOF, the existence
of an agreed settlement does not always provide the
condition for success. Persistent belligerence or the
non-commitment of the parties to a settlement after
the initiation of a mission can represent a significant
challenge. That is particularly the case when a shift
occurs in the balance of power, or when a split takes
place.

S/PV.7947

Clearly, it is essential that the parties to an agreement
abide by that agreement. In UNDOF, the particular
challenge has been the entry and presence of a thirdparty belligerent not party to any previous agreement,
not bound to accept the established conventions and not
committed to accepting the presence or role of the United
Nations mission. That can significantly alter the nature
of the original agreement and how it is subsequently
implemented. The intentions of parties can also change,
and the challenge is not always to try and renegotiate
the original settlement — even where possible.
I believe that in order to overcome those particular
challenges, the United Nations mission must have a
clear and robust mandate, and it must also be flexible
and adaptive. Any United Nations mission, particularly
under Chapter VI, must have the ability to transform
itself. It must be able to respond to challenges, adapt its
disposition, tailor its forces and alter its deployments
and focus as the situation requires. That enables the
mission to respond to its environment without becoming
ineffective because the situation has changed. That has
proven to be a significant challenge for UNDOF as we
transition for the third time in four years with the return
to operations in Camp Faouar and on the Bravo side in
Syria. However, with a clear vision, that transformation
is possible. The challenge for Chapter VI operations is
to ensure that the United Nations as an organization
is flexible and agile enough to change as the mission
situation does.
How the mission achieves that end is through
various ways — strategic, operational and tactical.
And the ways can change rapidly. The political,
security and operational situations are all influenced
by the parties — legitimate or otherwise. As we have
experienced directly in UNDOF, third parties become
influential and change the dynamic. The third parties
cannot be ignored, because they also have aims and
agendas that influence and shape the situation. Although
in our specific example the third parties are not party
to the original agreement, they are stakeholders
nevertheless. They also come from the civil population,
which they seek to control and influence, whereas
the civilian population requires protection, security,
humanitarian and human rights assistance.
The challenge for Chapter VI missions is that the
same ways will not always be suitable or possible.
Just because something was acceptable, successful or
agreeable in the past does not mean that it is the right
course of action now. For 40 years UNDOF had a

17-146525/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

particular way of operating, with specific parameters
agreed by Israel and Syria, the parties to the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces.
Those ways were also agreeable and suitable to the
other key factor in peacekeeping operations — the
troop-contributing countries. That way of operating is
no longer suitable — even if it were possible. UNDOF
is currently changing the ways in which it operates. It
must — because the political, security and operational
situations have all changed. The specific challenge
for Chapter VI peacekeeping is to ensure that the new
ways are supported and resourced. The United Nations
as an organization must be open to change, open to
new ways of doing things, not be afraid to chart a new
course, even though the past 40 years have reflected
a successful way of achieving the requirements. The
Organization must be willing, and able, to learn — and
quickly, as the situation demands it.
No mission can operate without the means to do
so — that is, the capability. Capability development
is more than just equipment. It is the right equipment,
in the right place, at the right time, with the right
people qualified and capable of operating it. That
requirement covers a multitude of issues for Chapter VI
peacekeeping operations: troop-contributing country
support; contingent-owned equipment suitable for
deployment; the rotation of troops who have received
the correct environment-specific training in their
home nations — including with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse, cultural awareness and the rules
of engagement; and the complete absence of national
caveats that present commanders with unacceptable
situations on the ground.
In UNDOF, troop-contributing countries have
deployed some contingents without the required
equipment. The support from the deployed troopcontributing countries has been superb in trying to
match the mission’s requirement. Two countries have
started to develop the specific capability for the mission
that they do not possess in their home countries. That
is an admirable commitment, and I commend their
support. I could not achieve my mandate without it.
However, that also presents difficulties. The newly
developed capability has not been fully developed.
The experience is not present on deployment and
must be developed in an environment that is often not
suitable for on-the-job training. The challenge for the
Organization is to match troop-contributing-countrys’
capabilities with the requirement. In moving to achieve
6/31

23/05/2017

new ends and ways, the means available from troopcontributing countries are lacking.
UNDOF is attempting to turn a traditional light
infantry force into one with armoured protection
and firepower as critical force-protection measures.
However, in order to meet the demand, countries
without that capability have to develop it, rather than
countries with experienced capability providing it.
This mismatch of capability versus willingness must
be addressed.
Inter-mission cooperation is also required if Chapter
VI mission operations are to succeed. A good example
of such inter-mission cooperation and coordination,
including with a State that is not covered by the mandate,
is how UNDOF is required to conduct its operational
and administrative moves through Lebanon with full
cooperation, assistance and facilitation by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese
authorities, because of the absence of a crossing across
the ceasefire line between Israel and Syria.
UNDOF is an excellent example of the challenges
facing Chapter VI peacekeeping. For 40 years, it was
a classic Chapter VI mission, observing and reporting
on an agreement between two sovereign States
attempting to avoid war. For 40 years, a specific way
of operating, with minimum means, was sufficient
to achieve the desired end. Since 2011, however, this
has utterly changed. UNDOF and the United Nations
are challenged on a daily basis in transforming and
adapting to a new reality. The ends, ways and means
are all changing, and while this change is happening,
UNDOF is required to achieve its mandate however
it can — limited initially, but now moving back into
Syria and the areas from which it withdrew in 2014.
But UNDOF will not, and cannot, go back to how it
operated for 40 years. The question posed to UNDOF
has not changed, but the answers required have, and
this is the ultimate challenge.
The solution required is an organization that is
flexible and agile enough to change as the mission
situation does. The organization must be willing and
able to learn, and learn quickly. It should be able to
respond quickly to changing situations, including the
allotment of an additional budget if required. And troopcontributing countries, whose support is so critical to
peacekeeping, must be willing to match capability to
requirement, rather than providing support based on
national interest.
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacekeeping, in any guise, is challenging.
However, we should not be looking for the perfect
solution, simply the best possible one. At the start of
this address I referred to Dag Hammarskjöld, who
identified the challenge for the United Nations early by
referring to “Chapter VI and a half” of the Charter. It is
perhaps fitting to end with him also.
Chapter VI peacekeeping is challenging, but so
is anything worthwhile. And peacekeeping is not just
worthwhile, it is essential. As Hammarskjöld said, the
United Nations was not created to take humankind
into paradise, but, rather, to save humankind from
hell. Peacekeepers all over the world try to meet this
challenge on a daily basis. Some of our peacekeepers die
trying to achieve it, as we have so tragically seen only
recently in the Central African Republic and yesterday
in Chad. Our challenge is to ensure that the ends, ways
and means required are available so as to give our
peacekeepers the best possible chance of success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank General
Menon for his comments.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Keïta.
Lieutenant General Keïta (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly thank the Council for
providing me with this opportunity to present to it, in
10 minutes or so, my Mission’s views on an issue that
is of such crucial importance to the Council, namely,
robust peacekeeping.
I am fully aware of the difficulty and delicate
nature of this task, as the Security Council itself
established this concept and has been following its
difficult implementation for several years now. Thus
I am grateful for your understanding regarding this
issue and would like to touch upon, if I may, certain
aspects that will in all likelihood lead to the appropriate
reactions on the part of the Council.
For several years now, we have been seeing
major changes in peacekeeping missions, which are
facing increasingly complex and chaotic conflicts
characterized by rising levels of violence and a
strengthened presence by uncontrollable warring
parties. The tragedies of Srebrenica and Rwanda are
still fresh in our minds, as are those in South Sudan,
Somalia and Mali, which are a challenge to us all.
In many ways, the move towards more robust
mandates was inevitable. An example is the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2013, where a

S/PV.7947

Force Intervention Brigade was established within
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Situated somewhere between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, the main goal of this new approach, which
combines strong political intentionality with aggressive
military action, is to give the peacekeeping missions
concerned the necessary operational credibility,
especially with respect to spoilers. This would allow
them to better protect civilian populations and ensure
that the discharge of their mandates; the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and the
political process are not jeopardized.
However, it is clear that this desire for robust
action, free from artificial constraints of neutrality and
determined to use force as and when necessary, has
fallen short of expectations.
Here I should like to comment briefly on factors that
I believe have hampered the effective implementation
of the concept of a robust mandate. I will also talk about
various pathways for discussion as to how we could
make the appropriate adjustments.
It is our humble view that a robust mandate should
manifest at all levels, from the Security Council to the
troops on the ground, the armed branch of the system.
Indeed, I think that the concept of a robust mandate
has suffered from a deficiency in the original concept,
namely, that the intent to conduct robust and aggressive,
even offensive, action has seemed to take the form of
only operational and tactical action.
But logically, this desire for firm action
should have been translated equally into all of the
dimensions — political, legal and administrative — of
the actions of the impacted missions. In fact, no military
action, vigorous though it might be, can make up for
the shortcomings I have just mentioned if it is not
carried out in support of an appropriately firm policy,
established by an organized structure and operating on
the basis of tailored rules and procedures.
In fact, there is a fundamental contradiction
between, on the one hand, the declared intent to take
a more offensive stance on the basis of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and, on the other, an
implementation framework that remains under Chapter
VI, which, as the Council is aware, involves a role that
is far less ambitious, namely, that of referee between
warring parties.

17-146527/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

For the concept of a robust mandate to actually
lead to vigorous and decisive action, the doctrine
and structure of peacekeeping missions, their focus
and the political posture underlying them, as well as
the resources allocated to them, all must transcend
traditional peacekeeping methods. We therefore need
to finalize this paradigm shift and support this intent to
act with firmness through the necessary psychological,
organizational and doctrinal changes.
Along the same lines, there is a need to strengthen,
make credible and streamline this approach by providing
the resources necessary to ensure that the declared
goals can be effectively met. These changes should also
lead to Member States, in particular troop-contributing
countries, taking a resolute stance to protect suffering
civilian populations and accepting the political and
operational risks inherent to the application of robust
mandates.
The Security Council should demonstrate its resolve
through ongoing political support for missions, which
could also lead to the adoption of sanctions regimes
that are more tailored and aggressive with respect
to individuals and organizations acting as spoilers
in the context of the peace process. This is the same
type of strong message that has to come from regional
organizations. Rightly or wrongly, the perception
is, unfortunately, that some troop-contributing
countries are reluctant and that the Security Council
is sometimes divided because of differing strategic
interests. Those differences are even greater at the level
of regional organizations.
We also have to rethink the internal structure
of peacekeeping missions if we are to give them the
resilience and decision-making agility needed to
implement such robust mandates effectively. For
that, we should give particular emphasis to reducing
red tape and administrative regulations, which lead
to slowdowns, a lack of cohesiveness and serious
handicaps. I should underscore that the regulations that
we are dealing with end up producing logistical support
that is not well adapted to robust operations, owing to
the slowness of the processes and severe restrictions on
the operational use of essential force multipliers such as
military aviation and engineering and transport units.
And it is impossible to conduct effective operations
under such administrative regulations.
Similarly, the principles of exemptions and
flexibility for contingents in the memorandums of
8/31

23/05/2017

understanding and statements of unit requirements
should be reviewed with a critical eye, because they
are two of the most limiting factors for the force’s
effectiveness. They are, frankly, incompatible with the
intensity of engagement, capacity for rapid reaction,
unexpected changes in posture and vigorous supported
action, which are intrinsic to robust operations. Lastly,
within missions, the progress that must be made
is needed at several levels. The forces themselves,
which are at the core of the drive for robust action,
should reflect the necessary reality and consistency
in their numbers, their equipment, their operational
preparedness and their morale. Those parameters
should be thoroughly tested not just before deployment
but also during their entire deployment. Units that do
not meet the required criteria should be withdrawn,
and Force Commanders should be able to demand that
they be repatriated if they are clearly incapable of the
necessary operational effectiveness.
The rules of engagement should also be revisited
in order to enable strong offensive operations so as to
be able to properly protect populations and ensure that
missions have the freedom to manoeuvre and support
their actions. That does not mean giving missions
licence to abuse force but rather helping them make
better use of the weapons they have. While I am aware
that some changes are under way, we will not be able
to realize them fully until we mobilize the fundamental
and rapid change of mindset that I mentioned earlier.
Nonetheless, I believe that is the price we must pay
in order to ensure that the desire for decisive action
expressed in our robust mandates can lead to tangible
results on the ground.
If I may, I would like to refer to our mission,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), which has, to some extent, been able
to embody such a robust approach to peacekeeping
by preventing the slaughter of the civilian population
in a number of areas and in particular by defending
the town of Bambari against a coalition of armed
groups. That operation succeeded because we bent
various administrative rules, challenged some limiting
agreements with troops and changed morale where the
use of force was involved. Our efforts also benefited
from the unequivocal support of the Security Council,
which took targeted measures at the right time.
MINUSCA is an example, even if an imperfect one,
of robust peacekeeping, although we recognize that
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7947

we could have done better without various ongoing
complications. If I may, while apologizing for perhaps
bypassing some of the rules, I would like to say
that I believe MINUSCA is on the road to success.
Despite that, it still needs support, and I would like to
solemnly request that the Council continue to give it
robust support.

establishment of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and a programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. In 2006, in the wake of those successful
elections, UNMIL began a phased drawdown of the
Mission and by 2010 had adjusted troop strengths down
to 7,952, while the police totals, including the formed
police units, were reduced to about 1,375.

In conclusion, I believe that getting the two parts
aligned — on the one hand, the robust mandates
and on the other, the appropriate bodies, means and
procedures — is crucial to bridging the gap between
the expectations of the parties involved and missions’
actual capacities. Only well-equipped and well-trained
troops, working in an environment free of bureaucratic
red tape and supported by firm policy positions at every
level — the Security Council, regional organizations
and partners — can enable us to mobilize effectively
and decisively. I know that not all of the thoughts that
I have shared with the Council can help to solve the
problem definitively and in the short term, but they
accord with the major conclusions of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446). I hope that they will at least help to
emphasize the urgency of speeding up the consolidation
of the concept of robust mandates in order to ensure
that effective peacekeeping operations will enable us to
save thousands of human lives.

As a mission in transition, the Mission handed over
all security responsibilities to the Government of Liberia
in June 2016 and completed its drawdown in February
of this year, leaving only a residual force capacity of
434 made up of a Nigerian company of 230 troops and a
Ukrainian aviation unit and a Pakistani Level II hospital
manned by 105 and 69 troops, respectively. The force
headquarters is compact, consisting of 15 staff officers
and 15 military observers, who are double-hatted and
generally carry out several headquarters functions. The
residual UNPOL contingent is made up of two formed
police units at an authorized strength of 260, and 50
individual police officers, for a total of 310, while
the civilian component consists of 783 international,
national and United Nations volunteer staff. The
Government of Liberia has fully taken over all security
responsibilities and has developed a concrete plan and
timelines for the third post-conflict general election,
scheduled for 10 October.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Lieutenant General Keïta for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Uba.
Major General Uba: I am Major General Salihu
Zaway Uba, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). It is a privilege for me to
address the Security Council and to share some of my
thoughts on our experiences and the challenges brought
on by UNMIL’s drawdown, based on my experience
in the United Nations Mission in Liberia, established
pursuant to resolution 1509 (2003). After 14 years of backto-back civil wars in Liberia, UNMIL was established
with a robust force of about 15,250 personnel, including
formed police units, United Nations Police (UNPOL)
officers and a significant civilian component, whose
job, among other things, was to assist with the peace
processes and support security-sector reform. UNMIL
has worked assiduously ever since in accordance with
the various relevant Security Council resolutions as
they were adopted. The first post-conflict democratic
elections in Liberia were held in 2005, following the

It is a well-known fact that, as countries emerge
from conflict, they undergo critical socioeconomic,
development and political changes in which United
Nations missions are expected to adapt to encourage
depth of reconciliation and peace consolidation within
the national polity. While United Nations transitions
can be as diverse as the contexts in which they take
place and are heavily influenced by decisions made by
host Governments, transitions must be a response to
significant changes in a country’s political, security and
socioeconomic development. The UNMIL transition
was planned to ensure continuity in the development
and security agendas of Liberia with the goal of
consolidating a peace dividend and ensuring the nation
focuses more on building a holistic security system for
the society.
My briefing will focus on drawdown considerations
and associated issues, the current UNMIL configuration
and mandate and proffer some recommendations in
considering the drawdown and related issues.
Guidance for considerations when planning and
managing the transition of United Nations missions

17-146529/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

scheduled for a significant drawdown, withdrawal
or closure are many and varied. The drawdown of
UNMIL considered several planning preparations and
guidance from United Nations Headquarters and the
Mission. These included early and integrated transition
planning, which was firmly rooted in the minds of the
leadership, other staff members and the host nation.
The planning guidance mapped clear objectives of
the drawdown and indicated some benchmarks and
timelines just as the Mission integrated transition
issues into an all-encompassing planning tool. A
planning officer was appointed and dedicated for such
tasks while intermission cooperation with the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire was intensified to
cover gaps in the transition planning process and to
assist in a potential security setback in Liberia by using
the quick reaction force where possible.
During the transition phases, UNMIL inculcated
and engaged the views of the Government of Liberia,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and other international partners in the
entire process of the drawdown. The UNMIL good
offices interfaced and informed on the timing, scope
and expected benchmarks of the transition. The iniative
of UNMIL to engage in regular dialogues and series
of engagements with all stakeholders assisted the
Government of Liberia in buying into the transition
agenda seamlessly. Consultations continued with all,
including civil society groups, opposition parties,
women and minority representatives in Liberia. While
UNMIL was interested in keeping the transition on
track to achieve its objective timelines, the Government
of Liberia was similarly made to see the transition as
its own product in which failure could have a serious
backlash on the Government and the people of Liberia.
Managing the logistics support in the transition was
Herculean to UNMIL, as Pakistani, Bangladeshi and
Chinese engineers were earmarked for repatriation in
the process of the drawdown. Engineering support for
the maintenance of UNMIL main supply routes became
unfeasible due to heavy rain and poor road conditions
in Liberia. UNMIL resorted to the planned use of air to
replenish most critical supplies in some key locations
in the field. Patrols for early-warning and mapping
exercises to assess and report the situation as it truly
was, particularly in the hinterland, became conditional
on friendly weather in the areas. Expired ammunition
certification and disposal and camp maintenance
became an issue owing to a lack of qualified workforce.
10/31

23/05/2017

UNMIL had to resort to borrowing experienced
ammunition technical officers from sister missions for
the certification of ammunition before troops’ rotations.
Consistent with drawdown requirements, UNMIL
engaged national staff capacity to function in some
critically vacated areas, while the need to keep qualified
international staff in support of the Mission to the
end was similarly appraised and balanced. UNMIL
continued to undertake staffing needs assessments to
determine the skills required throughout the drawdown
to liquidation phase with a view to meeting up critical
staffing gaps. Capacity-building and the capability of
the Liberian National Police and the Armed Forces
of Liberia, including other security apparatuses, have
been mixed. There are about 2,000 trained Armed
Forces of Liberia members, including engineering,
band and military police platoons respectively, while
the Liberian National Police is about 5,000 in strength
and mainly domiciled in Monrovia. Equipment and
logistical sustenance have been daunting for the
security services, particularly when deployed outside
Monrovia. UNMIL and other international community
members have been doing the best they could to provide
mentorship, training and logistics to the security
agencies and the Armed Forces of Liberia as the case
may be.
UNMIL transition leading to phased drawdown
of military forces started early following the first
successful post-conflict elections in Liberia. Thereafter,
UNMIL continued to right-size its personnel, coordinate
its activities and collaborate with other international
partners for coherence between peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development necessary for postconflict peace and stability. The Mission drew up a
drawdown plan and continued to implement the plan
by closing its field offices systematically and reducing
its footprints in several endeavours. The consequent
handover of security responsibilities to the Government
of Liberia in June 2016, the establishment of the
transition plan and benchmarks and the visit of the
Strategic Assessment Team in September 2016 were all
part of the drawdown process of UNMIL.
The transition leading to liquidation in June 2018
was supported by resolution 2333 (2016) and a budget
procedure is ongoing in support of such endeavours.
Processes were carefully planned in line with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of
Field Support Liquidation Manual, aptly communicated
to stakeholders and politically supported by the
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Government of Liberia. The review of the strategic
asessment team report and the subsequent release of
resolution 2333 (2016) all underscored the retention of
UNMIL’s residual capacity through Liberia’s general
elections in 2017. That resolution came up with a
mandate that includes the protection of civilians;
support for reform of justice and security institutions by
assisting the Government of Liberia in developing the
leadership, internal management, professionalization
and accountability mechanisms of the Liberian National
Police, with a particular focus on elections security;
the promotion, protection and monitoring of human
rights activities in Liberia; the protection of United
Nations personnel, installations and equipment and
the ensuring of security and freedom of movement of
United Nations and associated personnel; and support
for the capabilities of the Government of Liberia to
meet urgent gaps in the 2017 general elections.
UNMIL has consistently undertaken a proactive
approach to ensure all camps that are closing down
comply with environmental sustainability standards.
All measures necessary are taken regularly to inform
and sensitize Liberians and members of the international
community on the transition timelines. Resolution 2333
(2016) is the final resolution on UNMIL, as it sets out a
final closure timetable for the Mission.
In the broadest sense, a multidimensional mission’s
transition and drawdown indicate significant changes
in its mandated presence in a country. While transition
may include start-up, reconfiguration and drawdown
or withdrawal of a United Nations mission, the need
for early and integrated transition planning needs to be
firmly in the minds of the mission leadership. Planning
considerations addressing the transition phase must be
transparent and flexible and be regularly reviewed and
adjusted to ensure their practical relevance.
A successful United Nations transition will require
broad national buy-in and ownership, strong support of
the Security Council, as well as the major donors and
regional partners. Planning guidance should therefore
involve all relevant partners and engage in high-level
consultations at the United Nations Headquarters and
in broader consultation with national actors, including
key political players, minority group representatives,
civil-society groups, women leaders and the media. The
strategic assessment of field missions must take into
account the need to balance the security forces required
to secure United Nations assets and personnel in the
midst of drawdown and closure of missions.

S/PV.7947

I would like to make a few recommendations.
Planning considerations addressing the transition phase
should be made clear and flexible. The drawdown
of missions should be planned using a graduated
approach, keeping in mind the need to retain a force
of reasonable strength and adequate manpower until
a mission is liquidated. Headquarters should adopt
strategies that will reduce the negative impact of the
drawdown and the withdrawal of mission assets in the
field. A mission-liquidation strategy should be carefully
planned, communicated and politically supported by
both the mission leadership and the host nation. Missions
should undertake early staffing-needs assessment to
determine the skills required throughout the liquidation
phase. Missions should set processes for the building of
national capacities early in the life cycle of a mission.
Information and records management should be given
priority at the outset of a mission — not only during
the liquidation phase. Documentation should include
lessons-learned exercises and after-action reviews of
transition processes and mandate implementation — and
the challenges thereto — undertaken by the outgoing
mission and the lead department.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Major
General Uba for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): After
listening to our briefers during this most important
exercise, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his introductory remarks and, in particular, for bringing
us together around this table. I would also like to thank
the Force Commanders for sharing with the Security
Council their visions of an effective implementation of
the peacekeeping operations mandates for which they
are responsible and which have been assigned to them
by the Council. It has also been an opportunity for them
to give us feedback on what they have experienced day
to day in various theatres of operation.
This event was more than necessary as it takes place
in the context of the review in which we are seeking
to reorienting efforts aimed at adapting peacekeeping
operations and their mandates to the current realities.
We believe that there is nothing more useful for the
Council than to interact with force commanders and
peacekeeping operations in order to better take into
account the challenges and specificities of each theatre.
Let us recall that each operation is sui generis.

17-1465211/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

This meeting is of particular importance to my
delegation because my country, Senegal, is present in
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
with troops totalling 1,513 men, a task force consisting
of an infantry battalion and a tactical helicopter unit. In
the second half of 2017, the number of troops deployed
will increase to 2,253. The helicopter unit will be called
upon to intervene in Liberia should the need arise.
We would once again reiterate our gratitude to
the Force Commanders for the outstanding work they
have accomplished, often in complex and difficult
situations, in carrying out Security Council mandates.
In particular, I commend the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MINUSCA,
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
for their important briefings, which highlighted
the political, security and strategic challenges our
missions are facing. The effective implementation
of these challenges will undoubtedly depend on the
effectiveness of our missions and the image and
credibility of the Organization.
Having said that, I would now like to ask the Force
Commanders a few questions.
With regard to MINUSCA, I would first like to
express our deepest condolences to Lieutenant General
Balla Keïta for the loss of Cambodian and Moroccan
soldiers during clashes over the last few weeks. I
would also like bear witness to our satisfaction for the
professionalism General Keïta has demonstrated in
carrying out his mission. In addition, I would also like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the two Chadian
soldiers who fell in Mali under the flag of MINUSMA.
We therefore express our heartfelt condolences to Chad.
Lieutenant General Keïta mentioned earlier that
attack helicopters were used for the first time to slow
down the advance of armed groups. My first question is
what led him to take this type of decision. This decision,
I would remind the Council, was most courageous as
it was unprecedented. Secondly, I would like to know
whether he thinks that the use of these types of air
assets can play a decisive role in carrying out mandates,
particularly in the context of the protection of civilians.
12/31

23/05/2017

With respect to UNMIL, the Senegalese contingent
was called upon to intervene in Liberia while it was
serving in MINUSMA, that is to say, in Mali. The
experience we saw in the decommissioning of assets
in the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and
their transfer to MINUSCA showed that this type of
operation requires good planning and coordination
between the two missions and the Secretariat. I would
like to ask Major General Salihu Zaway Uba what
arrangements have been made for the reception and
operational integration of this contingent.
With regard to transitions and the exit strategies
for missions, we have seen that this is a most difficult
endeavour, requiring early planning that takes due
account of the conditions on the ground and the objectives
to be attained to close a peacekeeping operation and see
to the needs of making the transition to an integrated
peacebuilding office or other arrangement. Seen in
this light, the transition in Liberia, which will follow
a peacebuilding plan developed as part of the planned
drawdown of UNMIL, could become a benchmark
for other missions to strive to match. I would like to
hear the views of the UNMIL Force Commander on
his experience in planning and strategy with respect
to the orderly withdrawal and exit of UNMIL without
jeopardizing efforts to achieve the long-term goals of
peace and stability.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the Force Commanders for their briefings. They
are a valuable contribution to the current debate on
peacekeeping reform.
In a world where global security challenges are
increasing dramatically, we strongly believe that
peacekeeping should remain a crucial tool for the
maintenance of peace and security. We strongly believe
in it, we are largest contributor of troops among the
Western European and other States Group, and we are
continuing our efforts in this area. Yet resources are
limited and should be utilized a cost-effective way. We
need a more holistic approach, and peace operations
should be defined in a broader context of prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, in a sort of peace
continuum where the quest for political solutions must
be our primary goal.
Peacekeeping missions should therefore be regularly
reviewed to assess their effectiveness, adherence to
their mandate and the need for adjustments to address
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

evolving situations on the ground. This would make it
possible to identify and thereby fill in potential gaps.
In that context, it is of paramount importance to receive
briefings and evaluations from Force Commanders, and
to have in-depth discussions on possible options.
After listening to the Force Commander today,
we are concerned about the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We agree with
Lieutenant General Mbuyiselo Mgwebi that the threat
flaring up all over the country requires an even-more
mobile United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) to ensure the protection of civilians in
several provinces and to assist the Government in the
run-up to the election. In that context, flexibility is key.
We are confident that the last renewal of the mandate,
which also anticipates using troops and assets from
other missions in the region, will provide sufficient
flexibility, and that in coming months MONUSCO will
be able to improve its performance, thereby enhancing
its mobility and effectiveness.
The situation in the Central African Republic
is another example of the different challenges and
asymmetric threats peace missions face today. We
commend the robust posture of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, which prevented armed
groups in the Central African Republic from expanding
their control over larger swathes of the country. However,
it is very unfortunate that in recent weeks, the Mission
has been the target of a deadly attack that resulted in
the death of five peacekeepers and the wounding of
several others. We reiterate our heartfelt condolences to
the families of the victims in Cambodia and Morocco.
I too would like to take this opportunity to express my
condolences to the recent victims in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
On a positive note, I would like to underline the
support of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, which is
making crucial contributions to restoring national
harmony. The involvement of regional actors and the
role of regional and subregional organizations is key
to establishing an effective and successful political
process. In that regard, the European Union can have a
major role in complementing the on-the-ground efforts
of other relevant players.

S/PV.7947

We also believe that the Mutual Engagement
Framework between the international community and
the Central African Republic is proving to be a valuable
instrument for cooperation and a clear example of how
the Mission’s mandate can be linked to the political
process so as to enhance the local ownership of the
stabilization process and to prevent dependence on
the Mission.
As for the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF), its area of operations is quite risky
and the presence of non-State actors can lead to
unintended escalations arising from accidental clashes
between the parties. In the interest of preventive
diplomacy, it is advisable for UNDOF to strengthen its
coordination mechanisms with the parties, following
the same-region model of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and its remarkable tripartite
coordination mechanism. The mechanism has shown
how important the coordination of the liaison function
can be for a peacekeeping mission to maintain stability,
defuse tension and prevent the escalation of incidents.
With regard to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), after almost 14 years everyone recognizes
the success story behind that peacekeeping operation.
Over the years, the presence of the United Nations in
that country helped rebuild what a devastating civil
war had destroyed, leading the Liberian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their own security. At the
same time, the UNMIL case exemplifies a flexible and
modern approach to peacekeeping, based on a gradual
methodology in managing troops and police forces in a
country, on an appropriate integration mechanism with
the other regional peacekeeping operations, as well as
on coordination with the peacebuilding dimension — in
order to ensure an orderly withdrawal in March 2018. An
early disengagement could be counterproductive. Thus,
strategic patience must be at the core of our evaluation.
Finally, I want to thank the presidency for the
opportunity to listen to the Force Commanders and to
engage with them in a fruitful dialogue. We stand ready
to continue to discuss peace missions with troop- and
police-contributing countries, with the common aim
of having smarter peacekeeping missions that are as
effective and accountable as possible.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to have this interactive discussion
with the Force Commanders. Many thanks to them and
to Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.

17-1465213/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Tomorrow is the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers, so I want to begin by paying tribute to all
of our Force Commanders for their bravery, service and
leadership, and to all of the men and women who work
for them in support of United Nations peace operations
around the world. It is United Nations peacekeepers
who turn the words of the Security Council into action
in the real world. They are literally on the front line
of bringing peace and security to the world, serving in
some of the most difficult environments imaginable,
and sometimes they have to put their own lives on the
line in order to protect the world’s most vulnerable
people. Sadly, that dedication and determination on
occasion requires them to pay the ultimate price as two
peacekeepers from Chad did yesterday in Mali. We pay
tribute to their courage and to their ultimate sacrifice.
We should be proud of the service of all
United Nations peacekeepers. The employment of
peacekeepers is truly one of the greatest achievements
of the United Nations over its 72 years of history but,
like the rest of the United Nations, it needs to reform.
It needs to progress with the times and it needs to be
modernized. There is always more that can be done
to make United Nations peacekeeping more efficient
and more effective — better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and capabilities, and stronger mission
performance, not just in driving down all of the sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations down to zero, but in
other aspects of performance as well.
This afternoon we have heard of several of the
challenges facing peacekeeping missions, particular
those operating in high-threat environments. We heard
how missions are changing the ways, means and ends
of their operations. My overarching question is whether
that change is happening fast enough to keep up with
global changes. I would like to illustrate that question
with three more specific concerns.
My first point is about the use of intelligence and
technology in peacekeeping.There has been much
debate on that topic here in New York. Member States
have recently called for greater use of peacekeeping
intelligence in missions, and it is a part of what we
would consider to be the necessary modernization
of peacekeeping. It would be interesting to hear the
views of the Force Commanders on that issue and on
what progress has been made in improving situational
awareness in their missions.
14/31

23/05/2017

My second point has to do with the role of women
in peacekeeping. At the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial in London, many Member States
committed to increasing the number of women in
peacekeeping, specifically by deploying more female
military observers. Collectively, we are a long way from
meeting that commitment of doubling the number of
women in peacekeeping by 2020, and it would be very
helpful to hear suggestions from Force Commanders
about actions that could be taken to meet that very
ambitious target.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, I would
ask a series of questions on how we can make sure
that missions are truly becoming more efficient and
effective. How can we get the right people with the
right skills, the right equipment and the right training
in the right place at the right time? We have been doing
a lot through the series of peacekeeping ministerials
and through force generation conferences in order to
increase the available pool of peacekeepers and thus,
the overall capabilities available. What difference
do the Force Commanders believe that those efforts
have made so far? Are we collectively generating
the capabilities that they need? Are the peacekeepers
reaching them more quickly than before?
I also have a question for the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in response
to his remarks. What is he doing as Force Commander
and what are his colleagues doing to ensure that all
of the troops under their command have the same
understanding of the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including on when the use of force is necessary
and appropriate?
Similarly, it was interesting to hear the points of the
commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic on how too much red tape is slowing down
decisions and making it harder for the more strategic
and robust approach to peacekeeping to be effective. I
would like to hear other ideas as to how we can get rid of
that red tape more broadly, and finally, what we all can
further do to continually drive up both the performance
of individual missions and the accountability between
each mission and the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to underline, once again,
that United Nations peacekeeping, in our view, is the
jewel in the crown of the Organization. It is the unique
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

selling point of the United Nations, and I encourage
everyone involved, including all of us, to keep up the
level of ambition, to ensure that the pace of change is
fast enough to allow peacekeeping to be modernized
and do its job in the twenty-first century ever more
effectively and efficiently so that it can really protect
the people who need that protection.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I, too, should like to begin
by thanking today’s briefers for their very insightful
remarks. Like Matthew Rycroft, I would like to begin
my statement by paying tribute to the brave men and
women serving with the United Nations, who, on a daily
basis, place themselves in some of the most difficult
and dangerous contexts in the world. We appreciate
their commitment, which over the past 70 years has
saved countless lives.
Today’s briefing provides a timely opportunity to
discuss operational challenges across the peacekeeping
realm, not least in the light of the ongoing review of
the United Nations peace and security architecture.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
implementing a more holistic approach to sustaining
peace. That work deserves our full support. We
encourage the Secretary-General to be bold in
his recommendations.
The broader concept of the primacy of politics
is key to ensuring effective peace operations and the
successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
As sustainable peace can only be delivered based
on political solutions, political strategies must be
built across all pillars of the United Nations system.
Military components represent a crucial part of those
integrated strategies. Clear and measurable objectives
accompanied by benchmarks for follow-up and
reporting back to the Security Council should provide
those integrated missions planning and leadership.
Today’s briefings highlighted the diverse challenges
facing various missions and also indicated the need for
a context-specific approach to the configuration of all
missions. That work needs to be supported with highquality conflict analysis, including through intelligence
and analysis jointly prepared by the whole of the United
Nations system.
Experience shows that agreeing more realistic,
context-tailored and flexible mandates will increase the
potential for successful outcomes. Within mandates,
tasks need to be prioritized, sequenced and adjusted
over time, and we encourage efforts to enhance the

S/PV.7947

flexibility and the ability to correct course, including
through frank input from across the system and
enhanced capacity to engage with local communities.
To achieve that, we also need to empower the field,
including by simplifying administrative procedures
and achieving greater delegation of authority, but
also by ensuring that the highest calibre candidates
be appointed to lead those United Nations missions in
the field.
Support for capacity-building needs and better
reporting of caveats by troop- and police-contributing
countries are essential. All peacekeepers, as well as
contributing countries, need to be properly prepared,
trained and equipped so as to meet the challenges that
they will face in the field.
There is an inherent link between security and
human rights. Human-rights components should be
standard in peace operations so as to enhance their
quality and effectiveness, not least in the promotion of
the rights of and protection of civilians. The protection
and promotion of human rights must constitute a
whole-of-mission approach. Furthermore, when a
gender perspective is implemented from the beginning
of a mission, it leads to more operational effectiveness,
better situational awareness and more security for our
troops. All missions should continually report on how
gender considerations are included across operations.
Let me turn now to some of the points raised by
today’s briefers.
First, with regard to drawdowns, the type of crosspillar, political strategies, which were mentioned,
should lay the groundwork for successful drawdowns.
Experience shows us that there is room for improvement
in how the United Nations deals with transitions. Exit
strategies and transitional phases of peacekeeping
operations need to be analysed and planned at an early
stage in cooperation with all relevant actors. Realistic
expectations of what can be achieved in the immediate
aftermath of the drawdown must be coupled with
clear commitments from the Government to further
key structural reforms. We wonder, for example,
if, through the United Nations country team, the
United Nations is equipped and resourced to deliver
on the ambitious peacebuilding plan in Liberia. As
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, we feel
that the Commission has an important role to play in
monitoring and following up so that the international
community can provide the support needed to deliver

17-1465215/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that peacebuilding plan at this important transition
phase for Liberia.
Secondly, if peacekeeping is to be robust, mandates
must be matched with adequate capabilities for missions
to fulfil their objectives. A robust stance will also
require flexibility to adjust to changed circumstances.
Helicopters, intelligence and quick reaction forces, as
well as the proper training of troops, are key in that
regard. In addition to military and police resources, that
is an area in which human rights expertise is essential.
We need to consider short-term objectives in relation to
longer-term consequences when developing strategies
for the protection of civilians. Local engagement is
also essential for understanding conflict dynamics and
allowing the mission to carefully weigh its options.
In conclusion, peacekeeping is an essential, unique
and, according to many assessments, successful
instrument within the United Nations peace and security
toolbox. It is nonetheless essential that it evolves in
response to the changing nature of the challenges that
we face today. In supporting that evolution, we must
not waiver in our commitment to those who serve and
those whom we seek to protect.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Lieutenant General Mgwebi, Major General Menon,
Lieutenant General Keïta and Major General Uba for
their briefings this afternoon and for the commitment
that they have shown to the ideals of the Organization.
We too are very grateful for what they do every day in
their service to the United Nations to protect the world’s
most vulnerable people, and we know that they and the
troops under their command are on the front lines.
Some of those troops, as has been noted by many
colleagues, have made the ultimate sacrifice, and I
would like to extend our deepest condolences with
respect to the deaths of peacekeepers this month in
both the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, as well as those of the
nine other peacekeepers this past year.
We recognize that leading a United Nations
peacekeeping force is extremely challenging. The Force
Commanders are working in increasingly dangerous
environments and, at times, with the half-hearted
commitment of political leaders to the agreements that
led to their deployment. Security Council mandates
have also become more complex and, admittedly in
16/31

23/05/2017

some places, confusing. It is therefore very important
for us to hear today their ground-level insights to the
challenges, which they face.
One challenge of particular concern to us is
that of performance and accountability. As Force
Commanders, they have the most direct influence
over our peacekeepers in the field, and we count
on their leadership as the first line of accountability
for the conduct of the troops and police under their
command. That is particularly true with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse. All of us condemn such
abuse and call for zero tolerance, but they are the ones
who can most directly ensure that those crimes do not
happen on their watch. They also have the clearest
view of peacekeeper performance. If they encounter
performance issues, we need to know. If they help us
identify problems, we can help them address them.
It is much better for the Security Council to learn
of issues early from our own peacekeeping mission
leaders, than to have to deal with the consequences
later. Standardized, objective performance reporting
will help us greatly and we encourage mission leaders
to make effective use of the existing systems to track
and document performance and to embrace those now
in development.
I would now like to touch on individual briefings.
First, I thank Lieutenant General Keïta for his
briefing on robust peacekeeping. We commend him
for the demonstrated willingness of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to take risks
and act decisively against armed groups; its support to
the Government; its proactive protection of civilians
and for the provision of security in the Central African
Republic. MINUSCA’s robust and proactive response
in Bombari serves as an example for all peacekeeping
missions. However, the threats to MINUSCA in the
Central African Republic are quickly evolving and
require an immediate response. I would therefore like
to ask: Can it be said that there is enough flexibility
to determine operational requirements within
the mandate?
This comment is for Lieutenant General Mgwebi. In
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
as with all peacekeeping missions, we must look at ways
to improve the performance of the Mission, including
by unlocking the Force Intervention Brigade so that it
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

can be more mobile, and by building the capacity of
the troop- and police-contributing countries serving in
them. Ensuring accountability for poor performance,
conduct and discipline remains a priority for the
United States. With regard to MONUSCO, Lieutenant
General Mgwebi mentioned the difficulty of moving
troops quickly, given national caveats. What can we
do to ensure that action can be taken quickly when the
situation demands it?
This comment is for Major General Menon.
We know that the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) has faced a number of
serious challenges since its creation in 1974. In recent
years, those challenges have arisen from the fact that
its area of operations has changed so dramatically.
The mission has patiently worked with the parties and
garnered the support of the Council for major upgrades
to its equipment and force protection, as well as to
plan for a successful return to the Syrian side of the
area of separation. We commend the General’s work to
execute that difficult strategy and to plan so diligently
for UNDOF’s future. Could we have additional details
on how force protection concerns are being addressed,
while ensuring that the mission fulfils its mandate? Are
there particular technologies that could be useful in the
unique environment in which the mission operates?
With regard to the briefing by Major General
Uba, we have seen how difficult it can be to draw
down peacekeeping missions. The force of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia has undergone a significant
reduction since resolution 2333 (2016) was adopted
last December. The 2017 presidential and legislative
elections are now six months away. How is the
remainder of the force being prepared to provide a
back up role for security during the elections? Finally,
as we continue our review of peacekeeping operations,
we expect to see drawdowns in other missions. What
other lessons learned from UNMIL’s drawdown can be
applied usefully to other missions?
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and the Force Commanders of the four missions for
their informative briefings.
China would like to pay tribute to the Force
Commanders and peacekeepers of all United Nations
peacekeeping forces in active service for their
extraordinary courage and dedication. We also extend

S/PV.7947

our condolences to the families of all those peacekeepers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
The current international situation is undergoing
profound change. Peacekeeping operations face ever
increasingly complex environments and mandates, and
we face serious challenges in carrying out effective
peacekeeping operations. Informative briefings enable
the Security Council to have a broad understanding of
peacekeeping operations in the field and of the efforts
made by peacekeepers to deliver their mandates. I would
like to make the following four points in response to the
briefings made by the Force Commanders.
First, the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations are still of great relevance as guidance in
the new context. The purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the consent of the
parties concerned, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and for the defence of mandates,
are the irrepressible constants of peacekeeping
operations. Such operations should properly handle the
relations with the host country, respect its sovereignty
and heed its views and suggestions. In line with the
wishes of the host country, the Security Council should
appropriately address the issues of an exit strategy for
peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations are tasked
with proactively taking forward the process of seeking
political solutions to regional hotspot issues. Some of
those issues are protracted and persistent and lead to
the steady deterioration of the security situation in the
region concerned and in some mission areas, there is no
peace to keep. That has had a serious and adverse impact
on the fulfilment of other peacekeeping functions and
responsibilities. The international community should
therefore have a greater sense of urgency and redouble
its efforts to promote political solutions to regional
hotspot issues. Peacekeeping operations should
achieve synergy and coordination to create an enabling
environment for achieving political solutions to the
hotspot issues.
Thirdly, it is important to improve upon the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, making them
realistic and actionable. In recent years, the protection
of civilians has become one of the mandates for the
relevant United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
implementation of that mandate should be predicated
upon respect for the ownership of the host country
and should articulate the scope, conditions and

17-1465217/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

terms of reference of implementation, so as to be a
useful supplement to the actions by the host country.
Given the limited material resources, at the level of
implementation and policy, we should develop specific
rules governing the protection of civilians.
Fourthly, we must ensure a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, development
and reconstruction. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should make timely adjustments to the
mandates and size of missions, in the light of specific
conditions and developments in the situation on the
ground. They should strengthen coordination with
actors such as countries in the regions concerned,
regional and subregional organizations, United
Nations development agencies, the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Peacekeeping operations
should also undertake efforts to meet the needs of the
host country, provide tailored support to help with
security capacity-building and assist the host country
in achieving self-reliant development at an early .
Nine out of sixteen United Nations peacekeeping
missions are in Africa. The first 12 top troop-contributors
are African countries. Strengthening communication
and coordination with African countries in the area
of peacekeeping is an inevitable requirement for
effectively improving peacekeeping operations. China
supports the United Nations in carefully listening to the
views, suggestions and concerns of African countries
in the area of peacekeeping operations. China strongly
supports African peacekeeping capacity-building.
China has been a staunch supporter of and an active
participant in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is the largest troop-contributor among the permanent
members of the Security Council and second largest
contributor to the peacekeeping budget. China is
fully implementing the commitments announced by
Chinese leaders concerning our support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We will increase our
communications with the Force Commanders in the
field, and we stand ready to join other Member States
in efforts to improve peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and the Force
Commanders for their comprehensive briefings. Allow
me express our deep appreciation to them for their
efforts and sacrifice in the service of international
peace and security and stability in conflict areas.
18/31

23/05/2017

Over the past two years, the United Nations has
witnessed the development of the peace and security
framework, a process that has been based principally on
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In the face of the varying security situations that
vastly complicate conflict, we are duty-bound to
reform peacekeeping operations and to provide the
capabilities necessary to confront the new challenges.
Hence, peacekeeping operations should be considered
in the framework of a response continuum to conflict
situations so as to insure that the mandates of these
operations include integrated political, programmatic
and operational approaches, which can be summarized
in the following six points.
First, no peacekeeping operation should be
unrealistically burdened with objectives that go beyond
the mission’s capabilities or that do not take into account
political and security realities on the ground.
Secondly, exit strategies for operations are
needed. They should have clear criteria and a set time
frame, which should be reviewed periodically so that
the Council can adapt and develop mandates based
on field requirements, as opposed to engaging in a
predetermined, cost-cutting exercise.
Thirdly, strategic partnerships have to be built with
the host countries. Such partnerships should be based
on national ownership, conciliation and negotiation,
thus contributing to the success of peacekeeping
operations and avoiding hindrances that may affect
their performance.
Fourthly, we must concentrate on building national
security capabilities so as to enable the State concerned
to take up its civilian-protection responsibilities and
avoid State dependency on the peacekeeping operation,
which would only complicate and make more difficult
the exit in future.
Fifthly, we must create an integrated United Nations
system for multidimensional assessment that takes into
account the effectiveness of the United Nations peace
and security architecture as a whole, in a way that
ensures the integrity of roles undertaken by the various
United Nations and international organs, programmes
and agencies, and all according to a holistic view to
achieve the sustainability of peace and address the root
causes of conflicts.
Sixthly, the partnership between the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should be enhanced
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in implementing the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations
within the general framework adopted by the General
Assembly in resolution 71/278 of 10 March.
Let me take this opportunity to stress Egypt’s full
support for peacekeeping operations. That is reflected
in our desire to participate in the most difficult United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly the
those in the Central African Republic, Mali and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We provide the
highest possible level of pre-deployment training, as
well as the appropriate equipment required to implement
the mandate.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Uruguayan presidency for organizing this important
and much-anticipated interaction with the general
officers in charge of specific peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and the general officers in charge of the military
components of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
their briefings on important issues so critical to the
success of peacekeeping.
Allow me to begin by paying tribute to them
and to the more than 100,000 peacekeepers deployed
around the world. Without their everyday actions,
their personal commitment and their courage, and
that of their soldiers, the men and women who have
demonstrated, very recently, in the Central African
Republic and Mali, their acceptance of the ultimate
sacrifice, in what state would our world, already so
weakened by the proliferation of crises, be? How many
civilian lives have been saved by the Blue Helmets,
who are increasingly confronted with direct and often
asymmetrical lethal threats? Let me assure them of our
admiration, our trust and our support for their noble
task. Let me also assure them, above all, of the constant
care taken within the Security Council to provide
them with the mandates, means and political support
necessary to ensure the success of their missions.
It is our responsibility within the Council to
fully understand the challenges that they and their
soldiers face, including the complex environments

S/PV.7947

and security threats. We do that by listening to them
today, and even more so through regular dialogue with
troop-contributing countries, which now takes place
systematically each time the Council takes the initiative
to renew a mandate.
Today, I would like to highlight three key points
that underpin their day-to-day work.
First, we are mindful of the smooth conduct of their
military operations, both during the pre-deployment
training phase, the deployment phase, of course, and
the withdrawal phase. That would not be possible
without integrated planning in New York among all
the actors of the Security Council, Secretariat, the
troop-contributing countries, and also the host States.
That integrated planning must also continue on the
site of the activities, through coordinated action by all
constituents. That is the key to their success.
Secondly, I would also like to stress the importance
of giving them the means to carry out their mission.
That is our responsibility and our commitment. We
have a duty in the Council to ensure that they deploy
with the best trained troops. To that end, I would like
to stress the importance of the regional peacekeeping
conferences, in particular that held in Paris in October
2016, which was devoted to peacekeeping in Frenchspeaking environments and during which language
training and the importance of interaction with the
local population were highlighted.
It is also important that their troops be deployed
without hidden national restrictions and with acceptable
and standardized protection capabilities, as well as with
facilitating capabilities that will enable them to conduct
their operations under the best conditions in terms of
efficiency and protection. We hardly even need to
underscore here the crucial importance of having a fully
coherent and unified command structure on critical
capacities. Here I would stress medical- evacuation
capacities, which must be available around the clock,
seven days a week, because threats do not stop on the
weekend or at night. I would also mention the equipment
that is needed to protect against improvised explosive
devices in cases where troops face such threats in their
theatres of operation.
Thirdly, and finally, we must be very clear
with regard to robust peacekeeping. If we ask Force
Commanders to implement robust mandates, then
we commit ourselves for our part to provide them
with all of the necessary political support as well as

17-1465219/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

adequate capacity, in full accordance with their rules
of engagement, which must also give them the means
to successfully accomplish their mission. This is our
moral commitment towards them.
This annual meeting with Force Commanders
is vital in order to enable them to share their current
concerns; they should never hesitate to turn to us. We
in the Council consider them to be our armed branch in
the service of international peace and security.
Allow me to conclude my statement by once again
paying tribute to the Force Commanders. Their current
peacekeeping profession is not an essentially military
one, perhaps, but it is a task that only the military can
carry out with such success. I thank them warmly once
again for their exemplary commitment in the service
of peace.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is common knowledge
that today the world situation warrants a greater
engagement on the part of the United Nations in the
area of peace and security. Sustainable de-escalation
and progress in achieving peaceful settlements and
peacebuilding are not possible, in most cases, without
a robust international security presence. It is also an
axiom that the Council has to craft each and every
peacekeeping operation’s mandate carefully and update
them accordingly based on reliable and full information
from the ground.
In this regard, today’s briefing has practical value,
and I should like to express my sincere gratitude to the
Under-Secretary-General and the Force Commanders
for their valuable input.
Among the many potential improvements that
could be made, I believe that the United Nations could
benefit greatly from sophisticated technologies to
assist its peace operations. To miss such opportunities
means missing chances for peace, as has happened far
too often in the past. In this regard, I would like to
echo the point that was made in several consultations
of the Council on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF): the use by a force of relevant,
sophisticated technologies remains one of the priorities
yet to be achieved. I am aware of the intention of the
Secretariat to explore options to deploy sense-and-warn
technologies to the mission and would appreciate it if
the Council could be updated on progress in that area.
I would like to reiterate our view that UNDOF
remains one of the important cornerstones of the long20/31

23/05/2017

term stability of the region. In this regard, I commend
the efforts aimed at the return and further consolidation
of UNDOF’s presence in the area of separation.
I should like also to touch upon the activities of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), as other speakers have done. I believe
that the United Nations peacekeeping presence in
the Central African Republic is more than vital in
supporting the efforts of the country’s new leadership to
achieve peace and stability throughout its territory. The
continuing presence and increasingly violent activities
of armed groups is leading to numerous casualties
among civilians, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, and an
increased number of internally displaced persons.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic, I should like
to express serious concern regarding the information
provided by the Panel of Experts on the regular inflow
of weapons and fighters into the Central African
Republic from neighbouring States.
As previous speakers have done, I condemn
all attacks and provocations against MINUSCA,
including the brutal killings of peacekeepers, as well
as the most recent attack against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. These actions are unacceptable and may
constitute war crimes.
Liberia will soon mark 14 years of peace since
the lengthy and bloody civil war in that country. The
security situation in the country remains stable, and the
Government has demonstrated its ability to effectively
ensure security on the ground. At this point, the
crucial task is a timely transition from peacekeeping to
effective United Nations peacebuilding measures.
I look forward to the country’s peaceful and
democratic transition of power in October this year.
This should represent a genuine milestone for the nation
and a success story for the United Nations. Ukraine is
proud to be among those troop-contributing countries
that have played a part in this success by actively
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping efforts
in Liberia.
Ukrainian troops also continue to serve in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose mandate
the Council recently updated (see S/PV.7910). The
Mission must pursue its force-transformation process
in order to become an flexible, agile and mobile force
that can adapt to the current challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
also supports prioritizing the Mission’s talks on the
protection of civilians.
In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity,
on the eve of the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers, to join my colleagues in paying tribute to
all United Nations Blue Helmet. Their devoted service is
universally recognized as the most meaningful symbol
of our Organization. Through the Force Commanders,
I thank all of them.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First of all, I should
like to join previous speakers in extending gratitude
to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
the Commanders on the ground for their effective and
informative briefings.
I should like to express my gratitude to all
peacekeepers for their service. I also convey my
condolences in connection with the six United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
peacekeepers who have lost their lives over the past two
weeks. Since the military component of each mission
comprises troops from various troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), the role of Force Commanders is
extremely important in ensuring a mission’s unity,
effective command and control and a high standard of
conduct and discipline.
But in addition to the role of Force Commanders, it is
crucial to improve TCC capabilities in order to enhance
the performance of each mission’s military component.
Japan has been contributing to the capacity-building of
TCCs and plans to further strengthen these efforts.
I turn now to a few mission-specific issues.
First, with respect to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), we are concerned
by the situation in Kasai and are following it closely. We
take an interest in how the efficiency and performance
of MONUSCO have been enhanced since the adoption
of resolution 2348 (2017) and the transformation of the
force and in how MONUSCO can respond to the rising
violence in Kasai after the reduction of the force.

S/PV.7947

The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is fluid as we approach the elections, and
relations between MONUSCO and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are important.
On MINUSCA, we are deeply concerned by the
rising violence against the Mission and civilians in the
south-eastern part of the country. We call on all armed
groups to halt the violence and lay down their weapons.
We support MINUSCA’s proactive and robust posture
throughout the Central African Republic, including in
Bambari and Banguassou. Regrettably, in Banguassou
both MINUSCA personnel and civilians have lost
their lives. Enhancing MINUSCA’s capability to
fully implement its protection-of-civilians mandate is
therefore important.
We are closely following whether the pilot model in
Bambari for restoring State authority can be reproduced
in other areas, as well as how security-sector reform
is progressing.
Finally, on UNMIL, the upcoming elections and the
peaceful transfer of power will represent both the fruits
of UNMIL’s labour over the past 13 years and one of the
Mission’s final tasks. To meet this challenge, UNMIL
and the United Nations country team will have to work
closely together to ensure that the key functions are
successfully transferred to the United Nations country
team before UNMIL’s departure
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and all the Force Commanders for their respective
briefings. We also join others in paying tribute to the
brave men and women who are serving in different
peacekeeping missions around the world under the
United Nations umbrella as we mark International
Peacekeeping Day tomorrow.
We would like to focus our remarks on the
unprecedented challenge faced by peacekeepers
today, as explained by the Force Commanders in
their presentations to us. As one of the major troopcontributing countries to United Nations peacekeeping,
we share the issues and concerns raised by the Force
Commanders. There is no doubt that peacekeepers
are increasingly deployed to protect civilians and
support complex political processes amid ongoing
fighting in high-risk situations characterized by
asymmetrical threats.

17-1465221/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Targeted attacks against peacekeepers and
innocent civilians are not only on the rise but they have
increasingly become the norm rather than the exception.
The recent incidence of attacks that led to the deaths of
peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali are clear
indications that these threats are growing in scale,
frequency and complexity. It is therefore imperative
that peacekeeping missions adapt to changing security
dynamics. For this reason, devising the right political
strategies and operational approaches has never been
so critical. In this regard, we would like to suggest
the following.
First, and this has been reiterated by many, the need
for pragmatic and flexible interpretations of the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping cannot be
overemphasized. The traditional peacekeeping versus
peace enforcement debate should add the minimum
be looked at in a more nuanced manner. Peacekeepers
cannot and should not remain indifferent in the face of
significant threats either to themselves or to innocent
civilians whom they are supposed to protect. What the
Force Commanders said today is instructive, and there
is really a need to look at this issue.
Secondly, peacekeepers should have robust
mandates with a clear concept of operational rules of
engagement based on a thorough situational analysis,
threat assessment and planning. This will allow them
to have a robust posture in defending themselves and
in protecting civilians in the face of mortal danger.
However, having a clear mandate, concept of operation
and rules of engagement is not enough.
Therefore, my third point is that peacekeepers need
to have sufficient capacity that is credible enough to
deter spoilers who threaten the mission’s mandate,
civilians and peacekeepers themselves. We need to
ensure that peacekeepers have adequate equipment,
including force enablers and multipliers, to be able to
counter hostilities and fulfil their mandate effectively
in an asymmetrical environment. Peacekeepers must
also get adequate training and acquire the skills that
are needed to operate in a volatile security situation.
We know that these things are easier said than
done, and we have no illusions that the strategic
and operational challenges that were mentioned
previously will be easily overcome, but in the light of
22/31

23/05/2017

the seriousness of the matter it is imperative that they
be addressed as promptly as possible. Otherwise, the
commitment to the protection of civilians will remain
mere words to be repeated ad nauseam.
Finally, I do not wish to add more questions to
what has already been asked by other delegations, as
some of the issues we wanted to raise have already
been raised. I simply want to conclude by thanking
all the Force Commanders for their efforts under
difficult circumstances.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his statement, and the four
Force Commanders for their very informative briefings.
Bolivia joins in the previous expressions of words
of tribute for the valuable lives of soldiers and civilian
personnel that have been lost in the fulfilment of their
duties in the implementation of the mandates of the
various missions and, in particular, with regard to the
recent events in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We also wish to pay sincere tribute and
express our thanks to each and every member of United
Nations peacekeeper contingents around the world.
They are sparing no effort to fulfil their missions and
implement their mandates, despite the limitations,
including insufficient resources, difficult conditions
on the ground and challenging security environments.
It is also necessary to thank the countries that
contribute personnel military, police, observers or
civilian personnel for their generosity, solidarity
and commitment to the United Nations system
and to countries that are suffering from conflicts
and instability.
Bolivia has been committed to its membership
through its actively participation in peacekeeping
operations, contributing militarily since 1995 to
missions such as the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola, the United Nations Observer Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala,
and United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
proper selection of personnel and the training received
at the peace operations battalion training have made it
possible for our soldiers to be part of a select group
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of military personnel throughout the world with the
excellent qualifications they have received.
The international context is undergoing significant
transformations; it is not and will never be static. The
constant threats to international peace and security by
terrorist groups highlight the need for peacekeeping
missions to be subject to structural changes that will
enable them to adapt and repel these threats more
efficiently. The threatening environments of extreme
violence and volatility, in addition to the influence of
terrorist groups, have led to the tragic loss of life in
missions. Bolivia reiterates its vehement rejection of
such actions.
We emphasize the efforts of the Security Council to
achieve the objectives of each of the existing mandates.
The unity of everyone involved is essential on the
ground to strengthen the financial, tactical, operational
and strategic aspects, in strict accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and respecting the
principles of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States.
Finally, it is important to improve the material
equipment of peacekeeping missions so that they are
able to control the areas where crises arise with the
primary purpose of fulfilling their mandates. Therefore,
effectiveness should also be achieved through
continuous coordination and exchange of information
among missions and local authorities. It goes without
saying that no peacekeeping mission can succeed if it
does not have the support of the host country.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his assessment of the
current state of affairs in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank the Force Commanders of the
United Nations peacekeeping from the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Mission in Liberia for
sharing the state of affairs of their missions.
The nature of the issues raised by modern-day
crises is changing significantly. In carrying out their
mandates, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have at various times come up against terrorist attacks
on civilians and peacekeepers themselves, organized
crime, and illicit trafficking in weapons and narcotics.

S/PV.7947

The situations in countries where they are deployed and
their respective theatres of operations each have their
own special features.
United Nations missions are increasingly working
in a context in which at least one side of the conflict is
not a State. Instead, one of the sides is armed opposition
or illegal armed groups. Furthermore, we have seen
cases where a region with a traditional clash between
two sides gets a third side that is not controlled by
anyone. This was the case, for example, in the Golan
Heights, where terrorist and illegal armed groups now
run rife.
The trend in the Central African Republic is also a
matter of concern, as there are ongoing intercommunal
clashes, continuous extraordinary violence committed
on religious and ethnic grounds, and widespread
organized crime and gangs. Governmental and security
bodies in many areas of the country are weak or
totally lacking.
In these circumstances, peacekeepers need to act
with utmost caution. It is more important than ever to
respect the basic principles of peacemaking, that is,
the consent of the parties; impartiality; the non-use of
force, except in cases of self-defence; and respecting
Security Council mandates. The loose interpretations
that we have been hearing, based on the situation on the
ground, are unacceptable.
We also must not allow peacekeepers to be directly
pulled into conflicts, but this is exactly what happens if
we get overly involved with robust mandates and even
more with preventive responses to asymmetric threats.
This also applies to offensive and counter-terrorist
operations. It is unacceptable to take the concept of the
protection of civilians as a pretext for the use of force by
peacekeepers against the host State. That automatically
turns Blue Helmets into a party to the conflict, provokes
the Government and simply generates new violence.
In this context, we must be extremely cautious and
balanced in approaching the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the Government and the
opposition are having a hard time cooperating on the
issue of implementing the December 2016 political
agreement. Instead of overpoliticizing the subject
of electoral violence and violations of human rights,
there is a need to focus on assisting the Congolese in
reforming the security sector and building the capacity
of local security forces to counter lawless gangs in the

17-1465223/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

east of the country and to improve the military-political
situation in country as a whole.
We must remember that the Government bears the
primary responsibility for ensuring the security of the
population, including by countering terrorist attacks,
establishing a political process, ensuring development
and eliminating the root causes of conflict. International
assistance should be provided to support local and
regional efforts, but not substitute for them.
With respect to the issue of increasing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations while
lowering financial expenditures, we note the need
to improve approaches to mission planning, timely
mission reconfiguration and drawing up exit strategies.
It is puzzling that generic functions, such as addressing
gender issues, peacebuilding and preventing the
escalation of conflicts, are included in the mandates
at the same time that a mission’s capacities are being
reduced. Let us consider, for example, the situation
in Liberia where Blue Helmets are mandated simply
with peacebuilding tasks. That is where we have room
for a significant drawdown in the military and police
components. Nevertheless, for some reason there are 700
armed peacekeepers and 5 military helicopters there.
Blue Helmets should be deployed where they can
work effectively while remaining neutral. Let us not
forget that the essence of peacekeeping is the absence
of an alternative political settlement. That priority has
also been confirmed by Secretary-General Guterres
himself. High-quality, thorough political and mediation
efforts should be the priority. The history of conflicts
in various regions of the world has shown that this is
the only way to eradicate the root causes of conflicts,
as opposed to endlessly addressing their consequences.
Otherwise, after a brief respite, crises are at risk of
rearing their ugly heads again.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We commend and
most sincerely thank the presidency of the Security
Council, as well as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, for
having this discussion, which gives us an opportunity
to get firsthand insights on very important aspects and
challenges of peacekeeping. The missions, represented
in this Chamber by their Force Commanders, evidence
the diversity of challenges that modern peacekeepers
face: long-lasting conflict, the challenges of protecting
civilians, and robust peacekeeping and peacekeeping
operations drawdown considerations.
24/31

23/05/2017

For the Security Council, it is very important to
see how decisions taken in New York on specific
missions are implemented on the ground. We have
come to an understanding that, to deal with modern
security challenges, there is a need to adapt the
existing approaches and implement new strategies.
As the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (S/2015/446) states, United Nations
peace operations are not appropriate tools for military
counter-terrorism operations. In this regard, we
acknowledge that regional forces are better able to fight
them, as seen in the case of the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia successful combating
of Al-Shabaab. Therefore, we need multistakeholder
approaches and greater corporation with regional and
subregional organizations. The division of labour
and even outsourcing for some peacekeeping tasks
can be good incentives that will increase the overall
effectiveness of our peace operations.
It has been highlighted during open debates on
peacekeeping operations that we need more flexibility.
In this context, and having practical experience and
knowledge of the challenges of the current peacekeeping
operations, we would appreciate hearing the vision
of the Force Commanders on possibilities for greater
flexibility in United Nations peacekeeping, especially
on counter-terrorism issues.
With regard to drawdown considerations for
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) is widely acclaimed as a success story
in United Nations peacekeeping. Among the reasons
for the success of UNMIL are the massive show of
force, a clear and comprehensive mandate, a strong and
capable Force Command and well-balanced militarypolice civilian components. An important point is that
UNMIL reports provided candid assessments of the
situations throughout the country. The experience of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia shows that the
strong political commitment of all stakeholders and
effective coordinated peacekeeping operations bring
real success in achieving peace.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that United
Nations Force Commanders’ recommendations, based
on their rich experience and lessons learned, provide
important input for increasing the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and contribute
greatly to the success of our common efforts to keep
peace around the world.
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
At the outset, I would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. I would also
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations for their briefings on
the four subjects under consideration, which show the
difficult reality and operational challenges they face in
implementing their mandates.
I would like to refer specifically to the ability of a
peacekeeping operation to fully meet all the goals that
are assigned to it by the Security Council. Unfortunately,
we see that many of the current missions have serious
operational difficulties in fully accomplishing their
tasks. We must therefore ask ourselves why the missions
are facing these kinds of difficulties and what can be
done to remove them.
With respect to the reasons why, we can identify
various situations: Security Council mandates are not
sufficiently clear or achievable; the human resources
and equipment available for the missions often do not
correspond to the tasks assigned or to the reality on the
ground; the States or parties in control of the territory
where the operations are being carried out impose or
limit their full functionality through restrictions of
movement or bureaucratic obstacles or, among other
things, actions that constitute clear violations of
status-of-forces agreements; the collapse or lack of
an ongoing political process among the parties to a
conflict, which leaves peacekeeping operations without
room to manoeuvre and prevents them from being
able to fully carry out their tasks; or specific cases
of low staff performance or inadequate equipment,
which negatively affects the fulfilment of mandates. In
such situations, responsibility is shared between four
principal stakeholders — the Security Council, the
States or parties in control of the territory where the
operations take place, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. The Council has multiple
responsibilities for ensuring the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.
The design and deployment of peacekeeping
operations should always be guided by political
solutions, just as political momentum should always
be maintained. For that, the political strategies on
which peacekeeping operations are based must have

S/PV.7947

the support of a united Security Council. On the other
hand, even when the Security Council does present
a united front, the United Nations cannot do much if
the national actors do not show real commitment to a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.
Another responsibility of the Security Council is to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are more flexible,
that they have clear mandates based on appropriate
priorities and that they are able to adapt to changing
realities on the ground. We have seen efforts made
in that regard in the past few months in the renewals,
for example, of the mandates of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, which have
established tasks based on clearly defined priorities.
Much remains to be done, however. Also, once an
operation has deployed under its current mandate, it
is the host State’s responsibility to ensure full respect
and compliance with the terms of the status of forces
agreement. The agreements protect the personnel
that countries voluntarily contribute to peacekeeping
operations and any violation of them prevents a mission
from functioning properly and is therefore unacceptable.
As a country that has participated actively in
numerous peacekeeping operations for many years,
Uruguay considers the responsibilities of troop- and
police-contributing countries extremely important,
since it is they who are doing the work on the ground
and implementing operational mandates. It is crucial
to ensure that peacekeepers are adequately equipped,
trained and prepared to carry out all the tasks in their
mandate. In that regard, issues such as the existence
of national restrictions — so-called caveats — that are
announced ahead of time or, worse, not announced; a
lack of effective command and control; refusals to obey
orders; failure to respond to attacks on civilians; and
inadequate equipment cannot be tolerated, since they
undermine the shared responsibility for the effective
fulfilment of mandates. That is why States signed
the Kigali Principles, and we urge the major troopcontributing countries to review and abide by those
commitments, which are aimed at improving the quality
of troop contingents.
The Secretariat also has a crucial role to play in
providing advice and recommendations on compliance
with mandates and the necessary adjustments to be

17-1465225/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

made. We acknowledge the efforts that have been
made in this area, particularly through the preparation
of periodic reports on attacks on Blue Helmets or
violations of status of forces agreements.
In conclusion, I have a question for MONUSCO’s
Force Commander. When the Mission’s mandate was
renewed, on 31 March, a decision was made to reduce
the number of troops deployed. I would like to know the
Force Commander’s views on what the consequences
have been for carrying out the Mission’s mandate
considering the current instability in the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the briefers to respond to
the questions and comments, starting with Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank all Member
States for the comments and I will be brief, because we
would also like to hear from the Force Commanders in
answer to the questions raised.
There were a number of mentions of what I think is a
key expectation for our peacekeeping operations — that
is, adaptability and responsiveness. I would like to
highlight a few points in that regard that I believe are
key to achieving that.
The first is the issue of rules and procedures, which
were mentioned by some of the Force Commanders.
The Council is aware that the Secretary-General has
launched an effort for reform in this area aimed at
making it much simpler for operations to discharge
their mandates. That is a key issue in responding to the
serious expectations of those on the ground.
The second, which was also mentioned by several
Force Commanders and Member States, is the need
for an appropriate framework within which troopcontributing countries (TCCs) operate and that can
be affected by statements of unit requirements and
memorandums of understanding that in some cases are
not adequate to Force Commanders’ needs. Those we
simply have to review and revise where necessary in
order to give Force Commanders the flexibility they
need where the use of resources is concerned.
The third element in this is mindset, for which
all of us are responsible — Headquarters, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Force
Commanders and troop-contributing countries. It is
a willingness and determination to fully implement
26/31

23/05/2017

mandates and see that everyone interprets a mandate in
the same way, as well as to ensure that the caveats and
dual chains of command that have had negative effects
on our operations are gradually terminated. In that
regard, we are emphasizing and definitely expecting
that we should be stricter and more demanding in our
evaluations of operations.
The fourth element is capacities. As has been
repeatedly pointed out, in order to be more agile,
responsive and flexible, we need the necessary training
and the necessary capacity. Someone mentioned new
technology, and that is indeed being gradually brought
into our operations, particularly with regard to having
better situational awareness. And we are working very
hard to attain the specific types of capacity that we
need for many of our operations. Just before today’s
meeting, in fact, we had a force-generation meeting
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and I am grateful to the
Member States that have committed to providing very
important new capacities that I believe will make a
difference to the force’s ability to fulfil its mandate.
In that regard, I would like to specifically point to our
contingents’ ability to use that capacity for training
and the importance of bilateral cooperation for our
TCCs, which need this kind of assistance in order
to be better prepared to use the equipment that the
operation requires.
I will touch briefly on the robust use of force.
(spoke in French)
Lieutenant General Keïta alluded at length and
very interestingly in his briefing to the use of robust
and legitimate force as provided for in our mandates.
Implementing a mandate is also about implementing
the political processes that our operations support, and
therefore a reaction to those who try to interfere with
or prevent the implementation of those processes, in
which case the use of force can be entirely legitimate.
However, using robust force is not enough, and the
Central African Republic is particularly instructive in
that regard. It must be accompanied by similarly robust
efforts in the political arena. I think the same is true
for the Security Council — just as our operations have
robust mandates, they need the robust support of the
Council at all levels, so as to hold accountable those
who try to prevent us from fulfilling our missions.
I also want to touch upon the periodic performance
reviews of missions, an expectation that has been
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7947

expressed by everyone — Member States, the Secretariat
and, above all, the Security Council. In expecting more
from the missions, we should not hesitate to call into
question certain truths or demands that have hitherto
been accepted as fundamental but are, perhaps, not quite
so. The reference to troop numbers is a case in point,
since the number of peacekeepers is less important than
their ability to fulfil their mandate. In that regard, I
believe we must also review our assessment criteria.

With regard to intelligence, it is encouraging
that the United Nations has at least accepted the term
“intelligence” and has accepted to bring in technology
in the form of unmanned aircraft, which do help when
it comes to contentious issues. Some of the military
radios at our disposal are not interoperable. With the
use of technology, the various contingents can speak to
each other using their own equipment, which bridges
the gap.

I want to briefly address the issue of transition.
Although Major General Uba’s statement was very
enlightening in that respect, the support of the Security
Council at all stages has been crucial. The inclusiveness
of the transition process, in which host countries,
stakeholders, civil society, agencies and bilateral and
multilateral donors participated, was key to its success.

In response to the question from the representative
of the United States about assistance in moving troops,
the Office of Military Affairs has helped by readjusting
and revisiting the areas of responsibility as they
relate to the boundaries of the various contingencies.
Headquarters has granted our request to be able to
move the rapid deployment forces within an area of
responsibility without first seeking Headquarters’
permission, which makes our life easier. We are also
working with the Office of Military Affairs to revisit
the statement of unit requirements so that we can
respond as required.

Finally, to endorse what Major General Menon said
about sexual abuse, the determination of the SecretaryGeneral and the Force Commanders to doggedly combat
those acts is evident, and I can assure everyone that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is also fully
committed to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Lieutenant General Mgwebi.
Lieutenant General Mgwebi: In responding to
the question posed by the representative of the United
Kingdom on the principles of peacekeeping, I would
say that the commanders understand those principles as
they relate to consent, impartiality and the use of force,
and even more so the use of force for self-defence. The
critical challenge is to understand the use of force when
it comes to defending the mandate.
Additionally, the language of the mandate of United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) uses
terms like “terrorist operations”, which then creates a
special responsibility for the Intervention Brigade to
act in accordance with the mandate. That situation is
challenging, because when it comes to an armed group
that has a base probably not too far from the mission’s
base, what does the mission do if that armed group is
threatening the population, but has not done anything
yet? Does the mission proactively attack the group or
does it coexist with them? At present, the question
of co-location and co-existence with armed groups
is challenging. Even if the Intervention Brigade can
overcome that challenge, it cannot be present all over
the country at the same time.

As for the question from the representative of
Japan about the enhancement of the force in the Kasai
region, I note that, previously, there was no force
stationed there. Recently, with the assistance of the
Office of Military Affairs, we have been able to move
two companies from Pakistan who were in stationed
in South Kivu to the Kasai region. Now, we are only
waiting for their vehicles, so they are ready to move.
Even the boundaries of Pakistan’s South Kivu brigade
have been adjusted pursuant to consultations between
the Office of Military Affairs and Islamabad, which
makes life a bit easier. All those efforts are aimed at
being able to cover the Kasai region.
The last question came from the representative
of Uruguay, who inquired about the implications
of MONUSCO’s troop reduction. According to
Headquarters, the Mission’s strategic review speaks to
the notion of force optimization, which means that we
are looking at a number of capabilities that would give
us the flexibility and versatility to be able to respond
to possible challenges. We are also revisiting the
contract we have regarding unmanned aircraft systems.
We would like to increase our range of coverage and
payloads, so that we can have greater situational
awareness. In that way, small versatile companies can
improve our ability to respond. The challenge, however,
is to secure the necessary assets.

17-1465227/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President: (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Major General Menon.
Major General Menon: I will be brief in
answering the questions that were raised during the
meeting. As far as technology is concerned, I would
like to assure the members of the Security Council that
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) has conducted a detailed study of what
additional technology needs to be brought in. We are
building that capability but it takes some time. I can
say that we have already brought in certain night-vision
devices — which we did not have earlier in the mission.
We are bringing in surveillance trailers, cameras and
so forth. It is important that we understand national
sensitivities when we bring in technology. Whatever
technology we bring in, we share it with both Syria and
Israel, and it is important that we keep up that dialogue
with them. But I would like to emphasize that both
nations very strongly support us in the endeavour of
bringing in technology.
The question of sense-and-warn radar was raised.
No troop-contributing country has offered UNDOF
that capability, and Headquarters is therefore now
looking into the possibility of acquiring the equipment
on the open market. We are currently working on
that. The issue of who will operate it and how it will
be maintained — the logistic model — will have to
be addressed. I would also like to say that we are in
very close coordination with both Israel and Syria with
regard to that particular equipment. They have been
very forthcoming. I have discussed it personally with
my Syrian interlocutor. He has been very forthcoming
and open to it, but he has also told me that we need
to share that information with his side, once that
particular equipment has been identified. I am hopeful
and confident that we will very soon be able to get that
particular equipment to UNDOF.
As far as technology is concerned, we definitely
require a greater amount. The Mission really started
with nothing, since we were a very traditional
peacekeeping mission, but things have changed. I think
that the way forward now is to build up technology for
the Mission.
With regard to the protection measures concerning
which the United States representative inquired, I
would just like to say that UNDOF used to operate in
soft-skin vehicles. That has changed significantly. Now
every person who comes to the Syrian side travels in
28/31

23/05/2017

an armoured, protected vehicle. We are now looking
at getting armoured personnel carriers (APCs) to the
Mission, so that we can stop using the earlier soft-skin
vehicles. Any movement is carried out in very close
coordination with both parties, Israel and Syria, so
as to ensure that, when troops are moving, we keep
them safe.
We are in the reconstruction phase. We have
engineer platoons with us. When we went into Camp
Fouar, the first issue on which we concentrated was to
build up its force protection measures, which we have
now strengthened significantly. I would also like to say
that, despite the fact that we left those positions some
time ago and some of them were vandalized, the force
protection measures, such as bunkers, among others,
are in a very good state. In fact, when we moved into
Camp Fouar most of the bunkers did not require any
reworking. They were in very good condition.
UNDOF’s method of operation has also changed
significantly. We will no longer operate in small teams
or remain in isolated pockets, as we had done for the
previous 40 years.
I have already touched upon the sense-and-warn
radar, and I am confident that, once that equipment
arrives, it will strengthen the force protection measures
of the camp significantly.
As far as availability and capabilities are
concerned, we are, as I said, a light infantry force that
is now turning and metamorphosing into an armouredprotected capable force. It is being built up slowly. I
would like to commend the Fijian contingent, which
came in with APCs. They did not have that capability,
but they went out and acquired it. Such was the case with
the Nepal contingent, which brought in five APCs and
will possibly bring in a mechanized company, because
they turned to the open market to acquire that particular
capability. But I sincerely feel that we need nations
with capability to come in and assist United Nations
missions in a crisis situation, rather than leaving the
job to nations that do not have the capability and which
have to go out and build it up. However, in the event
that a nation that has the capability cannot come in,
it then becomes imperative that we help others trying
to bring in that capability in their efforts to build up
their capabilities so that they can protect the missions
in carrying out their mandates.
Headquarters is doing its utmost to build up the
capability of UNDOF. The issue of capability versus
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

willingness is one that needs to be addressed. Ideally,
we would have willing and capable forces, and we have
to resolve that particular issue. United Nations missions
definitely need to be flexible. We need to be agile
and adaptive, and we have to keep up with changing
conditions in the world. My personal opinion is that we
continue to remain lacking in that regard.
Concerning the subject of the tripartite coordination
mechanism, which was raised by representative of Italy,
I would just like to say that both parties, Israel and Syria,
very strongly support us. I enjoy extremely open lines
of communication with both parties whenever a crisis
situation arises. Nevertheless, although the tripartite
coordination mechanism of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon is good, I would say that both parties
have to agree on that particular issue.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Security Council for
assisting UNDOF in its return to the area of separation
limitation on the Bravo side, which took advantage
of a great existing opportunity. With the support of
the Security Council, we managed to move back into
certain vacated locations earlier than expected. Once
again, both parties, Israel and Syria, have strongly
supported UNDOF’s return to the Golan.
I will leave the Security Council with the following
reflection. Who monitors the Golan? In my opinion, it
should be UNDOF or the United Nations. Although some
people call it a challenge, I will designate it as more of
an opportunity, because both Israel and Syria strongly
support us in our return to the Golan. Furthermore, I
would like to take this opportunity to say that it was
through the unanimous support of the Security Council
that we were able to return to Camp Fouar during phase
1. I believe that we should subsequently move forward.
In the meantime, I would like to assure all members
of the Security Council that UNDOF is up to the
challenge and will do its best to maintain peace and
stability in that area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Lieutenant General Keïta.
Lieutenant General Keïta (spoke in French): I
would first like once again to express our gratitude to
the members of the Security Council for their support,
and our acknowledgement of the sacrifices made by
peacekeeping soldiers.

S/PV.7947

I will only briefly address the three questions asked,
because I believe that the other Force Commanders
have already provided information concerning them.
With regard to the representative of Senegal’s
question, the engagement of our helicopters in Bambari
to confront a coalition was due to two basic reasons.
The first concerned the very credibility of our mission.
Would we stand by and watch one coalition attack
another in the second largest city of the country,
thereby allowing chaos and despair to reign over the
civilian population?
The second reason was that, as Bambari is the
second largest city, taking it would have meant the de
facto division of the country in two, because it is the
only remaining city that prevents the Central African
Republic from being divided between the east and
the west.Because of those two fundamental reasons, we
were more or less forced to take decisive steps and the
most suitable way to do that was to use our advantage.
Our advantage over the rebel groups was in the air,
which enabled us to be decisive and at the same time to
ensure that our troops were not too vulnerable. Despite
the fact that we had troops on the ground to handle the
situation, we used the advantage we had, which was key
to our efforts. It stopped the advance of the coalition
into Bambari. We were compelled to use helicopters for
those two reasons.
(spoke in English)
I received another question from the representative
of the United Kingdom on how to mitigate the impact
of red tape on peacekeeping operations. That is a very
important issue but it is beyond the capability of the
Force Commanders. I think that it is up to the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Affairs
and the troop-contributing countries to agree on the
reason that we send soldiers to current peacekeeping
missions. We have all understood that for 90 per cent
of the current missions, there is no peace to keep. We
therefore send the troops for some other reason, and
that other reason is to protect civilians against armed
individuals who kill civilians. It is therefore obvious
that if the Council sends peacekeepers to deal with
armed groups who kill, then they must be ready to
fight. The peacekeepers cannot be put into that type
of situation and have to deal with red tape and caveats
that render them non-operational. If the missions are
to be fully operational, then risks must be accepted
and caveats removed. Troops must then be given the

17-1465229/31

S/PV.7947

United Nations peacekeeping operations

ability to meet the protection-of-civilians challenges
they face on the ground. I think that the problem can
be solved at that level. At the moment, as soon as the
troops land on the ground, there is too much red tape
that we cannot circumvent.
The last question came from the representative of
the United States about whether or not I have the right
capability to deal with the worsening situation in the
Central African Republic in order to achieve success
in the country. I am very glad that the representative
of the United States asked that question because the
narrative is that the United States does not want to hear
about additional capability. It wants the peacekeeping
missions to do more with less. We have tried to do
more with less but we have reached our culminating
point. In military operations, when the culminating
point has been reached, we can no longer move
forward and then we lose ground. We have reached that
culminating point. To prevent us from losing ground,
we have requested additional resources. That requires
investment to rightsize the force.
After Bambari, the threat has moved towards the
south east. The south-east of the country was a very
peaceful area throughout the conflict. For more than
three years, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) carried
out activities and the Ugandans, supported by the United
States, dealt with the threat posed by the LRA. But
while the conflict was moving south-east, at the same
time the African Union and the Ugandans, supported
by the Americans, started leaving and a vacuum was
created. In addition, we do not have enough capability
to move and fulfil the protection-of-civilians mandate,
deal with the LRA threat to the civilian population
and try to stabilize the area. Because Bambari was a
success and a turning point, we have to preserve that
achievement so that development investment can be
made. Capability is therefore required just to make
Bambari safe.
At the same time, as the Council knows, we have
a centre of gravity known as Bangui, the capital of the
country. We have to ensure the safety of everyone in
Bangui, from the President to the smallest child. We
have to keep that centre of gravity safe. We need a bit
of investment to preserve the centre of gravity and the
Bombari success, and fill the huge vacuum in the south
east. We can then capitalize on that and make the mission
successful. We ask that that request be considered and
that it be a matter of urgency so that we can control and
improve the situation to achieve success.
30/31

23/05/2017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to Major General Uba.
Major General Uba: First, I would like to respond
to the comments made by the Permanent Representative
of Senegal, concerning the quick reaction force. The
quick reaction force was established under the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). Now that
UNOCI has closed down, the force is being prepared
and refitted for deployment to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We understand the issues and the
problems. MINUSMA is a just a short distance from
there to Liberia, if the need arises and, at the same
time, under inter-mission cooperation we are supposed
to have the quick reaction force fulfilling an overthe-horizon mandate in Liberia. That simply means that
the force that is being refitted must be flexible enough
to provide that over-the-horizon capacity. It must be
mobile enough to be able to move when requested
and be able to adapt to the terrain in which it is going
to operate.
When the force was a part of UNOCI, we had the
opportunity to exercise with it in April 2015. The force
came to Liberia and we had an exercise that went very
well. At the same time, we saw the capacity of the
force when it offered assistance in the Central African
Republic. Now, the force has changed, which is quite
normal, and its entire focus will also change. I am
aware that the Office of Military Affairs is working
on settling the unit requirements and the concept of
operations of the force. It is expected that once all of
that has been sorted out and the force is deployed in
MINUSMA, we shall have the possibility of exercising
together to understand each other.
The next point is on security in Liberia ahead of the
upcoming October elections. According to resolution
2333 (2016), the Government of Liberia is responsible
for ensuring security, as a result of the handing-over
of security responsibility to the Government. That
underscored the need for the final drawdown, which
kept only a residual force in Liberia. It is also wise to
mention that we have a force that is capable of only
just maintaining the security of the United Nations and
its assets. The military has a force of only 230 troops
and the police force has just 260 officers. Those are the
combined forces that keep the United Nations entities
and equipment safe and provide a platform when an
eventual force is required to assist the mission. In a
17-14652

23/05/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

nutshell, we have just what is required for basic selfsustenance in the Mission.
Another aspect was elections-related assistance,
which was mainly centred on logistics that suffered
from critical gaps. UNMIL was mandated to assist
where we observed critical gaps in logistics related to
elections. At the same time, when it came to security,
we were expected to interfere only when the situation
threatened a strategic reversal that was not palatable
to anybody.
With respect to lessons learned associated with
drawdown, a lot has been learned through UNMIL.
UNMIL has been a very important force, with all the
paraphernalia of a multidimensional and integrated
force. It interfaced with all facets of Liberian life. Now
we have drawn down, we are left only with a residual
force. The first aspect that we saw to be lacking was
early preparation for peacebuilding. Peacebuilding
in Liberia could have taken place much earlier. In a
nutshell, peacebuilding should begin concurrently with
peacekeeping in any mission so that the two can take
place together. While we keep the peace, peacebuilding
should be ongoing. We hope that Headquarters will
have a look at that and adopt a critical approach to
it so that there is no demarcating line where we say
“Now we have finished peacekeeping we can roll
back to peacebuilding”, and so on. Development and
peacebuilding should go hand in hand with peacekeeping.

S/PV.7947

At the same time, we have observed a trend whereby,
when it comes to drawdown, there is a need for robust
engagement. Naturally, a dependency syndrome will
emerge when a nation that has been given everything
suddenly sees its United Nations mission close. There
is a fear and apprehension that the nation may revert to
where it was at the start. There is therefore a need for
early, robust engagement between the mission and the
host nation. What this means is simply that, as a mission
is deployed, a time line and specific benchmarks should
be set so that an exit strategy can be worked out in the
meanwhile. We should be able to say that a mission is
likely to last two or three years, and within those years
we want the mission to achieve a, b and c, and then
drawn down and close. Inasmuch as that is not a given,
it leaves leeway for a mission to keep gallivanting,
neither here nor there, until such time that the Security
Council may decide to end it.
In a nutshell, a key lesson was that the transition
programme should be all-encompassing and involve the
host nation, international partners, strategic partners
and even the downtrodden people of the host nation.
They should all be taken on board in order to ensure
that they understand the concept of drawdown, mission
closure and departure.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

17-1465231/31
