TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 7 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 349) . . . . , . , , , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . , . . , .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . , . .

Page

1

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . , . , , .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggressionthreatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
theSecurityCouncil(S/7910)
.... ...,................. ..... ...

S/PV. 1349

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of the Official Records

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in -1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securily Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York, on Wednesday, 7 June 1967, at 1 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).
Present: The representatives of the ,following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, ,Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1349)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its. repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peaceand security” (S/7907).

the United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the .Council chamber in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Eban (Isme!),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria), Mr. S.
Chammas (Lebanon), Mr. K Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T.
Benhima (Morocco), Mr. G. Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia), Mr.
G. A. Al-Rashid (Kuwait), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr.
W. El Bouri (Libya) took the places reserved for them

2. The PRESIDENT: In response to an urgent request
received this morning from the Permanent Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, I consulted my
colleagues on the Council and convened this meeting at
short notice, in accordance with the understanding that
members would hold themselves in readiness should the
circumstances or the developments necessitate the convening of a meeting at short notice.
3. The Security Council will now continue its discussion
of the three items inscribed on its agenda.

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

4. Mr. FEDORENKO

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

lics) (translated from Russian): My delegation has asked for

an urgent meeting of the Security Council in cormetion
with the situation in the Near East.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

5. Yesterday evening /1348th meeting] the Security
Council, as we all know, unanimously adopted resolution
233 (1967) calling for an immediate ceasefire and a
cessation of military activities in the Near East. In so doing
the Council took a decision that Israel’s aggression against
the Arab States should cease immediately and unconditionally. But the information now being received demonstrates beyond doubt that the forces of the aggressor are
continuing their military activities, in disregard of the
Security Council resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Cooncil (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to tha President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)

6. May I say that my delegation has at yesterday’s meeting
explained its position of principle and given its assessment
of the events ocurring in the Near East area. We should now
like to confirm this position and assessment of ours once
again.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,

7. The Soviet Union decisively and categorically condemns
Israel’s absolutely unjustified aggression against the Arab
States. We feel we must stressthe fact that the continuation
1

i

(233 (1967)] calling upon the Governments concerned as
a first step to take forthwith all measures for an
immediate cease-fire and for a cessation of all military
activities in the area. This cable is to inform Your
Excellency that the Government of the Hashemite King
dom of Jordan has taken note of the Security Council
resolution and has authorized me to convey its acceptance of the said cease-fire resolution. I would add that I
was in telephonic contact with Mr. El-Farra, our permanent delegate, when the Security Council voted the
cease-fire resolution unanimously. Consequently, immediate orders were issued to our armed forces to observe
the cease-fireresolution except in self-defence.

of military activities by the aggressor, in defiance of the
Security Council’s resolution, may create an even more
menacing situation in the area. We consider that this is not
the time for any postponements or procrastination, The
Soviet Union for its part believes that the Security Council
should without any delay demand, as a first step, a
cease-fire and a cessation of all military activities in this
area at 2000 hours GMT on 7 June.
8. Accordingly
resolution:

we are introducing

the following draft

“The Security Council,
“Noting that, in spite of its appeal to the Governments
concerned to take forthwith as a first step all measures
for an immediate cease-fire (and for a cessation of all
military activities in the Near East [resolution 233
(1967)], military activities in the area are continuing,

“Ahmad TOUKAN
‘Minister for ForeignAffairs”

The cable is dated 7 June 1967. I have, by telephone,
informed the Government of Israel of its contents through
the Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations.

“Concerned that the continuation of military activities
may create an even more menacing situation in the area,

14. The Chief of Staff of UNTSO reports that on the
morning of 7 June the Jordan-Israel Mixed Armistice
Commission headquarters was occupied by Israel forces.
The Chief of Staff of UNTSO lodged a strong protest with
the Israel authorities, insisting that the Mixed Armistice
Commission headquarters should be evacuated at the
earliest possible moment by Israel troops.

“1. Demands that the Governments concerned should
as a first step cease fire and discontinue all military
activities at 2000 hours GMT on 7 June 1967;
“2.

Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Coun-

cil promptly
fS/7940]

and currently informed on the situation.”
15. I regret to inform the Council of the death of an
UNTSO observer, Commandant Wickham of the Irish
Army, who was killed on 7 June on the road between
Kuneitra and Damascus, I wish to express my sympathy
and condolences to the Government of Ireland and the
family of Commandant Wickham.

9. The USSR delegation insists on an immediate vote. I
should like to stress that we are not raising a new question,
but responding to the need to ensure compliance with the
resolution which the Security Council adopted yesterday,
in view of the extremely serious situation in the Near East.
10. The Security Council must take the necessarydecision
without any delay.

16. I have instructed the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to do
whatever he can to continue with his functions and to make
his good offices available to the parties whenever there is an
opportunity to do so.

1.1. The PRESIDENT: The members of the Council have
heard the text of the draft resolution being submitted by
the representative of the Soviet Union. He insisted on an
immediate vote, taking into account that it was not a new
matter before the Council but, rather, that the aim was to
ensure the implementation of the resolution adopted by the
Cpuncil last night; and also taking into account the extreme
gravity of the situation.

17. The Commander of UNEF reports that he is continuing his efforts to ensure the security of the remaining
contingents of UNEF pending their evacuation. He reports
that none of the units are at present in danger. Urgent
efforts continue to find methods for their evacuation.
18. I also regret to have to report to the Council that the
death of one Brazilian soldier of UNEF in Rafah Camp on 5
June is now officially confirmed. The Commander of UNEF
has also informed me that, according to the latest information, the casualties suffered by the Indian contingent are
nine killed, twenty wounded and twelve missing. I have
expressed to the Governments of India and Brazil my deep
sorrow at these casualties.

12. I suggest that before we proceed with our discussion
we should ask the Secretary-General to give us the
information he has received in reply to the request
transmitted to the parties by the Secretary-General in
pursuance of our resolution of last night. I now call on the
Secretary-General.
13. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I received this morning the following cable1 from the Foreign Minister of
Jordan:

19. In view of the occupation of the headquarters of both
UNTSO in Jerusalem and UNEF in Gaza by Israel troops, I
have formally approached the Government of Israel to ask
for their assurancesthat the records and documents of both
of these headquarters, which are of both practical importance and irreplaceable historic value, will be preserve! and
protected, undisturbed and undamaged, until UNTSO and
UNEF personnel return to their respective headquarters.

“I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your
cable informing me of the Security Council resolution
1 Subsequentlycirculated as document S/7946.
2

20. I have no further detailed information about the
fighting, which I understand to be continuing at numerous
points.

submitted a draft resolution informally
I shall now read out:

to members, which

“The Security Council,

21, The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for
Ms statement. I now call on the representative of Brazil ou
a point of order.

“Having heard the report of the Secretary-General on
the recent outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East,
“Gravely concerned at the outbreak of fighting and
with the menacing situation in the area,

22. Mr, SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): We are all anxious to
have the cease-fire resolution which the Council unammously adopted yesterday complied with, The fighting in
the Middle East must stop as soon as possible, and my
delegation appreciates the initiative that has now been
taken by the Soviet Union delegation. However, this is a
very serious and grave matter. In spite of all the urgency
that the matter requires, my delegation believes that we
should have at least a short time to reflect and meditate on
the text before us and to have some consultation among
members, The Council could hardly vote on a draft
resolution that we have barely had time to read, It took
two days of strenuous negotiation for us to agree on a
cease-fire resolution while the fighting was raging, My
delegation thinks that it would be only fair to have a very
short recessso that we can at least become acquainted with
the wording of the text before us.

“I. Calls upon all the Governments concerned to take
forthwith all steps for an immediate cease-fire;
“2. CalIs upon all Governments to co-operate fully
with the United Nations in its task of supervising the
observance of the cease-fire;
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council promptly and currently informed on the implementation of this resolution.”
30. When the President circulated that draft resomtion to
members of the Council, my delegation, among many
others, strongly supported urgent and immediate action
upon it, which we felt would have a good effect upon the
situation and which we felt could contain the situation. It is
a matter of profound regret to my Government that that
draft resolution was not supported by other Powers.

23. Therefore, I would suggest that we recess for twenty
minutes and then resume to vote on the draft resolution.

31. We strongly support implementation
of a cease-fire
resolution. President Johnson said yesterday:

24. The PRESIDENT: I take it that the representative of
Brazil has made a motion under rule 33, paragraph 3, of the
provisional rules of procedure, “to adjourn the meeting to a
certain day or hour”.

“We believe a cease-tire is the necessary ‘first step’ , , . a
first step toward what we all must hope will be a new
time of settled peace and progress for all the peoples of
the Middle East.”

25. Before putting the motion to the vote, I call on the
representative of the United States, who has asked to speak.

32. That is our position. We reaffirm it here today. We
have not changed our mind. We had this view on Monday;
we had it last night; we have it today.

26, Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I do not
object to the suggestion made by the representative of
Brazil, Mr, Sette Camara, but I would like to speak briefly.

33. I shall be glad to consult with my colleagues, for the
reasons stated by the representative of Brazil, Mr. Sette
Camara.

27. My delegation has been conscious of the gravity of this
situation not since last night, but for three weeks. At the
1348th meeting of the Council last night I made specific
references to the records of the Council and official
statements on behalf of our Government.

34. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of France has
asked to speak on the motion made by the representative of
Brazil, and I now call on him.
35. Mr. SEYDOWX (France) (translated from French): In
the spirit which prompted the brief statement by the
representative of Brazil, I entirely support what he said and
associate myself with his proposal.

28. I think that the sequence of events should be very
clear to the: members of the Council and to the world
community. We pointed out the extreme gravity of the
situation. If certain Powers had not objected and had not
deprecated our statements about the gravity of the situation, a resolution would have been in the hands of the
CWIPA for effective action to avert the outbreak of
hostilities in the Middle East, with all the consequences that
have ensued. But regrettably, our consistent requests and
our consistent demands for action by the Council to call on
all parties, in the strongest terms possible, to exercise
restraint were not heeded.

36. My delegation, approves of the idea of repeating the
request for a cease-fire which was unanimously adopted by
the Security Council yesterday, and is ready to vote in
favour of the text submitted this morning, just as it voted
for the draft resolution adopted yesterday. However, we
feel that for purely practical reasons a short suspension of
the meeting is necessary. In view of the circumstances and
the need for the text to be circulated in the working
languages, my delegation feels that this recess for technical
reasons could be very brief and should not last more than
ten to fifteen minutes.

29. But more than that: On Monday morning the President, conscious of his responsibilities to the Council,
3

-

more than ten or fifteen minutes and this must not lead to
further delays.

37. The PRESIDENT: The next representative who has
asked to speak on the motion made by the representative of
Brazil is the representative of the Soviet Union, on whom I
now call.

42. The PRESIDENT: After the intervention of the
representative of Brazil, I asked whether he wasmaking his
motion under rule 33, paragraph 3, to adjourn the meeting
to a certain day or hour. I call the attention of the
representative of the USSR to the final part of rule 33 of
the provisional rules of procedure, which reads as follows:

38, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russia??): Mr. President, I do not
intend to repeat what I said a moment ago. I still insist on
an immediate vote, But I do have some understanding for
the point made by the representative of Brazil.

“Any motion for the suspension or for the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without
debate.”

39. On the other hand, Mr. President, I cannot understand
why, after referring to the Security Council’s provisional
rules of procedure and having in mind rule 33, you have
nevertheless to all intents and purposes opened the debate.
This rule states that:

That means suspension or simple adjournment as referred
to in rule 33, paragraphs 1 and 2. If a motion is made under
either of those two paragraphs, there can be no debate.
However, since the motion was made under rule 33,
paragraph 3, the President has to piit the question under
debate.

“Any motion for the suspension or for the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without
debate.”
40. I am thinking of the rather long statement-m view of
the hour-made by the representative of the United States
of America, I should like to repeat again that this is not the
time for discussions or for historical reminiscences, and
even less for quoting one’s own speeches,whatever pleasure
this may give to the speakers concerned and their friends.

43. Is there any objection to adjourning for fifteen
minutes? As there is no objection, we shall adjourn and
meet again at 2 o’clock.
It was so decided.

41. Having regard to the point made by Mr. Seydoux, the
French representative, I agree to a suspension, but for not

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

4
Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

0835’7-November

1970-2,100
