S/PV.8244

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8244th meeting

Thursday, 26 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra/Mr. Tenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-12527 (E)
*1812527*

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain,
Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Mrs. María Rubiales de Chamorro, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
2/66

26/04/2018

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Two weeks ago, the SecretaryGeneral addressed the Security Council on the crisis in
the Middle East and the threats to international peace
and security (see S/PV.8231). He spoke of a region that
is plagued by sectarian divisions, by imploding States
and exploding extremist groups; a region in which
anger and frustration quickly turn to terror, violence
and radicalism; a region where the battle between
moderation and radicalism is the battle for the future
of millions of people. What happens in the Middle
East today has immediate implications for the rest of
the world.
Outside interference is transforming domestic
conflicts into regional wars. In Syria, we see
confrontations between several national armies, their
proxies, various armed opposition groups, militias,
foreign fighters and multiple terrorist organizations.
Humanitarian crises are escalating and spreading
across borders. In Yemen, we are witnessing the worst
humanitarian disaster of our time. Old wounds continue
to bleed and deepen as we speak, risking the outbreak of
another war. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues
with no prospect of a political resolution, and Gaza is
about to explode. Gross violations of international law,
including human rights law and humanitarian law, have
become the hallmark of the region.
Today, the risk of miscalculation grows, increasing
the danger of a wider conflagration as violence spills
across borders. In that highly charged and dangerous
environment, whether in Syria, Yemen or Gaza, one word
becomes critical. It is de-escalation — de-escalation
of the dangerous military buildup; de-escalation of
the inflammatory and provocative political rhetoric.
Everyone in the Middle East needs to step back from
the brink. There is no military solution to the conflicts
of the region.
Amid these complex conditions, my counterparts
in the region and I regularly emphasize in our briefings
to the Council the rapidly shifting regional dynamics.
The United Nations is working tirelessly to prevent
further deterioration, while supporting national
political processes region-wide. We in the field need
the international community to continue supporting
multilateral mechanisms promoting security, stability
and development in the region. We see the need for
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more multilateralism that blends humanitarian and
development interventions with preventive diplomacy
and crisis management.
As stated by the Secretary-General, the changing
nature of conflict means that prevention should be at
the centre of our efforts. It is most certainly needed
when dealing with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Although the urgency of the grave situations in Syria,
Yemen and elsewhere has understandably focused
international attention, Palestine remains a central
part of the regional quagmire. Until the occupation
ends and a two-State solution is achieved through
meaningful negotiations based on relevant United
Nations resolutions, the conflict will remain one of
the key drivers of extremism and a persistent threat to
regional stability.
Gaza is coming apart as we speak. It is coming
apart under the pressure of an explosive combination
of negative humanitarian, security and political factors.
If another conflict between Hamas and Israel were
to erupt, it would have devastating consequences for
Palestinians in Gaza. It could undermine the relative
stability of the West Bank and have repercussions for
Israel and the region. I say this with a heavy heart and
in the hope that all of us will do our utmost, in the spirit
of preventive diplomacy.
For the past four weeks, tens of thousands of
Palestinians in Gaza have converged on the border
with Israel in the context of the Great March of Return
protests. Demonstrations are expected to continue and
culminate around 15 May, and could spread to the
West Bank and beyond. Since 30 March, during these
demonstrations 35 Palestinians have been killed and
a large number have been injured by Israeli security
forces. No Israeli casualties have been reported.
There has also been an increasing number of
dangerous incidents at the fence, including the planting
of improvised explosive devices — at least one of which
detonated — the throwing of Molotov cocktails and
attempts to breach the fence. Israel has accused Hamas,
Islamic Jihad and other militants of using the protests,
women, children and the elderly as a cover to infiltrate
Israel and to commit terrorist attacks. As these protests
continue, tension and the potential for serious incidents
and further casualties will increase.
I have engaged in an intense effort with all sides
to reduce the risks of friction and welcome efforts,
particularly those of Egypt and others, to the same

S/PV. 8244

effect. Israel must calibrate its use of force and
minimize the use of live fire. Lethal force should be
used only as a last resort. Hamas and the leaders of
the demonstrations must keep protestors away from
the Gaza fence and prevent all violent actions and
provocations. The Secretary-General has been vocal in
reiterating these messages and calling for restraint, and
has repeatedly called for all incidents to be investigated.
Children, who should be particularly protected, are
at grave risk. Sadly, to date we have witnessed at least
four who have been shot dead by Israeli live fire. I take
this opportunity to reiterate in the strongest possible
terms that civilians, particularly children, must not
be intentionally put in danger or targeted in any way.
Everyone must ensure that civilians are able to exercise
their right to demonstrate peacefully. I welcome recent
reports that the Israel Defense Forces have established
a team to examine the use of force during the current
protests, including all incidents of fatal shooting, and
reiterate the importance of conducting an independent
investigation for results to be credible.
In other incidents, two Hamas militants were shot
dead on 30 March in an exchange of fire near Gaza’s
fence, and five rockets and mortars were fired towards
Israel in the past month. On 12 April, one person was
killed by an Israeli air strike after a group of Palestinian
militants targeted an Israeli aircraft with machine gun
fire. At least three additional militants were killed by
the Israeli security forces in separate incidents. On
15 April, Israel announced that it had sealed the fifth
Hamas tunnel in the past six months leading from Gaza
into its territory. The Israeli security forces also foiled
an attempt in the West Bank to smuggle 10 pipe bombs
that were reportedly intended for an attack on Israel’s
Independence Day.
As I have said repeatedly, all militant activity in
Gaza, including the digging of tunnels and the firing of
rockets, must cease. It threatens the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians alike, increases the risk of a new escalation
of hostilities, undermines calls for lifting the closures,
and ultimately damages the prospects for peace. I call
on all Member States to join the United Nations in
condemning such actions.
On top of the security risks escalating in Gaza, the
humanitarian situation continues to rapidly deteriorate.
Starting in March 2017 and without prior notice, the
Palestinian Authority reduced the salary benefits of
thousands of public sector employees in the Strip

18-125273/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by over 30 per cent. One year later, in March 2018
it suspended the payment of salaries to some 20,000
civil servants in Gaza. The impact of this decision
has been devastating. Gaza’s already faltering public
service will move further towards a total collapse.
Hospitals and clinics, schools, water and wastewater
treatment facilities, garbage collection, transportation
and other critical services will be critically impacted.
I have engaged with the Palestinian Authority on the
destructive impact of such decisions, which pressure
ordinary families that are already struggling to make
ends meet. That is why I call on the Palestinian
Government to resume the payment of public-sector
salaries in Gaza without delay.
We must immediately deal with the humanitarian
crisis that is unfolding. Israel must relax movement
and access restrictions on Gaza to enable the economy
to recover, with due consideration for its legitimate
security concerns. In this context, I take note of the
decision to increase the fishing zone from six to nine
nautical miles, and urge that the zone be extended
further and on a permanent basis. I also note our
continuing engagement with Israel and the Palestinian
Authority on the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism.
I want to assure the Council that the United Nations
is working intensely with partners to prioritize energy
and water initiatives discussed in the format of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, as well as in
our donor meetings in Cairo and Washington, D.C. The
long-term goal of increasing energy supply must be
pursued, alongside immediate and short-term projects
in the Gaza Strip.
Compounding the deteriorating humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza are the stalled efforts to restore
Palestinian Authority control over the Strip. Despite the
best efforts of Egypt, the implementation of the Cairo
agreement has come to a halt. I urge all Palestinian
factions to engage with Egypt and redouble their efforts
to enable the legitimate Palestinian Government to
be fully empowered in Gaza. The combination of the
security, development and humanitarian deterioration
that we are seeing Gaza, coupled with the political
impasse, makes the Strip a powder-keg.
Notwithstanding the tragic developments in the
rest of the region, we must do everything possible to
prevent another war in Gaza. It is imperative that the
international community and the Security Council
4/66

26/04/2018

support the efforts of the United Nations and key
stakeholders to address the security, humanitarian and
political challenges that I have outlined. The tragic
events in Gaza have reinforced the growing risks
of implosion and explosion, with potentially grave
consequences elsewhere in the region. Palestine refugee
camps in the occupied Palestinian territory, Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria are highly vulnerable.
In this context, the situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is particularly worrying. Even
with the welcome pledges of some $100 million last
month in Rome, the recent $50-million pledged by Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, respectively, and
the $10-million contribution just announced by Japan,
UNRWA operations are funded only into the summer.
Shutting down or reducing services at this critical
time would further destabilize the region. The ability
of half a million Palestinian refugee students across
the Middle East to start the new school year, must be
protected. Just in Gaza, UNRWA serves as a lifeline for
more than 1 million people — half the population — who
are at risk of losing access to health services, education
and food. Without those services, we should anticipate
a dramatic increase in social unrest, poverty, hunger
and psychosocial problems, not only in Gaza but across
the region. I again appeal to Member States to ensure
funding for UNRWA.
Turning briefly to the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, there have been no settlement
plans approved or tenders issued in the reporting period.
However, settlement construction and the demolition of
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C have continued.
The United Nations considers all settlement activities
illegal under international law and an obstacle to peace.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, in Area C of the West Bank
35 structures were demolished, including a school in
the Hebron community of Khirbet Zanuta. The only
school of the Al-Muntar Bedouin community is also at
risk of being demolished. Meanwhile, attacks against
Palestinians and the vandalism of property are also
increasing. On 13 April a mosque in the West Bank
was badly damaged in another apparent hate crime and
arson attack.
Turning to Lebanon, allow me to note that
preparations for the first parliamentary elections in
nearly a decade continue on track. In Lebanon, the
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8244

United Nations engages with stakeholders in order
to ensure that credible and inclusive elections will
be followed by the swift formation of a Government.
That is important in order to safeguard the country’s
stability and to sustain the positive momentum of the
recent Rome II and CEDRE conferences. The Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
remains engaged with regional stakeholders to defuse
tensions and to prevent the risk of conflict spilling over,
including into Lebanon.

Palestinian conflict remains a perpetual source of
oxygen for militants and radicals across the region.

The situation in southern Lebanon and along the
Blue Line remains calm but tense. South of the Blue
Line, Israel proceeded with construction in several
locations outside the Lebanese reservation areas.
On 8 and 12 April, tension increased, with Lebanese
demonstrations north of the Blue Line in the vicinity of
the works. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
has maintained close liaison with the parties, including
at the tripartite level, to prevent misunderstandings
and miscalculations.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.

I would like to conclude with some brief reflections
on the situation in Gaza, the peace process and the
regional impact. What is happening in Gaza today
is an injustice that no man, woman or child should
have to endure. The deplorable living conditions, the
consequences of the continued suffocating closures and
the control of Hamas and the increasing risk that Gaza
could trigger a new conflict are building up. People
should not be destined to spend their lives surrounded
by borders that they are forbidden to cross or waters
that they are forbidden to navigate. They should
not be destined to live under the control of Hamas,
which invests in military activities at the expense of
the population.
I firmly believe that there is a way out. The
challenges are political and man-made and therefore
resolvable if all sides firmly commit to supporting
practical solutions that can be implemented quickly,
effectively and sustainably.
However, Gaza is only part of the story. We
must also step up our efforts to support the parties in
advancing a sustainable Israeli-Palestinian peace on the
basis of the two-State solution. The prospects for peace
are slipping further and further away, emboldening
extremists and deepening polarization and mistrust on
all sides. With tensions mounting across the region, the
lack of progress should worry us all. The fires of the
Middle East continue to expand and shift. The Israeli-

Establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict would eliminate a chronic
source of instability and violence from the region. The
United Nations will continue to make every effort in
the pursuit of that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine. I congratulate Peru on its presidency of the
Security Council and on its skilled leadership of the
Council at this critical time.
Today, I must also express sincere condolences to
the Council and to the Permanent Mission, Government
and people of Côte d’Ivoire, in particular, on the passing
of our dear colleague, Ambassador Bernard TanohBoutchoue. May he rest in eternal peace. He was truly
a kind and genuine diplomat. He will be greatly missed.
We thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing. We express our appreciation for
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Mladenov, including the recent statements made
in line with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. While such statements should be
considered standard, we are obliged to recognize them
in view of the constant harassment and intimidation to
which the United Nations and its representatives are
exposed every time they risk taking a public, principled
stand on our issue, as opposed to the artificial and socalled balanced stand that Israel bullies States into
adopting, despite the complete lack of symmetry in the
abnormal and unjust situation.
Today, that extremely abnormal and unjust situation
is most starkly exemplified by the dire situation in the
Gaza Strip, where for more than a decade 2 million
Palestinians, the majority of whom are refugees, have
been subjected to an illegal Israeli land, sea and air
blockade. That has vastly compounded the misery and
suffering inflicted on the Palestinian people by the five
decades of Israeli military occupation since 1967 and
the seven decades of dispossession and denial of their
right to return to their homes and ancestral lands since
their ruthless uprooting in the Nakba of 1948.

18-125275/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Yet, as in all other areas of occupied Palestine
and in exile in the refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria, our people in Gaza have remained more
than patient. Despite the repeated upheavals, assaults,
crises, deep deprivation and marginalization, they
have remained steadfast, as is also reflected at this
time in the perseverance of the Palestinian refugees in
Syria, who face the extreme hardships and dangers of
war. That resilient and hopeful spirit is at the heart of
the Great March of Return, launched by Palestinians
in Gaza on 30 March, Land Day, and of the protests
carried out since then.
Contrary to Israeli propaganda, the protests
have been peaceful demonstrations by unarmed
and defenceless Palestinian civilians calling for
their rights, including to return, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and to selfdetermination, and demanding an end to the Israeli
blockade that has collectively punished, impoverished
and disfigured the entire society. Exercising their right
to peaceful assembly, those men, women and young
people are protesting an oppression that can no longer
be endured, pleading for their voices to be heard.
The Palestinian people live under the longest
military occupation and most protracted refugee crisis
in modern history. They endure constant displacement,
colonization and demonization, all aimed at their denial.
Against that backdrop, the restraint should be seen as
extraordinary and such protests as a natural response
to the illegal and cruel occupation. Let us all here agree
that it is not a benign occupation. Even deeming it a
belligerent occupation is an understatement.
Why is the occupying Power therefore so surprised
that a people would rise up to demand its dignity and
freedom? Why is it so outrageous that a people would
use all possible peaceful means to bring an end to its
persecution? Why have Israeli officials commanded
their military forces to fire at peaceful protesters?
Why are civilians, including children, being targeted
with live ammunition in a blatant shoot-to-kill-andmaim pattern, with at least 41 Palestinians killed by the
occupying forces and more than 5,000 injured, many
permanently disabled by the severity of their injuries,
since the protests began?
Where else in the world could an entire civilian
population, over half of them children, be imprisoned
and designated as a target, as is being done by Israeli
War Minister Avigdor Lieberman? Minister Lieberman
6/66

26/04/2018

has openly declared that “there are no innocent civilians
in Gaza”, meaning that the 2 million inhabitants of Gaza
are not innocent and a legitimate target. This same
Minister also declared, in referring to video footage
of an Israeli soldier deliberately shooting a Palestinian
man, that “the sniper deserves a promotion, whereas the
cameraman deserves a demotion”. Such wilful targeting
of civilians is terrorism in every sense of the word. It
is a grave breach of international humanitarian, human
rights and criminal law and violates the obligation to
protect civilians.
The international community must demand answers
from Israel. The Security Council’s failure to address
this situation cannot be justified. The Council must
speak with one voice to condemn these crimes, insist on
their cessation, including a full lifting of the blockade,
demand an investigation and ensure protection for the
Palestinian people based on international law.
We welcome the calls of the Secretary-General
and other leaders for an independent, transparent
investigation of the recent killings of Palestinian
civilians by Israeli occupying forces and urge its
swift launching via an international mechanism that
will ensure a legitimate investigation and not another
whitewash. But an investigation is not an end in itself;
rather, it must be part of broader efforts to ensure
accountability, end this entire travesty of justice and
make peace. In this regard, we thank the 14 members
of the Security Council that tried in the first and
second weeks, through the efforts of our brothers in
the delegation of Kuwait, to endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an independent and transparent
investigation. We all, unfortunately, know the reason
why such an investigation will not take place and why
the statement to the press was not endorsed.
The truth, however, is that Israel does not want
peace. Listen to official Israeli statements, including
the statement made by the Israeli representative in
this Chamber, who will no doubt again attack our
delegation for standing up for our rights and renew
Israel’s attempt to shame Security Council members
for daring to call for respect of the Charter and United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
In this regard, it is totally illogical and absurd to reward
Israel’s illegal behaviour with support for its brazen
candidacy to the Security Council, a body it has never
respected and constantly mocks, and whose credibility
it undermines. It is audacious for the Israelis to seek to
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

be a member of a club that they despise and disrespect,
and whose resolutions they refuse to implement.
If Israel had even remotely ever sought peace — as
opposed to using peace talks as a cover for its continued
land grab and de facto annexation schemes — then we
would not be in the dire situation we are in today. If
Israel truly sought peace, we would not be witness to
the brutal murders of young Palestinian boys, such
as Mohammed Ayyoub, age 15, who was savagely
shot in the head and killed by an Israeli soldier while
peacefully protesting with other civilians at the Gaza
border; or the killing of young photojournalist Yaser
Murtaja, age 30, shot while covering the protests,
despite wearing clearly marked press gear, ending
his life and his dream to travel out of Gaza one day, a
dream repeatedly denied by the Israeli blockade; or the
killing of a young deaf Palestinian, Tahrir Mahmoud
Wahba, age 18, who was shot by an Israeli soldier
during the 13 April protests and died this week of his
wounds; or the killing of so many other Palestinians in
recent weeks and the critical conditions of at least 100
persons suffering life-threatening injuries caused by
the deadly weaponry and munitions used against them
by the occupying forces.
Just like the thousands before them, they have been
killed for being Palestinians — for being non-Jews — in
an ongoing campaign of ethnic cleansing, colonization
and dehumanization of the Palestinian people. In this
context, we must refer to a recent declaration by the socalled Justice Minister of Israel, who stated that “there
is a place to maintain a Jewish majority even at the
price of violation of rights”.
On the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the
Nakba, it is a tragic fact that our Nakba continues, with
destructive and malicious crimes being perpetrated
against our people with absolute impunity. Before
the eyes of the world, young innocents are brutally
murdered; the lives of millions of families are destroyed;
our land is stolen and fragmented by Israeli settlements
and a medieval wall; the heart of our country, Jerusalem,
has been seized and isolated, and the sanctity and
historical status of its holy sites violated; our people in
Gaza are inhumanely besieged and blockaded; Israeli
settlers ruthlessly terrorize Palestinian civilians; and
thousands of Palestinians, including 350 children,
62 women and six parliamentarians, continue to be
imprisoned, detained and tortured for rejecting this
illegal occupation and its gross violation of their rights.

S/PV. 8244

All of the foregoing is being committed deliberately,
in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and in violation of the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations and all human rights instruments to
which Israel is a signatory and claims to respect, which
amounts to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
And yet, despite all of this, the Palestinian people and
leadership remain committed to the pursuit of a just and
peaceful solution. We also continue to seek, despite all
the obstacles, the genuine resolution and reconciliation
so essential for fulfilling our national aspirations.
That is why President Mahmoud Abbas came
before the Security Council on 20 February, with due
respect for its authority (see S/PV.8183). We have again
made an appeal for our rights and extended our hand
in peace. This peace plan, centred on the established
international terms of reference and parameters for a
peaceful solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is a serious attempt to bring the situation
back from the brink.
We are grateful for the support given to this
plan, including by Security Council members and
other States, as well as by the recent League of Arab
States summit — the Jerusalem Summit, held in Saudi
Arabia — and by the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We appeal today
for efforts to be made to back this plan and mobilize for
its implementation.
But no matter how many times we reaffirm our
commitment to peace, no matter the efforts exerted
over years of negotiations and the historic compromises
made to that end, Israel continues to respond with
aggression and contempt. At every juncture, the
Israeli Government has obstructed peace efforts and
ignored the international community’s will, choosing
instead to escalate violence, incitement and hateful
rhetoric against our people, alongside its settlement and
annexation policies, destroying the two-State solution
on the 1967 borders and the potential for peace.
To this, we must say that peace cannot be realized in
the absence of respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and its resolutions; nor can it be
realized absent the fulfilment of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, foremost among them the
right to self-determination, a right that no one on this
Earth would willingly forsake. Plans that disregard
those fundamentals will never bring peace.

18-125277/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That is why the United States decision on Jerusalem
and the impending transfer of its embassy, in violation
of Security Council resolutions, have so negatively
impacted the chances for resuming peace talks. As
with other key components, there can be no just and
sustainable solution without Jerusalem. East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967 and is the capital of the State of
Palestine, regardless of the passage of time and of
Israel’s measures aimed at forcibly and illegally altering
the city’s legal status, character and demographics.
It is therefore extremely regrettable that, instead
of rejecting Israel’s illegal actions, a few States
are emboldening its impunity. Recent decisions,
including by Guatemala, mirroring the United States
decision and flouting relevant resolutions — including
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which reaffirms
Jerusalem’s status as occupied and calls on all States to
distinguish between Israel and the territory occupied
since 1967 — evoke complicity with Israel’s violations
and should be rescinded immediately.
No action taken by Israel or any other State can
negate the applicability of international law to this
situation, including in regard to the prohibition of
acquisition of territory by force. Such actions have
zero legal effect and cannot negate Palestinian rights
or legitimate national aspirations. We stand firmly in
our conviction, and will continue using all peaceful,
diplomatic and legal means to protect our people,
uphold their rights and protect our land.
We reiterate our call on the international
community to also remain resolute in rejecting Israel’s
illegal policies and practices. All States must demand a
complete halt to and disassociate themselves from such
violations in order to bring an end to the occupation
and enable the realization of justice and the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including to freedom
and independence.
Moreover, we urge the international community
to maintain its solidarity with and support to the
Palestinian people. Responsible humanitarian action,
including support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), has been a lifeline over the decades.
At this moment of the heightened vulnerability we
are witnessing — particularly these days — in Gaza
and in the light of the unprecedented financial crisis
faced by UNRWA, we appeal for enhanced support to
8/66

26/04/2018

ensure the Agency’s vital humanitarian, development
and protection assistance to our refugees and its crucial
contribution to regional stability.
In closing, we reiterate our call on the Security
Council to act now, in line with its Charter duties,
to de-escalate this dangerous situation, to deter the
occupying Power’s crimes, to prevent further loss of
innocent lives and to salvage the prospects for a just
peace before it is too late and the consequences are too
grave — something not unimaginable in the current
international environment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Before we begin, I want to
convey my heartfelt condolences to the people of
Côte d’Ivoire on the sudden passing of our colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
Last week, Israel marked the 70th anniversary of
our independence. It was a joyous occasion celebrating
the return to our historic homeland and all we have
accomplished in seven short decades. But it was also
a time to recall how fragile our independence was for
many years. The day Israel was established, we were
attacked on all sides. At least once in every decade
following 1948, our survival came into immediate
question.
Today, Israel is stronger than ever. We have built
a robust, flourishing democracy, an open society
dedicated to freedom. And even though our survival
may not be in question as it once was, our country faces
very real threats. We have learned the hard way that
Iran spreads its tentacles all over the globe. It promotes
terrorism on our borders and instability worldwide.
To our north, we face two of these Iranian
proxies — the terrorists of Hizbullah, who have
amassed over 100,000 rockets and missiles aimed at our
cities and towns, and the dangerous Al-Assad regime in
Syria, the Iranian puppet that poisons its own people.
To our south, we have the Hamas-controlled
Gaza. Hamas is an internationally designated terrorist
organization. It is amassing its own stockpile of rockets
to fire at our citizens while continuing to dig terror
tunnels underground. It is that same barbaric entity that
holds Israeli citizens hostage and denies the families of
two of our soldiers the basic dignity of burying their
loved ones.
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For the past few weeks, Hamas has orchestrated
a series of provocations and confrontations along the
security fence between Israel and Gaza. Hamas and
the Palestinian Authority continue to claim that those
protests are peaceful demonstrations of solidarity.
They are not. There is nothing peaceful about placing
explosives on the fence separating Israel from Gaza.
There is nothing peaceful about terrorists firing over
the fence at our positions. And there is nothing peaceful
about setting off firebombs, burning tires and throwing
Molotov cocktails. Throughout the riots of the past
month, Hamas has used innocent Palestinian women
and children as human shields, while they cowered
behind in safety. The terrorists are hiding while
allowing — even hoping — for their people to die. This
is evil in its purest form.
Israel has an obligation to protect its citizens and
we will do so while minimizing civilian casualties to
the other side. The fact is that despite these impossible
conditions, the vast majority of those killed were
confirmed members of terrorist organizations. As
our former Prime Minister, Golda Meir, said, peace
between our peoples will come only when you love your
own children more than you hate us. Unfortunately,
that quote still correctly describes the Palestinian
leadership today. Like any law-abiding country, Israel
always ensures that, when necessary, incidents are
investigated by the proper authorities.
But let me be clear: Israel will never apologize for
defending our country. It is Israel that cares so deeply
about innocent lives. It is the Palestinian leaders who
exploit every innocent death for its shameless public
relations campaign. And it is Hamas that is fully
responsible for every Palestinian injury and death that
has resulted from these incidents.
Just two weeks ago, while too many in the world
were distracted by Palestinian propaganda, Israel’s
security forces uncovered the longest and deepest
Hamas terror tunnel discovered to date. If we had not
detected and neutralized this terror tunnel, Hamas
terrorists would have used it to infiltrate Israel and
attack our communities.
Some members of the Council have criticized
our response. But they must ask themselves a simple
question: how would Kuwait, for instance, react if
armed terrorists were marching on its border? What
would Sweden or Bolivia do to protect their people if a
violent mob threatened to infiltrate their countries? The

S/PV. 8244

answer is simple. They would defend themselves. We
will do the same. Our citizens live just a few hundred
metres from the security fence; we will protect them.
Make no mistake: these are not peaceful protests.
They are not grass-roots efforts, and they will only
become deadlier. These riots are fully orchestrated
by Hamas, and, according to Hamas leadership, the
protests will continue until at least 15 May. As Hamas
leader Ismail Haniyeh said:
“On Friday we stopped at the border. Next time, we
do not know where the border will be”.
Hamas’s goal is clear: to infiltrate Israeli territory,
either above or below ground, and to harm as many
innocents as possible.
If the Council wishes to put an end to these riots,
if it does not want to see more violence, then it must
condemn Hamas. It must hold the Palestinian leadership
accountable and demand that it end this charade, once
and for all.
We speak often of the threats posed by Hamas,
Hizbullah and the Al-Assad regime in Syria. But
we cannot forget that these threats lead back to one
source — one common thread. The Iranian regime is
the dangerous thread that ties these threats together.
We are presenting this image to the world so it can
understand the depth of Iran’s involvement in Syria.
What can be seen here is Iran’s central induction and
recruitment centre in Syria. There are more than 80,000
Shia militants in Syria under Iranian control. It is at
this base, just over 5 miles from Damascus, where they
are trained to commit acts of terror in Syria and across
the region.
This is yet another example of Iran’s presence
in Syria, about which we have warned the Council
time and again, a presence that includes the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard Corps, airfields, weapons factories
and key elements of Syria’s economy. In February, Iran
launched an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) from
Syria into Israel. Luckily, the Israeli air force was able
to shoot it down. Our thorough investigation has left
no doubt that this drone was an Iranian UAV. It shares
key indicators and markers of the Iranian Shahed-129s
that have fallen over Syria and Pakistan in recent years.
When we investigated the remains of the downed UAV,
we discovered that it contained explosive materials.
Those materials were different from those used in the
missiles that intercepted it.

18-125279/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The conclusion is clear: that UAV not only violated
our sovereignty, but was intended to be used as an
offensive weapon against targets in Israel.
These threats can be stopped, but only if the
international community acts together. In just two and
half weeks, the United States will announce its decision
regarding the fate of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). Iran claims that its nuclear pursuits
are peaceful and purely for self-defence, though nothing
could be further from the truth. The regime proudly
parades its missiles in city centres. Written on the
sides of these missiles are calls to destroy Israel. Iran’s
leaders make no effort to hide their hope of wiping
Israel off the map.
President Trump is focused on important changes
to the current situation, because he knows it will make
the world safer. He knows that we must change course,
and we must do it now. International inspectors must
be granted full access to all suspicious nuclear sites
in Iran, including military facilities. Iran must end
the development and testing of its advanced ballisticmissile programme. And the agreement’s expiration
date must be extended or eliminated.
We must increase monitoring and oversight of
Iran’s finances, which have grown significantly since
the JCPOA lifted the sanctions. Iran has sent this new
money directly to Hizbullah, which has used it to
build weapons factories and terror bases in Syria and
Lebanon. It has spent it on the Houthis, who continue
to attack the Gulf region with sophisticated arms and
ballistic missiles. It has reinforced Iran’s role as the
largest State sponsor of terrorism in the world.
All the signatories to the agreement must now make
a choice. Will they support the necessary changes, or
will they choose to enable the Iranian regime, which
supports terror and seeks to take over the Middle East?
They have one final opportunity to right the wrongs of
this deal. The world’s moral majority has an obligation
to end this Iranian threat. They cannot afford to put
their economic desires over the safety and security of
our world.
The choice has come to this: countries, individuals
and corporations must choose between doing business
with Iran or ensuring a stable world. They cannot have
it both ways.
Israel has had a very clear policy since the
Administration of Prime Minister Menachem Begin.
10/66

26/04/2018

We will not allow regimes that seek our destruction to
acquire nuclear weapons. Period. If there is the necessary
will on the part of the international community, Iran
can be stopped from financing, training and arming
terrorists. Iran can be stopped from enabling puppet
regimes and exploiting their countries as bases for
aggression. And most importantly, Iran can be stopped
from becoming a nuclear super-Power and a grave
threat to the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I have
spoken many times about my strong belief that this
monthly debate should be used to shed light on the
many different sources of conflict and instability in
the Middle East. There are, unfortunately, many to
choose from, some of which prompt disagreement in
the Security Council. But today, I want to address an
issue about which there should be no disagreement.
That issue is the use of innocent children, women and
men as human shields.
Tragically, this outrageous practice is reaching
epic proportions in the region. A week ago today, the
European Parliament passed a resolution condemning
Hamas for its use of human shields. We were pleased to
see this action. It is difficult to think of a more cowardly
act, even for a terrorist, than hiding behind innocent
civilians. The use of human shields deliberately gives
an advantage to those with no regard for human life
and is a disadvantage for those who seek to minimize
civilian casualties. The use of human shields is not
confined to any one conflict; it is present across the
Middle East in virtually every conflict. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) routinely used human
shields in Iraq. ISIS fighters took advantage of the
presence of civilians in their homes, hospitals, schools
and mosques.
When they were forced out of their positions, ISIS
went from door to door rounding up families and forcing
them to accompany their fighters as they evacuated their
locations. Hizbullah has also endangered civilians by
positioning its fighters and its weapons among them. Its
terrorists use schools, hospitals and apartment buildings
to shield its war arsenal in Lebanon. In the course of its
massive arms build-up, Hizbullah has turned Lebanese
villages into military compounds, stationing weapons
depots, rocket launchers and command posts in, around
and under the civilian population, in blatant defiance of
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolution 1701 (2006). Hundreds of Lebanese villages
are home to Hizbullah rockets and fighters. There are
press reports that every third or fourth house in South
Lebanon is in some way being used by Hizbullah to
shield its activities.
Another example is Yemen. The United Nations
has reported that Houthi militants have used Yemeni
civilians as human shields.
Lastly, Hamas has exploited and endangered the
very Palestinian people it claims to represent by locating
rocket launchers near schools, apartment buildings,
hotels, churches and United Nations facilities. It has
been less than a year since a Hamas terror tunnel was
discovered underneath two schools belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza. That means that
United Nations facilities were being used a cover for
Hamas’ military infrastructure.
I note the threads of commonality that run through
those examples.
The first is Iran. As usual, Iran is the patron and
protector of many of the groups that fight from behind
the bodies of innocent civilians. Groups that Iran have
sponsored or supported have perfected the tactic of
using human shields and have inspired others to do
the same. That is part of Iran’s overarching efforts to
destabilize the region — efforts that include illegal
weapons shipments to Yemen and invading Israeli air
space with armed drones from Syrian territory.
The second common thread is the dramatic risk to
civilians. For those willing to sacrifice the innocent,
there is no way to lose. Innocent civilians either provide
cover for military infrastructure or they become victims
that rally the international media to their cause. Either
way, innocent civilians are caught in the crossfire
and exploited for illegitimate military and political
purposes. All decent nations and responsible militaries
seek to minimize civilian casualties in warfare. Those
who want to reduce civilian casualties in the Middle
East must focus their attention on the actors, including
non-State actors, who intentionally keep their military
infrastructure in close proximity to civilians.
The use of civilians to intentionally shield otherwise
lawful military targets from attack is a war crime. As
is so often the case, it is the most vulnerable who pay
the price for the use of human shields. Commandeering
homes puts families who are already in wae zones

S/PV. 8244

at additional risk. Locating rocket launchers next to
schools eliminates safe places for children. Putting
command posts in the hospital shows complete
disregard for the sick, injured and the elderly. Each time
ISIS, Hizbullah or Hamas succeeds in using a village, a
family or a child to protect its terrorist operations, the
use of that grotesque tactic grows. It is a win for the
groups that are willing to endanger civilian populations
in order to accomplish their political objectives. It is a
loss for the people who play by the rules and seek to
minimize, rather than maximize civilian casualties.
Anyone who cares about the safety of Lebanese
families should condemn that practice. Anyone who
cares about the lives of Yemenis or Palestinians should
demand accountability for the militants who exploit
them. Anyone who truly cares about children in Gaza
should insist that Hamas immediately stop using
children as cannon fodder in its conflict with Israel.
That is an issue that transcends the usual debates in
the Chamber. It is quite simply an issue of decency.
Humankind itself loses when the barbaric practice
of human shields is tolerated and unanswered. For
humankind’s sake the Security Council must rise up to
address that threat.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I also thank the other two speakers for
their statements.
I think that it is obvious that the ongoing violence
on Gaza’s borders has made the past weeks particularly
challenging for all of us who are committed to pursuing
a revived Middle East peace process. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned about the recent increase
in violence and the resulting high number of Palestinians
killed and injured. We continue to strongly urge Israel
to show restraint in their response to the protests and all
actors to abide by their obligations under international
law. In particular we, along with Ambassador Haley,
reiterate the importance of protecting minors.
That said, it is crystal clear that Hamas and its
operatives have been exploiting those protests for their
own benefit. Israel has the right to secure itself against
Hamas and other terrorist groups. Given the importance
of accountability, we support an independent and
transparent investigation. We therefore welcome Israel’s
commitment to investigating the conduct of operations.

18-1252711/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We urge that its findings be made public and if wrong
doing is found that those responsible be held to account.
The immediate concern must be preventing further
violence. We urge all parties to show maximum restraint
and to do their utmost to prevent further escalation and
loss of life. In particular, we urge Israelis to reconsider
the use of live fire and we urge the Palestinian
leadership to maintain its calls for non-violent protests.
Palestinians have a fundamental right to protest
peacefully, but those with influence over Hamas must
make clear that the use of violence and aggressive
tactics is unacceptable and will do nothing to further
the Palestinian cause. The violence has, sadly, put
added strain on the already dire humanitarian situation
in Gaza. That is particularly true of the health sector,
which was already operating far beyond capacity.
The parties must do all they can to address
the underlying causes of the dire economic and
humanitarian situation. We look to Israel to lift its
movement and access restrictions on people and goods,
including by urgently granting medical permits. While
we welcome last week’s brief reopening of the Rafah
crossing, we urge Egypt to open it on a more permanent
basis in order to ease the suffering of ordinary citizens
in Gaza. Hamas must decide whether or not it is
prepared to work for the good of the Gazan people and
join efforts for peace, or whether it will continue to use
terror and neglect the basic needs of Gaza’s population.
The international community has an important
role to play in improving the humanitarian situation.
That includes continued support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which provides essential services to some of
the most vulnerable Palestinian refugees. We believe
that the situation in Gaza could be radically improved
through the return of the Palestinian Authority. The
United Kingdom remains strongly supportive of a
Hamas-Fatah reconciliation, which would see the
Palestinian Authority resuming Government functions
in Gaza and restoring effective and accountable
governance. We welcome Egypt’s facilitation role and
would like to encourage it to help the parties discuss the
most difficult issues, such as security.
The Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, has
shown outstanding leadership on both reconciliation
and on progressing access and projects to improve the
situation in Gaza. As ever, I would like to reiterate that
the United Kingdom stands ready to assist him.
12/66

26/04/2018

Like many worthwhile things, the process towards
peace requires much patience. But we know from history
that violence will not help us to achieve that ultimate
goal and that the conflict will be resolved only through
a political process to a two-State solution. There is an
urgent need for renewed negotiations that can end the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and deliver peace and safe,
secure and sovereign homes for Palestinians and Israelis
alike. The United Kingdom, again, will be committed
to doing all we can to support that goal.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict cannot be seen in
isolation from the many other conflicts in the Middle
East. Israel’s security, let alone its existence, should
not be put at risk by any United Nations Member
State. The missile build-up in Syria and elsewhere
offers a clear risk of escalation, and a slide into further
violence in Israel and the occupied territories would
have a significant detrimental effect on stability in the
wider region.
Since the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) agreement was mentioned by the Israeli
Ambassador, I would like to recall that the United
Kingdom’s position on it remains clear. We believe
that it is a crucial agreement that makes the world
safer and contributes to regional and global security
by neutralizing the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran, and
we engage all partners as we take discussions on the
JCPOA forward.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. The
question of Palestine is fundamental to the situation
in the Middle East and to the issue of achieving peace
there. Only by fully resolving it can the situation in
the Middle East be fundamentally alleviated. At he
construction of settlements continues with rising
violence, and tensions in the Gaza Strip are obvious.
China is closely following such developments and is
concerned about the high number of casualties resulting
from the conflict.
China calls on the Security Council and the
international community to remain united and work
with a greater sense of urgency to promote a political
settlement to the question of Palestine, which is in
the fundamental interests of Palestinians and Israelis
alike and is the common aspiration of the people of the
Middle East and the world at large. .
The two-State solution is the correct way to resolve
the Palestinian issue. The international community
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

should adhere to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative; step up its efforts to promote
and resume negotiations, effectively implement
resolution 2334 (2016), stop all settlement activities in
the occupied territories, and take measures to prevent
violence against civilians.All parties should remain
calm, exercise restraint, meet each other halfway and
avoid adopting measures that could exacerbate the
situation. They should also create conditions conducive
to the resumption of negotiations. Parties with strong
influence in the Middle East should also assume a
constructive role to that end.
China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support the
establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Chinese President
Xi Jinping’s four-point proposal in favour of the
settlement of the Palestinian question includes the
promotion of a political process based on a twoState solution; adherence to a shared, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept; improved
coordination of international efforts to rally support for
peace; and the implementation of a holistic approach
promoting peace through development. On that basis,
China will endeavour to play a constructive role in the
implementation of that proposal and in the realization
of the peace process in the Middle East.
The issue of Jerusalem is complex, sensitive and at
the very heart of a solution to the question of Palestine.
All parties should respect the plurality of its history,
adhere to impartiality and fairness, and implement
international consensus to achieve peaceful coexistence.
In accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
all parties should reach a solution acceptable to all and
accommodate the interests of all parties through the
final-status negotiations.
At present, the occupied Palestinian territories
are facing even greater security and humanitarian
challenges, especially in Gaza, where the humanitarian
crisis has deteriorated. The international community
must not forget the millions of Palestinian refugees
to whom humanitarian assistance must continue to be
provided. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has played an
irreplaceable role in alleviating the humanitarian crisis
in the occupied territories. We call on all parties to
continue to step up their support to the Agency and to

S/PV. 8244

countries that host Palestinian refugees so as to ease the
humanitarian situation of the refugees.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his precise and enlightening briefing, as well as for the
clear warning bells he has sounded today. We also thank
him and his team for their exemplary commitment.
We have been saying for years that the reality on
the ground is wrongly described as the status quo; it is
in fact marked by a daily deterioration of the situation,
which could erupt into an open crisis at any time in
Gaza, Jerusalem or the West Bank. Decade after
decade, peace has given way not only on the ground, but
also in speeches, in minds and in hearts, as successive
generations of Palestinians and Israelis lose hope for
a resolution of the conflict. The ongoing occupation,
the intensification of settlement activities in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem and the blockade imposed
on Gaza, as well as the inter-Palestinian division and
the continued violence, are creating an untenable
and unstable situation, as demonstrated by the three
conflicts that have struck Gaza over the past decade. In
that context and for the reasons Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
outlined, May will be a month of grave danger. The
elements for escalation and even conflagration are
present. It is therefore urgent for us to coordinate our
efforts to convey the right message to the stakeholders.
The ongoing situation in Gaza — on which my
first and main point will focus — is yet another tragic
illustration of the human consequences resulting from
the stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
addition to the ongoing risk of an armed escalation
that those tensions are fuelling, the outcome of the
repression of the weekly demonstrations that have been
taking place for a month is tragic. After four consecutive
Fridays of protests in Gaza near the border with Israel,
at least 35 people have been killed, including two
minors and two journalists, as well as several hundred
wounded by bullets.
We are extremely concerned by those developments
and their recurrence, which aggravate an already tense
situation in the Gaza Strip. A line was crossed in the
violence from the first Friday of protests, and the level
of violence has remained constant since then. The very
heavy toll of the demonstrations in recent weeks, which
we deplore, is directly linked to the inadequate and
disproportionate response now regularly offered by
the Israeli security forces. Full light must be shed on

18-1252713/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

these serious events. We take note of the announcement
made by the Israeli Defence Forces concerning the
establishment of a fact-finding mechanism. Beyond
those first steps, we recall the Secretary-General’s
request for an independent and transparent inquiry.
Two fundamental requirements must immediately
be put in place in order to avoid having the same causes
produce the same dramatic effects during the next two
Fridays and around the dates of 14 and 15 May. The first
requirement is respect for international humanitarian
law, which is fully applicable in the Gaza Strip, in
particular the responsibility to protect civilians.
The second requirement is respect for human
rights, in particular the right to demonstrate peacefully.
The measures taken to preserve the security of Israel,
which is a legitimate concern and one that we share,
must fall within the framework of international human
rights law. We therefore call on the Israeli authorities
to exercise judgement, restraint and the proportionate
use of such force as is strictly necessary. We condemn
the successive, indiscriminate firings on protesters
over the past month. Israel is a democracy and as such
must apply standard international rules of engagement
in the maintenance of order. The use of lethal weapons
must be rejected when facing unarmed demonstrators
who pose no serious or imminent threat. Several Israeli
and Palestinian non-governmental organizations have
conveyed the same message. At the same time, we call
on protesters to refrain from all outbursts and violence,
and we caution those, in particular Hamas, who would
seek to take over and exploit the demonstrations
or use them to challenge Israel’s security along the
security fence.
In Gaza, but also in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
where the protest movement threatens to spread in
the coming weeks, the risk that the situation will
degenerate and escape control is extremely high, and
this is taking place in an already tense regional context.
Everyone must therefore show restraint and a spirit of
responsibility. It is up to the Council to speak with a
strong voice so as to prevent escalation. The silence
of the Council since the beginning of the crisis must
immediately give way to a sign of unity and a clear
public expression.
I come to my second point. The violence of recent
weeks cannot be dissociated from the more general
situation in the Gaza Strip, which itself must not be
separated from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a
14/66

26/04/2018

whole. The deterioration in the humanitarian situation
in Gaza over the past year, characterized in particular
by an unprecedented energy crisis and the worsening of
the wage crisis, is closely linked to the inter-Palestinian
division. That deterioration adds to the structural
humanitarian crisis imposed by the Israeli blockade,
which has lasted for more than a decade. It feeds
the ongoing protest movement among a very young
population, which feels it has nothing to lose.
Beyond the de-escalation that is required in the
immediate future, there will be no lasting solution in Gaza
without Palestinian reconciliation under the principles
endorsed by the Palestine Liberation Organization, and
without the exercise by the Palestinian Authority of the
full extent of its authority in Gaza. In that regard, we
call for the implementation of the agreement reached
in Cairo on 12 October under the auspices of the
Egyptian authorities. That process must lead to a rapid
improvement in the living conditions of the population
in Gaza. We encourage the Palestinian Authority to
take concrete steps in that direction. Beyond that, only
a lifting of the blockade and the restrictions imposed on
Gaza, with the necessary security guarantees for Israel,
will meet the needs and expectations of the population.
France stands ready to support those efforts.
In the current extremely fragile situation, the
presence of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) among the population, two-thirds of which
is comprised of Palestinian refugees, is one of the last
remaining stabilizing elements in Gaza. An interruption
of UNRWA services, which could take place as early
as this summer, would hasten the Gaza Strip’s falling
into chaos. We therefore once again call on the United
States not to give up the historic and essential role it has
played with UNRWA. We also call for increased efforts
on the part of all donors to the Agency, which were
announced last month during the Rome Conference and
which will have to continue. As you know, France is
playing its part in those efforts.
Turning to my final point, we must not separate
the situation in Gaza from the Palestinian question
as a whole. Gaza is an integral part of the Palestinian
territories. There will be no Palestinian State without
Gaza, and therefore no viable peace agreement with
Israel without Palestinian unity. Neither will there be
a peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians
outside the internationally agreed parameters, the
principal elements of which I shall recall here once
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

again: two States living in peace and security along
secure and recognized borders; frontiers based on
the 1967 lines, with exchanges of mutually agreed
territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of the two
States with, in the meantime, no change in the status of
the city, as required by resolution 478 (1980), including
the location of embassies; and a concerted, realistic and
fair solution for Palestinian refugees.
Any negotiation must be within that framework,
which itself is based on international law and Security
Council resolutions. Those parameters are not options
or a menu from which we may choose; they are the
bedrock of any peace plan and of any future negotiations.
In that context, we have a collective responsibility
within the Council to ensure the respect of those
parameters, which we have defined together and which
are recalled by resolution 2334 (2016), adopted a little
more than a year ago. The Gaza Strip is once again
on the edge of the abyss. A new conflict, beyond the
devastating consequences already mentioned, would
aggravate regional tensions, which have reached an
unprecedented level along Israel’s border. The ongoing
escalation in Gaza is also strengthening radicals and
providing all terrorist movements with additional
recruitment arguments.
Finally, with the approach of a high-risk May in
Jerusalem, current tensions contribute to the ongoing
shift from a political conflict that can be resolved
through concessions made by the parties to a religious
conflict in which it would be impossible to reach a
compromise. France will never allow such a dramatic
prospect for Israelis, Palestinians and regional security
to become a reality. That is why we remain determined
to act. We all know that the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are linked: neither of the two peoples will
achieve their national aspirations at the expense of the
other. France is not choosing sides. It is the friend of
both Israelis and Palestinians, and it is in that capacity
that it pursues its clear goal: the implementation,
through dialogue, of a political solution for a just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for, as always,
a very comprehensive and insightful briefing. I would
like also to thank the speakers, the Ambassadors of
Palestine and of Israel.

S/PV. 8244

I would like to align myself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Poland strongly supports all initiatives aimed at the
stabilization and strengthening of peace and security
in the Middle East. Unfortunately, since our previous
quarterly debate (S/PV.8167), there has not been any
significant progress towards the achievement of peace.
On the contrary, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate. That is why we should keep the Middle
East peace process high on our agenda. Today more than
ever before, our main goal should be the resumption
of a meaningful peace process. Our commitment to
resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts on
our agenda needs to be reinforced. Only a return to
meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law, can
make a positive impact on the process. That is the only
path leading towards a two-State solution and resolving
all final-status issues.
The creation of a political horizon, as well as an
appropriate framework for political progress, will be
possible only working together with our regional and
international partners, beginning with the Middle East
Quartet. The participation and peace proposals of the
United States would especially be helpful in renewing
the Middle East peace process. The constructive
development of solutions for achieving peace will
also require more active involvement on the part of
some countries of the region. Unfortunately, recent
developments in the Gaza Strip are extremely alarming.
The situation on the ground is very volatile. We share
the Special Coordinator’s opinion that we run the risk
of a regional spillover of the conflict, especially as the
region is already facing many other challenges. We
should do our utmost to avoid any further escalation
and loss of life. In that context, Poland underlines the
crucial role that the United Nations can play to that
end, including the particular role played by Special
Coordinator Mladenov.
We urge Israel to respect the fundamental right
to peaceful protest. We also call on Israel to respect
the principle of proportionality with regard to the use
of force, especially when directed against unarmed
protesters, while it seeks to defend its legitimate security
interest. At the same time, leaders and organizers of
protests have to avoid incitement to violence and refrain
from exploiting protesters for other purposes. We call
for an independent and objective investigation of the
incidents that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza

18-1252715/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

border since 30 March. In that context, we take note of
the fact-finding assessment mechanism established by
the Israel Defence Forces to review their actions and
specific incidents that have taken place on the IsraeliGaza border.
Overall, we attach extreme importance to the
prevention of any further escalation and loss of life.
We call on all sides to act with the utmost restraint and
responsibility. In that regard, we call for the respect
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians.
As has already been mentioned, the current situation
in Gaza can have significant consequences for regional
and international peace and security. It is the Security
Council’s responsibility to address the situation in an
effective way. The Security Council should, therefore,
contribute to de-escalation efforts, including by publicly
articulating its position in an appropriate manner.
In line with the long-standing European Union
position, we reiterate our position on Jerusalem. We
firmly believe that the status of the city should enjoy
the mutual recognition of both parties’ historical
relation and national claim to the city. We continue
to respect the international consensus on Jerusalem
embodied in, inter alia, resolution 478 (1980), including
on the location of diplomatic representations, until
the final status of Jerusalem is resolved. We support
the two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, as well as Israel’s right to ensure
its security and the normalization of relations with
Arab States.
We are closely following developments in the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and hope that that
process will be successful. However, we are aware that
reconciliation efforts have suffered severe setbacks
following the assassination attempt against Prime
Minister Hamdallah on 13 March. We therefore urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to ensure
the sustainable development of that process, thereby
allowing the Palestinian Authority to assume once
again its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step towards achieving the unity of a future Palestinian
State and the basis for a sustainable peace agreement.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
16/66

26/04/2018

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). The effects of reducing support could
include grave security and humanitarian consequences
not only in the Palestinian territories, but also in other
countries hosting refugees. The Agency is already facing
the great challenge of fulfilling its mandate to maintain
the key services that it provides, such as education and
health care for Palestinian refugees. In the absence of a
lasting political solution, the international community
cannot abdicate its responsibility and duty vis-à-vis
Palestinian refugees and must ensure the continuation
of the Agency’s work on a sound financial foundation.
For its part, Poland will continue to support UNRWA
through its financial contributions.
In conclusion, allow me to briefly mention Lebanon
and reaffirm our strong support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of that country. We underline the significance of the
upcoming parliamentary elections — the first of their
kind since 2009 — to be held in May. We support all
efforts to strengthen Lebanon’s long-standing tradition
of democracy, freedom and diversity, which stands as a
model for the whole region.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, which was, as
always, very helpful. We appreciate how difficult it is
for Mr. Mladenov to discharge his responsibilities in
the mission that he has been called on to carry out,
but he has continued to pass the test in terms of the
integrity with which he fulfils his obligations. We pay
tribute to him for his efforts.
The peace and security situation in the Middle East
is getting more complicated by the day. Even though the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has been defeated
and lost much of its territory, fighting still continues
unabated in Syria. In fact, in many ways, the whole
complex set of issues surrounding Syria — while the
country and its people are being devastated — often
appears bigger than Syria alone. Whether it is the Syrian
or the Yemeni crisis, there are no political solutions in
sight, and those situations remain a source of despair
for ordinary people. The humanitarian situation in the
region is appalling, and the need for international support
is enormous. The use of chemical weapons — even if
we have yet to decisively attribute responsibility and
therefore establish accountability — is becoming a
serious challenge undermining international norms.
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has been
overshadowed by other crisis situations in the region,
is now once again drawing international attention, as it
should. The recent situation in Gaza is a source of great
concern, and, unless efforts are made to de-escalate the
situation, it is bound to further complicate the peace
and security situation in the region. One would, of
course, have to be heartless not to be affected by the
loss of lives. There is a great need to do everything
necessary politically to prevent the situation in Gaza
from getting out of hand. We must take the Special
Envoy’s words seriously. He said earlier with a heavy
heart that Gaza is ready to explode, words that should
indeed be heeded.
We are, of course, deeply concerned by the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza, and every possible
effort must be made to facilitate critical humanitarian
solutions and revitalize Gaza’s economy. In addition,
we should consider the need to enable the Palestinian
Authority to exercise full control over Gaza based on the
Cairo agreement. We believe that progress on that issue
will not only improve the economic and humanitarian
situation, but will also advance Palestinian unity,
which hopefully could provide impetus for the peace
process. Although the signing of the agreement was
very welcome, not much progress has been made in
terms of its implementation, and that, coupled with
the restrictions on access, continues to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation.
Ethiopia’s position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute
has always been unambiguous and very transparent. As
much as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace
and security, we also support the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports the goal
of two States living side by side in peace and security
as the only viable option for resolving the IsraeliPalestinian dispute. We believe that that is not only in
the best interest of both Israel and Palestine, but it will
also significantly advance peace and security in the
Middle East region.
However, it seems to us self-evident that, lately,
moves have been made and actions have been taken
that might not contribute to making progress toward
resolving the outstanding issues on the basis of the
two-State formula. Such actions not only increase
frustration and mistrust, but are also undermining the
very viability of the two-State solution. The removal

S/PV. 8244

of those long-standing obstacles is imperative in order
to create the necessary conditions for progress in
negotiations between the two parties aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution on the basis
of mutual trust and a spirit of compromise, a solution
that ensures Israel’s security and Palestine’s aspirations
for statehood. That is what the situation calls for, and
it is also in the best interest of the two parties, as well
as that of the international community as a whole. The
latest tragedy in Gaza makes it obvious that the demand
for justice will never disappear as long as there are
objective facts on the ground that call for it.
That is why we supported the call for the
intensification and acceleration of international and
regional efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
lasting and just solution. Indeed, the resumption of
negotiations requires the full support of all partners,
and all should play their part in order for any meaningful
progress to be achieved. In that context, it is incumbent
upon the Council to discharge its responsibilities and
support such efforts for the sake of peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians and peace in the broader
Middle Eastern region. No doubt, at the end of the day,
the responsibility for making progress toward lasting
peace and mutual accommodation, based on justice and
fair play, falls on the two parties.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Mladenov for his customary
concise and incisive briefing, which elucidated for us
the current situation in the Middle East in general and
in Gaza in particular.
We want to begin by expressing our serious concerns
about the conflicts that persist in the Middle East from
Syria to Yemen and Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, leading to enormous losses in human life and
humanitarian devastation on a broad scale, particularly
in the case of Yemen and several regions in Syria and
in the Gaza Strip. It is regrettable to note that, far from
seeing any signs of a resolution to those conflicts, we
are seeing them deteriorate with the danger of greater
devastation, such as in the case of Israel and Palestine
in the Gaza Strip.
We must recognize that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has lasted for a long time now and is
fundamental and central to the entire situation in the
Middle East. We can hardly expect to achieve peace
in the region without a fair and lasting solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The significance and

18-1252717/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

gravity of the conflict lie not only in the fact that it
is causing great suffering to those who are directly
affected, but also in the undeniable impact that it has
on stability in the region.
We have already seen how the ramifications of
the Syrian conflict are directly affecting the situation,
as recent events show. Efforts must be aimed at
preventing an escalation. The parties must refrain
from unilateral actions that could hinder initiatives
geared towards dialogue aimed at resolving the issue.
Such a resolution requires a commitment by the parties
to negotiate in a direct and frank process without
preconditions and within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the principle of land for peace. The final status
of Jerusalem must also be part of the outcome of
those negotiations.
In order to facilitate that process, the parties must
refrain from unilateral acts that could hinder dialogue or
further complicate an already precarious situation. It is
important that the parties respect resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our call to both sides to strive for
peaceful coexistence, to respect international law
and to act in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, so as to arrive at a solution that
satisfies the interests of all parties.

26/04/2018

we believe could help achieve a lasting solution to the
conflict in general.
Equatorial Guinea condemns the acts of violence that
took place during the Great March of Return convened
by Palestinian civil and political organizations, which
resulted in the deaths of dozens of Palestinians and
hundreds of injured in the Gaza Strip. We very much
regret the loss of human lives and would like to make
a vigorous appeal for an independent and transparent
investigation into those deaths in order to clarify the
circumstances surrounding them and their cause.
The continuing outbreaks of violence between
Palestine and Israel are a source of concern for
Equatorial Guinea, as is the serious humanitarian
situation in Gaza. The humanitarian situation of the
population in Gaza, with problems of water, electricity
and so on, which Mr. Mladenov recently called a
humanitarian, economic and ecological calamity
(see S/PV.8183), requires urgent action in the form
of projects. We must work together to alleviate that
humanitarian disaster and provide full support for
Egypt’s reconciliation efforts. It is very urgent that no
effort be spared to avoid the risk of conflagration in the
Gaza Strip, which, as Mr. Mladenov clearly pointed out
in his briefing, would have devastating consequences
and could deteriorate into another open war in Gaza.

There is no other possible solution to the
Palestinian question than a two-State solution in
which Israelis and Palestinians alike live in peace and
security. The international community must support
the process by offering guarantees aimed at achieving
a successful outcome. Actors with influence in the
Middle East must play a decisive role in convincing
the parties to engage in the dialogue process.
The international community has no choice but to
redouble its diplomatic and mediation efforts to the
best of its ability in order to seek a satisfactory solution.
However, let us not fool ourselves, only Palestinians
and Israelis have the ability to resolve the problem.

Finally, I would also like to express our appreciation
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation and crisis
in the occupied territories. We call on the international
community to resolutely support UNRWA so that it
can carry out its work and alleviate the suffering of the
people in the occupied territories.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the historical
demands of the Palestinians are just, in accordance
with the various positions taken by the African Union.
However, we also believe that Israel has every right
to live in peace and security. Palestine and Israel
must respect each other’s right to exist and avoid
any action that could aggravate the current situation.
Similarly, we call for intra-Palestinian dialogue and
for Palestinians to resolve their differences, which

Côte d’Ivoire is concerned about the escalation of
violence during the Great March of Return, organized
by the Palestinians along the fence separating the
Gaza Strip and Israel; that violence is entering its
third consecutive week. Our concern is justified by the
heavy toll accompanying those demonstrations, which
have resulted in the deaths of 37 Palestinians and more
than 4,000 injured as a result of the various clashes.
My country would like to highlight the fact that such

18/66

Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
enlightening briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violence only exacerbates the tensions between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides, sustaining the doubts
and uncertainties over the continuation of the peace
process, which has been stalled since 2014.
In view of that new outbreak of violence, my
country remains convinced that there is no alternative
to peace. It urges the parties concerned to exercise
restraint, to engage in constructive dialogue and to
refrain, on both sides, from unilateral actions, which
can only further distance the prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. My country
takes this opportunity to reaffirm its principled position
in support of a negotiated settlement that prioritizes the
two-State solution, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.
My delegation also remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which is heavily
impacted by the ongoing blockade, youth unemployment
and the shortages of water and electricity. We welcome
the pledges made at the extraordinary ministerial
conference held in Rome on 15 March aimed at
reducing the budget deficit of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which has been facing a decrease in the usual
contributions to its operation.
Finally, we reaffirm our full support for the
initiatives under way to find a peaceful resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in particular the plan of
the President of the Palestinian Authority to organize
an international peace conference in mid-May, with
broad international participation.
In addition to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Middle East also faces a series of security challenges,
such as the situations in Syria and Yemen and the
Iranian nuclear issue.
With regard to Syria, despite the relative calm, my
delegation deeply regrets the lack of progress towards a
political solution to the conflict, as well as the continuing
fighting, which exacerbates the humanitarian situation.
Given that worrisome situation, my delegation again
regrets that the ceasefire unanimously called for by
the Security Council as part of such a solution has not
materialized and that the dire humanitarian situation
in Syria continues to persist without any apparent
end to the conflict. In the light of all of the above,
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its appeal to the parties to the
conflict to fully implement resolution 2401 (2018) with

S/PV. 8244

a view to allowing unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance for those in distress.
My country would like once again to reaffirm its
conviction and its principled position that the response
to the crisis in Syria cannot be a military one. We
continue to believe that the priority still is and always
will be to find a political solution that can defuse the
Syrian crisis based on an in-depth dialogue involving
the key international, regional and Syrian stakeholders.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the warring
parties to support the path of inclusive political dialogue
in the context of the Geneva talks and resolution 2254
(2015), which paves the way for a lasting political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire commends the efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to secure the resumption of the
peace talks and encourages the Council to lend its full
support to that end.
With regard to the conflict in Yemen, my delegation
remains particularly concerned about the continuing
deterioration in the humanitarian situation and the lack
of prospects for a political settlement of the crisis in that
country. My country remains, convinced, unfortunately,
that, despite our joint efforts, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen will continue to deteriorate in the absence of
a viable political track.
Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen. We therefore call on
the parties to the conflict to return to the negotiating
table with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of
the crisis. In that regard, we welcome the appointment
of Mr. Martin Griffiths as the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General charged with working to achieve the
resumption of the intra-Yemeni political dialogue.
We strongly condemn the air strikes on a wedding in
Hajjah, in the north-western part of the country, which
allegedly killed at least 50 civilians, including children,
and injured dozens of people. My delegation also
condemns the firing of missiles by the Houthis towards
Saudi Arabia, endangering the lives of innocent people.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue,
my delegation reaffirms its support for the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted under resolution
2231 (2015), It represents a major achievement for
the non-proliferation regime and allows for better

18-1252719/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

supervision of Iran’s nuclear activities in return for the
gradual lifting of the sanctions against that country.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive
and objective briefing.
The Middle East is going through a difficult period
in its history, marked by many old and new crises.
The conflicts in Syria and Yemen still need to be
resolved. Political and diplomatic solutions are needed.
Further international efforts need to focus on resolving
the situation in Libya, helping to rebuild Iraq and
supporting stability in Lebanon.
Palestine remains at the centre of the chaos
that plagues the region and is the consequence of
geopolitical experiments directed from abroad. That
is a commonly agreed fact, despite the fact that some
actors seek to relegate the issue of a settlement in the
Middle East to the background. The developments in
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
where destructive trends are increasingly evident, are
of grave concern. Owing to the lack of progress in
the political process, a vacuum has been created that
is being filled by unilateral measures and provocative
rhetoric. The abyss of misunderstanding and mistrust is
widening, undermining prospects for the resumption of
talks. It is clear that all long-standing issues, including
settlement activities, are far from being resolved.
We are concerned about the escalating tensions
around Gaza associated with the Palestinian protests in
the sector against the Israeli occupation since 30 March.
There were dozens of victims on the Palestinian side
and hundreds injured. We support the right to peaceful
protest and strongly condemn terrorist acts in any form
and the indiscriminate use of force against civilians.
We call on the parties to refrain from measures that are
likely to further exacerbate the situation.
It is not necessary to be an experienced analyst to
understand that it is highly likely that the situation will
further deteriorate. The plan announced by the United
States to hold a ceremony in Jerusalem on 14 May to
mark the beginning of the transfer of the United States
Embassy from Tel Aviv has a strong destabilizing
potential, the negative repercussions of which will be
seen not only in Palestinian-Israeli relations but also
throughout the region and the entire Muslim world.
That is not the only high-profile event related to the
Middle East that will take place in the coming months.
20/66

26/04/2018

Given the current situation, it is necessary for the
international community to urgently step up its efforts
for the resumption of the political process between
the Palestinians and Israelis based on the principles of
international law and aimed at the implementation of a
two-State solution.
Unilateral approaches will not lead to a fair and
lasting peace, aimed at fulfilling the national aspirations
of Palestinians or strengthen Israel’s security. To that
end, we are keeping on the table our proposal to convene
a summit between the leaders of Palestine and Israel in
the Russian Federation. We advocate the resumption of
active efforts on the part of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators, which remains, regardless of
what some may say, the sole mediation format approved
by Security Council resolutions.
We believe that one of the obstacles to the
resumption of the peace process is the schism within
Palestinian ranks. We continue to deliver assistance
to the Palestinians in their efforts to restore their
national unity on the basis of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization’s political platform and the Arab Peace
Initiative. It is important for all Palestinian stakeholders
to reaffirm their commitment to implementing the
agreements reached in Cairo in October 2017 and
to focus their efforts on the establishment of the
legitimate Palestinian National Authority in the Gaza
Strip. We support the relevant efforts undertaken by the
leadership of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
We support the delivery of international assistance
to Palestinians. It is not acceptable to divert attention
away from the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians or
to cut financing for the relevant programmes, including
throughthe United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which could
lead to radicalization within the Palestinian ranks.
To summarize, we wish to stress that the Russian
Federation advocates crafting a positive and unifying
agenda for the international community as a whole
to work on the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. We deem it necessary to conduct a joint
analysis of the genesis of the conflicts plaguing the
region and to seek alternative means for their settlement.
In that context, we believe that the initiatives advanced
in the past by Russia have not lost their relevance; on
the contrary, they are all the more relevant now. Recent
events within and around the Middle East confirm the
importance of Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov’s
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8244

proposal to convene a comprehensive review of the
situation in the Middle East in the Security Council.

targets in the territory of Saudi Arabia, which is an act
that Kazakhstan strongly condemns.

It is also of critical importance to rebuild trust
between the Arab world and Iran, to which end it is
important to launch a process aimed at building a
regional architecture for security that is comprehensive
and indivisible. A key factor in that context is
safeguarding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on the Iranian nuclear programme. On all of these
and other issues, Russia stands ready to work together
with interested partners in a transparent and impartial
manner, without threats or undue pressure. Dialogue
remains a key mechanism for resolving the issues at
hand.

Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East
peace process is very clear and remains unchanged.
Nevertheless, I would like to repeat it. We support the
two-State solution and call for the early resumption
of negotiations, especially in the bilateral format and
without preconditions, which should be in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, relevant
Security Council resolutions, and other mechanisms
and initiatives, such as the Quartet road map for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace.
We support the rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and the creation of a free, sovereign and
independent State within the internationally recognized
borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his detailed and objective
update on the situation in the Middle East. We agree
that the situation in the region remains complicated.
In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government and
the election of a new President are positive outcomes,
which will lead, hopefully, to the holding of free and
fair parliamentary elections on 6 May. The signing of
the decree to that end is a manifestation of the people’s
unity. We need to help the country consolidate its
constitutional and democratic processes, which remain
contingent on developments in neighbouring Syria. The
Lebanese Armed Forces play a vital role in maintaining
security on the border with Syria and throughout
Lebanon, thus averting threats from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the Jabhat Al-Nusrah.
We welcome the outcomes of the international
conference hosted in Paris by President Emmanuel
Macron to support Lebanon’s economic stability. It
is commendable that, at that conference, there were
pledges of $10.2 billion for Lebanon.
Turning to Yemen, we know that the conflict
there has no military solution. It is clear that the deepseated contradictions in Yemen can be resolved only
through a broad-based national and inclusive dialogue.
All parties must commit themselves to establishing
a new regime for the cessation of hostilities, which
will provide an opportunity to revive the economy,
resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore basic public
services. It is only when there is a political settlement
that the humanitarian situation can also be mitigated.
Everyone should refrain from committing acts that lead
to an escalation of regional tension and insecurity. It is
not acceptable to launch rocket attacks against civilian

Jerusalem is the shared homeland of different
ethnicities and religions. Palestine and Israel must
respect each other’s right to exist and avoid taking
actions that might further escalate the situation. We
look forward to the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016), and we would like to note that
the increased construction of new Israeli settlements
is causing hardships for the Palestinians, who are
incurring huge economic losses.
Turning to Gaza, we are alarmed that this is
the fourth consecutive week that we are witnessing
Palestinian casualties there. We reiterate that Israeli
security forces must protect civilians and calibrate the
use of force, employing lethal force only as a last resort.
At the same time, we emphasize the right of Israel to
security. We also reiterate our call on Palestinians to
avoid friction at the Gaza fence.
We praise our colleagues at the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the largest
shipment of United Nations medical aid to Gaza since
the beginning of the year. That assistance has provided
hospitals in Gaza with essential life-saving drugs and
other supplies to meet the urgent medical needs of
populations in crisis. It will also help respond to the
needs of 100,000 children and mothers in Gaza. With
regard to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Kazakhstan
reiterates the need to support that important mechanism.
My country underscores the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity. The rift between the Palestinian
Authority and Hamas should be resolved in order to

18-1252721/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

present a unified Palestinian voice in negotiations with
Israel and the international community. We welcome
and support Israel’s decision to provide the Palestinians
with some economic concessions on the seashore, as
was mentioned today by Special Envoy Mladenov, so as
to ease the conditions of daily life in the Gaza territory.
Investments in the building of strong Palestinian
institutions, inter alia, promoting reforms in the security
sector and the military, law-enforcement and judicial
and correctional systems, together with new legislation,
will ensure the rule of law and good governance.
The immediate start of direct negotiations, and, as a
result, the speedy implementation of agreements at an
early date, will allow us to solve the problem of the
confidence deficit and enable us to move to a more
open dialogue between the two sides. It is necessary
to identify mutually acceptable principles for the
advancement of the Palestinian-Israel peace process, as
well as to develop a concept for future negotiations and
a mechanism for implementing the agreements.
Lastly, we once again reiterate our call for efforts
to ensure Israel’s right to security and Palestine’s right
to statehood, with the use of appropriate instruments of
preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace, including
the utilization of confidence-building measures in
political, economic, environmental contexts, and in
addressing new challenges and threats.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others
in thanking Mr. Mladenov for his precise briefing and
dedicated work. Listening to him, we can draw one sole
conclusion — we cannot allow the peace process to be
put on the back burner.
I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union.
I will focus on three important aspects of the
situation in the Middle East: first, the tragedy and lack
of de-escalation in Gaza; secondly, the overall peace
process and the importance of resolutions 2334 (2016)
and 478 (1980); and thirdly, the upcoming elections
in Lebanon.
On my first point, Gaza, on 30 March we convened
an urgent meeting here in the Council (see PV.8219).
It took place as the first demonstration in Gaza ended
in tragedy. I concluded my statement with a call on
all sides to prevent further escalation. Otherwise, we
would have the same debate the next month. Today
is the next month. We regret to note that all involved
22/66

26/04/2018

have continued stubbornly on the track they chose then,
despite the calls for de-escalation and for the prevention
of further losses of life. I trust that all Members feel the
same way and would welcome a joint statement in that
vein from the Council. The sad score after four weeks
of protests is more than 30 people killed, including four
minors and thousands of injuries.
We repeat our call on Israel to ensure that its
responses are proportionate and necessary at all times,
in line with Israel’s obligations under international law.
The use of live ammunition should be a measure of last
resort only, as stated in the Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.
The high number of victims, including paramedics, and
the death of the journalist Yaser Murtaja raise serious
questions regarding the proportionality of the Israeli
response. That includes the respect for the right to
peaceful protest. Facts must be established regarding
reports about violent attacks against Israel under the
cover of the protests.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon the de
facto authorities in Gaza and the Palestinian Authority
to do everything possible to ensure that protests
remain peaceful. We call upon all sides to refrain from
making inciting statements. We repeat the call for an
independent, transparent investigation. We note the
fact-finding assessment mechanism established by the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) to review IDF actions and
specific incidents that have taken place since 30 March.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will be following its
work closely.
The growing crisis in Gaza requires a solution.
Economic development, humanitarian aid and the
rebuilding of infrastructure need to go hand in hand.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about
the difficult financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) and welcomes the additional
contributions that were announced. We will continue to
support UNRWA in its efforts to improve its financial
stability and broaden its international support.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon Israel
to ease restrictions on the movement of goods and
people, while safeguarding its security needs. We call
upon Hamas to end its efforts to rearm and rebuild its
military infrastructure.
We support the efforts to reunite Gaza and the
West Bank under one single and legitimate Palestinian
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Authority. The attack on Prime Minister Hamdallah
further complicated the already difficult process
of reconciliation. That negative course needs to be
reversed. All Palestinian factions must work genuinely
together to overcome the current stalemate and we
welcome the ongoing efforts by Egypt and Mr. Mladenov
in that regard.
With regard to my second point, the peace
process, we cannot afford to put it on the back burner.
International law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, provides a cornerstone for peace and
security in the region. In that connection, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands recalls the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2334
(2016) and 478 (1980). Those resolutions and the wellknown parameters clearly lay out the framework for a
sustainable solution to the conflict. In the end, only the
parties can come to an agreement on all final-status
issues, including Jerusalem and refugees. We underline
the need to refrain from unilateral steps that make a
two-State solution more difficult.
On my third point, Lebanon, on 6 May Lebanon
will hold parliamentary elections for the first time since
2009. We look forward to that memorable occasion.
Provided the elections are properly executed, they
will reinvigorate public trust in Lebanon’s democratic
institutions. Above all, the elections provide an
opportunity to reinforce the positive momentum of the
Rome, Paris and Brussels conferences. We encourage
all Lebanese to cast their vote, and we hope that the
elections will be an expression of peaceful competition
and democracy in action.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his valuable briefing regarding recent
developments in the peace process and the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory.
Most of our quarterly open debates on this item
coincide with very important junctures regarding
developments in the Palestinian question, and each
time, Israel, the occupying Power, is the one that has
violated international treaties, conventions and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The most recent
violation is the excessive and illegal use of force against
the Great March of Return, which was launched on
30 March and will be ongoing for the coming two weeks.

S/PV. 8244

It is a peaceful march where unarmed Palestinian
people call for their right to return to their occupied
territory. The death toll since the beginning of the
March is not less than 37 martyrs, with more than
5,000 injured. In that regard, it is regrettable that the
Security Council has failed to respond in a unified
manner to condemn all those practices and failed to
call for an independent and transparent investigation
aimed at identifying those responsible for using such
force and for killing scores of innocent people. They
must be held accountable for such crimes. We support
any appeal to the General Assembly or the Human
Rights Council if the Security Council continues to fail
to take any measures that oblige Israel to put an end
to those grave violations of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
On the other hand, the State of Kuwait supports
actions and measures that contribute to providing
international protection to the Palestinian people. In
that regard, we reiterate the provisions of resolutions
605 (1987) and 904 (1994) regarding the applicability
of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the developments
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the necessity
of providing the defenceless Palestinian people with
international protection. We do not exaggerate when we
say that the Israeli occupying forces, commanded by the
occupying Power, are constantly defying the will of the
international community. There is ample evidences of
that. One of the gravest challenges facing the Security
Council is Israel’s candidature, the occupying Power, to
membership in the Security Council.
How can we imagine that such an occupying Power
could participate in defending international legitimacy
and its resolutions? That occupying Power undoubtedly
lacks all qualifications to run for Security Council
membership as stipulated by the Charter of the United
Nations, because its only credential is a long record of
grave violations against resolutions of international
legitimacy and the principles of the Charter. That is why
the Security Council should be the first to challenge
its candidacy.
The unilateral policies, measures and actions
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, are a source of
concern as it seeks to alter the facts on the ground in
the occupied territory, notably the ongoing settlement
activities and the expansion of the existing settlements,
which is totally illegal and illegitimate and represents
a gross violation of international law and Security

18-1252723/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/04/2018

Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
The same is true of the relocation of certain diplomatic
missions to Jerusalem, which is a blatant violation of
relevant Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
476 (1980) and 478 (1980), which considered such
unilateral actions null and void, with no legal effect.
We emphasize that such steps, which constitute
violations of international law, will undermine efforts
towards peace, exacerbate tensions, flair the rage and
threaten to push the region into more violence, chaos
and instability.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): This open debate is the first to be
held since the Palestinian people peacefully began,
on 30 March, the so-called March of Return, along
the border between Gaza and Israel. It began with a
celebration of Earth Day and will end with Al-Nakba, on
15 May, on which date there will be a commemoration of
the illegal dispossession of Palestinian territories over
the more than 50 years of Israeli occupation. Tributes
will be paid to all Palestinian victims who perished as a
result of the brutality of the Israeli Government.

The State of Kuwait supports the Palestinian call
to give impetus to existing international mechanisms,
such as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to
include other regional parties, which would revitalize
its work, provided this takes place under the umbrella
of the United Nations Peace Process.

According to the latest special report of the World
Health Organization, between 15 and 20 April, during
the fourth mobilization of the March of Return, four
Palestinians, including one child, were murdered, and
832 wounded by the Israel Defense Forces as they
demanded an end to the inhuman blockade that Israel
has been using to choke the life out of the inhabitants of
Gaza for more than 11 years now.

We also support all legal and peaceful steps taken
by the sisterly Palestinian State, at the national and
international levels, to consolidate its sovereignty
with respect to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Palestinian
occupied territory. We underscore that in order to
achieve the long-desired peace, we must start by
putting an end to the Israeli occupation, whose fiftyfirst anniversary is coming up in 39 days. This should
be based on the resolutions of international legitimacy,
the principle of land for peace, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by all Arab States at
the 2002 Beirut summit. It should also be based on
the withdrawal of Israel from all Palestinian, Syrian
and Lebanese territories to the 4 June 1967 borders.
It should address all final-status issues and thereby
eventually lead to the Palestinian people realizing all
their political legitimate rights, including their right to
self-determination, and the creation of an independent
State with east Jerusalem as its capital.
The Palestinian people appeals to the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, to fulfil
all of the pledges made towards the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
reiterate our solidarity with the Palestinian people
in the defence of their just cause and legitimate
rights, including their historical and principled rights
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, guaranteed by the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We call on
States to recognize the state of Palestine, with occupied
East Jerusalem as its capital.
24/66

In total, 32 Palestinians perished, including three
children, and more than 1,600 persons have suffered
a range of injuries over the past four weeks. I need not
remind members here that Palestinian victims of the
latest events, including those killed by sniper bullets,
those seriously wounded by shootings, be it by rubber
or lead bullets, are proof positive that the State of Israel
is violating the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and is acting in clear breach of the
prohibitions set forth in the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
The Security Council must call on the Government
of Israel to fulfil its international obligation to
protect the mobilized Palestinian civilians. This body
must demand that the relevant international bodies
immediately and without further delay conduct an
investigation into the events of the past three weeks
on the border area between Gaza and Israel. This
must be an independent, transparent and conclusive
investigation, so as to identify those responsible for
firing on Palestinian demonstrators.
In this order of priorities, we wish to place on
record once again our strong condemnation of the
decision by the Government of the United States and
other countries that seek to move their embassies to
Jerusalem. These decisions are in violation of several
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
478 (1980), which calls for States to withdraw their
diplomatic representations from Jerusalem. We would
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

alert everyone to the fact that as the date for the transfer
of the United States embassy to Jerusalem comes closer,
we will see an increase in tensions and violence on the
ground in the region.
My delegation wishes to state its categorical
rejection of the clear intent of the Government of
Israel, with respect to the construction of settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories, inasmuch as it is
a direct violation of resolution 2334 (2016) and other
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, which reiterate that the establishment of
settlements in Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem, have no legal basis and
represent a flagrant violation of international law and a
major obstacle to achieving the two-State solution and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
We reiterate our full commitment to resolution
2334 (2016), on the illegality of Israeli settlements on
Palestinian occupied territories, and we stress once
again that the quarterly report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the resolution should be in
written form, so as to afford us detailed knowledge of
its implementation status, and that we should also be
provided with up-to-date maps of all settlements on
occupied Palestinian territories. We have consistently
as Council members made this request here; so far it
has not been heard or heeded.
Likewise, there are concerns about the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), because it
provides humanitarian assistance to more than 5 million
people and is currently experiencing a financial crisis
that is jeopardizing its capacity to respond to the many
pressing needs of refugees in the areas of health,
education, safe drinking water, inter alia. We express
our firm commitment to all international efforts geared
towards a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Here we endorse initiatives such as the Quartet
road map, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative and others, which serve as safeguards of a just
and lasting peace that would enable both parties to live
within recognized and secure borders.
We reiterate our conviction that the only longterm solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the
two-State one, which would finally give rise to a free,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, within
pre-1967 international borders and with East Jerusalem

S/PV. 8244

as its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
In closing, allow me to read out statements by two
young Palestinians, Tarek and Ghanam, who were born
in a Lebanese refugee camp.
(spoke in English)
Tarek said:
“My religion is the freedom of all oppressed
people, not only the Palestinian people. I want to
know why the international courts never address
what is happening in Palestine”.
Ghanam said:
“I would like my voice to be heard and to send
a message to the world about Palestine and the
Palestinian people, the people who are holding onto
and carrying the history and identity of Palestine.
I am living in a refugee camp in Lebanon, I was
raised and lived off of humanitarian assistance, and
I continue to survive at the mercy of international
aid programmes. Our story, the story of the
Palestinian people, is one of a human who has a
home and his home was invaded and occupied by
an outsider, an occupier.
“We are a people that love freedom for the
whole world, and we are against injustice anywhere.
We are deprived of our basic human rights every
day. I hope that the international community and
the media will shed light on the Palestinian cause
and suffering. UNRWA is reducing its services
to the Palestinian refugees living in camps due to
the lack of international support for the Agency. I
wish freedom and justice to all oppressed people in
the world”.
(spoke in Spanish)
Let me conclude by responding to the representative
of Israel, who asked what Bolivia would do. First of
all, Bolivia would respect international humanitarian
law. First of all, Bolivia would respect international
human rights law. First of all, Bolivia would comply
with all Security Council resolutions. However, I do
not think that Bolivia would ever find itself in that
situation, because we would never use violence in order
to occupy land that belongs to another people. Bolivia
would blockade others in the way that Israel isolates
the population in Gaza. We hope that the Council can

18-1252725/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

be useful in resolving the very protracted, regrettable,
tragic and unjust issue of Palestine.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.
I would like to start by thanking the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing to the Security Council
and for his tireless efforts, including most recently to
de-escalate the situation in Gaza. In today’s challenging
times, the strong presence and engagement of the
United Nations in Gaza is of paramount importance,
and we fully support Mr. Mladenov’s efforts.
Over the past few weeks, we have witnessed the
tragic events in Gaza that have led to a regrettable loss
of life. Since the beginning of the events on 30 March,
34 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli security
forces and thousands have been wounded. Israeli
security forces have used live ammunition, including
when shooting at children. Like the six United Nations
Special Rapporteurs mandated by the Human Rights
Council, Sweden condemns the killings and expresses
its condolences.
Israel has the right to protect itself and its people
within its borders, but measures taken must always
be proportional. The lethal use of force should be
used only as a last resort. Such incidents raise serious
concerns about their compatibility with international
law and must be swiftly and fully investigated. We
support the Secretary-General’s call for an independent
and transparent investigation.

26/04/2018

avoid a humanitarian disaster and further escalation of
violence in a very volatile region. There is an urgent
need for changes on the ground, and all actors have
responsibilities in that regard.
While understanding the legitimate security
concerns of Israel, Palestine and Egypt, restrictions must
be lifted and full and sustained access and movement
guaranteed. That includes an immediate end to the
Israeli policy of closure, which hampers reconstruction
and makes economic development impossible. We
underline the need for unimpeded access to Gaza for
humanitarian actors, which is far from being the case
today. Furthermore, Gaza constitutes an integral part
of the State of Palestine, and the Palestinian Authority
must resume its responsibilities in Gaza. We call on
Palestinian factions to redouble their efforts to achieve
reconciliation. Only reconciliation will lead to a unified
Palestinian leadership and the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
As others have done today, I wish to highlight the
difficult financial crisis of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNWRA). We must all support UNRWA,
financially and politically, to avoid additional severe
humanitarian consequences for the people of Gaza.
It is of the utmost importance that all members of
the international community meet their political and
financial responsibilities.

We continue to urge Israeli security forces to
refrain from the use of force against unarmed protesters
and representatives of the media and to respect the
right to peaceful protest. We also stress that it is
imperative that all actors, including those who organize
demonstrations, put the protection of children first and
never make children the target of violence, put them
at risk of violence or encourage them to participate
in violence.

We are heading into a historically charged period
in mid-May, with important reference points for
both Israelis and Palestinians. It has been 70 years
since Israel declared independence, on 14 May 1948.
Sweden was among the first wave of States that
recognized the State of Israel, in February 1949. We
have a long history of friendship with Israel. We must
also acknowledge that the birth of one State, while
being a joy to many, brought suffering for others. The
Israeli declaration of independence coincides with the
Palestinian exodus, also referred to as the Nakba, when
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were forced to
leave their homes.

Such deplorable events do not take place in a
vacuum. Gaza — roughly half the size of New York
City — is on the verge of social and economic collapse.
Earlier today we heard Mr. Mladenov explain that
Gaza is coming apart as we speak, with very dire
consequences. We have the collective responsibility to

In 1947, Sweden voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), which recommended the
creation of independent Arab and Jewish States, aimed
at fulfilling the national aspirations of both peoples.
While the establishment of the State of Israel led to the
fulfilment of its legitimate national aspirations, those

26/66

18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Palestinian people — a people living under more
than 50 years of occupation — are yet to be realized.
The events in mid-May will also coincide with
the planned move of the United States Embassy to
Jerusalem. The position of Sweden and of the whole
European Union on the status of Jerusalem as a final
status issue and as the future capital of both States,
including the location of diplomatic representations, is
clear and will remain unchanged.
With the current violence on the ground and the
upcoming period, we see a real risk that the situation
could spiral out of control. All parties must exercise
maximum restraint and avoid confrontation. All parties
must take immediate steps to de-escalate. The Council
should contribute to those efforts, including through an
appropriate public announcement.
While that must be our immediate priority, we
must also drastically increase our multilateral efforts
to advance peace. We must see the resumption of
meaningful negotiations on all final-status issues
leading to the two-State solution. President Abbas’
plans for an international conference with a view
to establishig a multilateral mechanism for peace
is well worth exploring. It is critical that any future
peace proposal have the ultimate goal of a two-State
solution and that all final status issues are resolved
based on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), and
previous agreements.
Let me just make a few brief remarks on Lebanon,
where we welcome the holding of legislative elections
on 6 May. It is the first time in nearly a decade for such
elections, which constitute a milestone in Lebanon’s
democratic tradition. More broadly, the elections are
vital for preserving the legitimacy of Lebanese State
institutions. We hope that a new Government can be
formed swiftly following the elections. We also hope
that more women will be elected to the next Parliament
and serve in the next Government. We reiterate our full
support for Lebanon’s stability, security, sovereignty
and political independence.
Lastly, in response to the Israeli Ambassador
who, regrettably, has already left, we share the view
expressed by the United Kingdom and others with
regard to the virtue of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action with Iran, as endorsed by the Council and as
a means to maintain international stability and resolve
the nuclear issue with Iran.

S/PV. 8244

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
Peru welcomes the holding of today’s quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his important briefing.
Peru is deeply concerned about increasing
instability in the region and the escalating violence
observed over the past few weeks in the Gaza Strip,
which has left many dead and wounded. We deplore
the most recent wave of escalating violence and extend
our deepest sympathy. In line with the remarks of
Secretary-General António Guterres, we believe that an
independent and transparent investigation is required
in order to determine those responsible for the most
recent tragedy.
Peru recognizes the freedom of expression and
association of the Palestinian people and underscores
that all protests must be peaceful in order to prevent
further escalation. Peru also recognizes Israel’s
right to respond to acts that may pose a threat to its
security and underscores that the right to legitimate
defence must be exercised in line with the principles of
proportionality, precaution and legality. We believe that
the violence witnessed over the past few weeks again
demonstrates the urgent need to address its root causes,
in particular with regard to the gradual deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza. In that regard,
we welcome the generous support provided through
various regional initiatives that support the urgent
proposal to provide stable and predictable funding
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Peru also considers it urgent that the Israeli and
Palestinian sides, with the support of the international
community, resume negotiations towards a two-State
solution, with secure and mutually recognized borders.
We therefore once again express our concern over
settlement practices, demolitions and evictions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including legislative
initiatives that contravene resolution 2334 (2016). We
recall that such practices run contrary to international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the State of Palestine and undermine the chances of
achieving a two-State solution.
We would like to conclude by encouraging
the political, religious and social authorities and

18-1252727/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

leaders of both Palestine and Israel to always act
with responsibility, prudence and moderation, and to
encourage the resumption of a reasonable dialogue that
will allow their respective peoples to move towards
sustainable peace. We believe that this would be
particularly important in the current context of growing
instability in the Middle East, which is manifested with
particular gravity in the conflicts and humanitarian
crises in Syria and Yemen, among other instances of
regional tension.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
wish to inform all concerned that we will be carrying
on this open debate right through the lunch hour, as we
have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Peru on a successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his important briefing.
We meet at a perilous time in the Middle East.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, described the
situation as chaos and a threat to peace and security.
The gaps are huge, and the shattered hopes should
intensify our determination to sustain peace.

26/04/2018

and injured thousands. Lebanon added its voice to
the voice of the Arab leaders and the rest of the world
in condemning the killing of innocent civilians and
called for an international investigation commission to
prosecute those responsible for those crimes.
Despite the situation, the Arab world is still
committed to solving the conflict peacefully. The Arab
leaders, at their summit, including Lebanon, reaffirmed
their commitment to peace as a strategic option. They
called for resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict on the
basis of the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, ending the
occupation and returning to the 1967 borders. The
message remains that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution based on all the relevant United
Nations resolutions. How many innocent people should
be killed, how many summits should be held and how
many calls and condemnations should be enough for
the Council to act and resume its role as the primary
organ responsible for peace and security in the world?
There is consensus in Lebanon about a policy
of disassociation towards the conflict in Syria.
Nevertheless, because of the presence of over
1.2 million displaced persons in my country, Lebanon
joins the international community in its call for a
political solution to the Syrian conflict. It was only this
week that the President of the Council of Ministers of
Lebanon, His Excellency Mr. Saad Hariri, urged the
international community to be more determined to find
a solution in Syria and considered any delay harmful to
the displaced Syrians, as well as to Lebanon.

The Palestinian question and support for the
Palestinian people and their legitimate rights remain
a central tenet of the Arab consensus. That was
reaffirmed at the summit held in Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia, in mid-April when Arab leaders, once again,
emphasized their support for the right of the State
of Palestine to its sovereignty over all the occupied
Palestinian territories since 1967, including East
Jerusalem. Jerusalem took centre stage in the summit,
and the Arab leaders unanimously condemned and
rejected the decision to recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel, as they rejected moving the United
States Embassy to Jerusalem.

In the midst of that regional turmoil, Lebanon
remains steadfast in its efforts to preserve its stability
through a series of steps. The Government was successful
in holding three important conferences in partnership
with Lebanon’s friends. The Rome conference, hosted
with the Italian Government’s support in March, helped
generate assistance for the Lebanese Armed Forces and
security services. The conference in Paris under the
auspices of the French presidency earlier this month
brought about much-needed support for the Lebanese
economy. Lastly, the Brussels conference, held this
week, promised to bring invaluable help to Lebanon to
withstand the burden of the displaced Syrians in the
country, although the pledges fell below 15 per cent of
the appeal.

In the meantime, the peaceful demonstrations
by civilian Palestinians in Gaza were met by Israeli
bullets, and led to the death of dozens of Palestinians

Lebanon is very thankful for the generous support
of its friends in the international community that
understand the central role that Lebanon plays in the

28/66

18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

stability of the region. Domestically, the Lebanese will
go to the polls on 6 May to vote for a new Parliament.
Those elections are very important because they
strengthen the well-established democratic traditions
in Lebanon and send a message about the importance
of the ballot box in politics. But Lebanon is still facing
serious challenges and threats to its security and
stability, especially from the daily Israeli violations
of its sovereignty by air, land and sea. Israel is still
insisting on building a wall on occupied Lebanese
territory and in disputed areas.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
through the tripartite mechanism, is trying to reduce
tensions and resolve disputes on the ground. But that
is not an alternative to the full implementation of
United Nations resolutions that call for the full Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Lebanese territory
and respect for its territorial and maritime borders.
Lebanon is committed to the complete implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety, and expects the
Council to shoulder its responsibility to bring Israel to
do the same, and stop its threats to Lebanon.
The last two days witnessed hundreds of world
leaders and representatives in this building talking about
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. If there is anything
they agreed on it was the importance of addressing the
root causes of conflicts. There is no place that needs
that more than my region. Ending the occupation in
Palestine and withdrawing from the occupied Lebanese
and Arab territories can go a long way towards bringing
peace and stability to the Middle East. There is a need
for peacemakers and honest brokers to start a peace
process, and have the commitment and will to see it
through. Only then can we have an open debate on the
Middle East that does not dwell on conflict, bloodshed
and despair, and delivers a hopeful message.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. I also thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Gaza since 30 March. We are appalled by the
number of dead and wounded, which has increased with
each passing week. We respect both the Palestinians’
right to peaceful demonstrations and the Israelis’ right
to security. However, violence cannot be justified for

S/PV. 8244

any reason. It will never solve problems and will not
change the behaviour of others.
Japan continues to call upon all parties to exercise
maximum restraint. We also reiterate that international
human rights law and humanitarian law must be fully
observed. There is now a tangible risk of an escalation
of tension on the ground that could lead to further
casualties as we approach the middle of May. We must
all seek ways to prevent that outcome. In that regard,
the Secretary-General’s call for an independent and
transparent investigation should be swiftly implemented
in a way that prevents further escalation and casualties.
Behind the current situation, there is a lack of hope
for the Palestinian people. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza is dire. The existing scarcity of electricity and
water will more severely affect people in the summer.
Continued settlement activities in the West Bank not
only violate international law, but also deprive the
Palestinian people of hope for a two-State solution.
The financial crisis of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNWRA) has caused increased anxiety for
Palestinian refugees. These hopeless conditions are
feeding radicalism and do not benefit either party. The
Government of Japan is determined to do what it can
to keep the hope for a peaceful future alive. Regarding
UNRWA, I am happy to announce that, two days ago,
Japan decided to provide $10 million in additional
contributions. We are also ready to call for further
cooperation with UNRWA by Asian countries at the
forthcoming Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development. We hope
the solidarity shown by the international community
will help Palestinians find hope in these difficult times,
and prevent them from being driven to radicalism.
In that context, I also would like to touch upon the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. That industrial complex
now creates tangible employment and provides
Palestinian manufacturers and entrepreneurs with
a glimpse of a positive future. We envision products
made in the Park being exported through Jordan
to the region and beyond in the years to come. The
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative has offered
opportunities where Palestine, Israel, Jordan and Japan
cooperate for the economic development of Palestine
through regional cooperation. A ministerial meeting is
expected to be held soon.

18-1252729/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Japan believes that keeping hope and mutual trust
alive through these efforts is essential, particularly
when the political track is at a difficult juncture.
Ultimately, though, the projects alone cannot achieve
peace. We reiterate that lasting peace and security can
be achieved only through negotiations between the
parties. Japan calls upon both parties to take concrete
steps towards renewed negotiations, leading to the
peaceful co-existence of a viable Palestinian State and
Israel with secure and recognized borders.
We will enhance our political engagement with both
parties, including at the highest level. Japan continues
to support a two-State solution that accommodates
the aspirations of both sides, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
The final status of Jerusalem should be resolved
through negotiations based on the assumption that it
will be the future capital of both States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The occupation by Israel of Palestinian, Syrian
and Lebanese territories, the displacement of peoples,
the confiscation of land and settling strangers on it based
on the conviction of a takfiri Zionist belief constitute
terrorism beyond description. Worse than that, double
standards have become characteristic of some Member
States in the Security Council that claim to defend
human rights, international law and the principles set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. They call for
hysterical meetings almost daily, on matters based on
false intelligence information that they make up while
pretending to forget the clear fact that Israel has been
occupying Palestine, the Golan and parts of Lebanon
for more than five decades.
Those countries, in particular the United States
of America, have provided protection and immunity
from accountability for Israel’s continued violations
of hundreds of resolutions calling on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories and to withdraw to the
4 June 1967 border. That encourages Israel to commit
the most heinous of crimes and terrorist acts, the most
recent of which was the killing of scores of people and
injuring thousands of Palestinian civilians who were
protesting peacefully during last weeks on the annual
Palestinian Land Day, stressing the right of Palestinian
refugees to return to their lands.
30/66

26/04/2018

The Syrian Arab Republic has maintained its
principled position supporting the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination, to establish an independent
State on their entire national territory, with Jerusalem
as its capital, and to ensure the right of refugees to
return to their homes according to General Assembly
resolution 194 (III), of 1948.
My delegation would like to strongly condemn the
deliberate disregard by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process of a main part of his
mandate. Once again, he did not touch on the situation
of the occupied Syrian Golan, or the continuing Israeli
practices and violations there, even though those
practices fall within the item under discussion today.
They are an integral part of his mandate as Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process. Deviating from
his mandate scores of times makes him incapable of
assuming the responsibilities he has been assigned
to handle.
Some countries have been attempting today to
impose subjects that are not under discussion, in order
to distract the Security Council from the practices of
the Israeli occupation. They have not said a single word
about putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Arab territories and the occupied Syrian Golan. It is
as if the restoration of the Golan is not the right of the
Syrian people, and as if the Golan were not an occupied
Syrian territory. Why do those delegations not speak
about fighting terrorism, about human rights law
and International humanitarian law when it comes to
detaining Syrian people and putting them in Israeli jails
in an arbitrary manner? For example, Sidqi Al-Maqt,
the Mandela of Syria, was detained and imprisoned for
merely documenting Israel’s cooperation in the Syrian
Golan with Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front gangs in the
disengagement area in Golan. Where is their rejection
of stealing Golan natural resources, including gas,
oil and water? Where is their rejection of the New
Jersey-based company Genie Energy? That company,
which is owned by a number of former United States
officials, is digging for oil in the occupied Syrian
Golan in violation of international law and the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Where is their condemnation of
the repeated aggression by Israel against my country,
Syria, in support of terrorist groups? The latest was on
9 April. Of course, none of that has been reported to the
Special Coordinator for the Peace Process.
We underscore that Syria has a sovereign right to
4 June 1967 border in the occupied Syrian Golan. It is
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a non-negotiable right. Our occupied territories and
our usurped rights should be returned in full to us, the
rightful holders. Israeli settlers must leave our occupied
territory in Golan sooner or later. My country calls
on the Security Council to take immediate measures
against Israel, the occupying Power, to put an end to
its acts of aggressions and violations, and to put an
end to the occupation of Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan. It must withdraw to 4 June 1967
borders, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981), and the establishment of the
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Moualimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success in your work.
I would like also to express my sincere
condolences to Côte d’Ivoire on the passing of our
colleague Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, and to wish his family
patience and solace.
Alaa Zamli, Hussein Madi and Mohammed Ayoub
were all 14-year-old boys. They were in the flower of
their youth. Another 40 children like them were singing
patriotic songs that included the following lyrics:
“Return is a right like the sun that rises in our
hearts and minds;
“The ray of justice will lead us to Palestine
and Jerusalem”.
The ray of justice is guaranteed by international
resolutions and charters. The ray of justice that those
boys never saw because of bullets fired at them and at
their friends by the occupation soldiers of the occupation
forces in cold blood, without a semblance of human
conscience. The Palestinians have claimed nothing
other than the right to life, the right to return to their
lands, which they were forced to leave, the right to selfdetermination and establishing their independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital and the right to demand that
the Security Council enforces its resolutions pertaining
to the protection of the Palestinian people, in particular
resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994).

S/PV. 8244

We call for the establishment of an international
investigative commission to shed light on the events of
30 March and thereafter, and to hold Israel accountable
for the murder of unarmed civilian protesters, and let the
perpetrators of those crimes be subjected to deterring.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes the
centrality of the Palestinian cause in relation to the
Arab nation, as well as the importance of the Arab
identity of Jerusalem, the right of the State of Palestine
to govern all its territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, and the urgent need for Israel to
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Arab Golan. Saudi Arabia also underscores
its strategic preference for peace and the need to settle
the Israeli-Arab conflict in accordance with the Arabic
Peace Initiative, introduced by my country in 2002.
King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Custodian of the
Two Holy Mosques, reiterated his firm stance on that
unchanged and principled position, when he announced
at the twenty ninth Arab Summit, held recently in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia that
“the Palestinian question is our first cause, and
would remain our first cause until the Palestinian
people enjoy all their legitimate rights, in particular
the establishment of their independent State with
east Jerusalem as its capital”.
Iran continues to interfere in the internal affairs
of Arab States and foment, support and embrace
terrorism. Iran provides the first line of support to
Hizbullah — a terrorist group that flaunts its arrogance
and dominance in Lebanon, wages war in Syria and
perpetrates the most extreme killings, siege and ethnic
cleansing. Iran is supporting the Houthi militias in
Yemen and providing them with arms and missiles
that are, in turn, fired against my country. The number
of missiles launched so far against Saudi Arabia has
reached 125.
Independent United Nations reports have
demonstrated that the missiles fired against my country
were manufactured in Iran. The final report of Panel of
Experts on Yemen found that,
“the Islamic Republic of Iran is in
non-compliance with paragraph 14 of resolution
2216 (2015) in that it failed to take the necessary
measures to prevent the direct or indirect
supply, sale or transfer of [arms to the Houthis]”
(S/2018/68, p. 2)

18-1252731/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
published following the Secretariat’s visit to Saudi
Arabia, he indicated that,
“The Secretariat also observed three actuators that
bore the castings of a logo similar to that of the
Shahid Bagheri Industrial Group, an entity on the
list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015)
and a subordinate to the Aerospace Industries
Organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran.”
(S/2017/1030, para. 29)
According to those reports, Iran is flagrantly
violating resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). It is
high time that the Council take a firm stand with regard
to Iran and urge the international community to avoid
complacency in the face of those acts of aggression
and terrorism, which are undermining regional and
international peace and security. It is also high time
to deal with Hizbullah seriously and lift the lid off its
terrorist operations in Syria, Lebanon and other parts
of the world, and combat the flow of illegal arms into
Hizbullah’s hands and its practices, which run contrary
to the Lebanese Constitution.
With regard to Syria, Saudi Arabia condemns the
horrific chemical-weapon attack perpetrated by the
Syrian regime in Douma in eastern Ghouta, which
led to the deaths of dozens of innocent women and
children. That crime demonstrates that the Syrian
authorities have not discontinued the use of chemical
weapons against civilians in Syria. Such a crime calls
for a serious response and firm stance on the part of the
international community to end the human suffering
and ensure that the perpetrators be held accountable
and punished.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia once again calls
for delivering immediate humanitarian assistance to
those in need throughout Syria regardless of their race,
religion or political affiliation. It is necessary that all
those detained and kidnapped be liberated. It is also
critical that all refugees and displaced persons be
allowed to return to their homes with dignity.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has expressed that it
is keen to provide its assistance to the brotherly people
of Syria to alleviate their suffering. Accordingly, my
country announced its pledge of $100 million at the
donor conference held in Brussels from 24 to 25 April
in support of Syria. That brings the total amount of aid
that Saudi Arabia has provided to its Syrian brothers in
32/66

26/04/2018

Syria and in neighbouring countries to almost $1 billion
to date.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reaffirms the need
to end the tragedy experienced by the Syrian people.
It is crucial that we move towards a peaceful solution
based on the first Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). The international
community must meet its obligations with regard to the
protection of civilians in Syria. The optimal solution to
the crisis is indeed through consensus among Syrians
and an agreement that meets the needs of the people,
ends their suffering and meets their aspirations for
freedom, stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, I thank you, Sir,
for convening this important meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Group of Arab States would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
More than 70 years have passed since the
establishment of the United Nations, and since then the
Palestinian people have been living under occupation
and suffering from all forms of Israeli violations, which
have affected generations of Palestinians, in flagrant
violation of international treaties and conventions and
in defiance of relevant United Nations resolutions.
We are firmly committed to the Charter of the
United Nations and to international law and international
legitimacy, as they form the basis of international
relations. In the light of the Israeli occupation
authorities’ flagrant and wanton aggression against
those principles, and the continued brutal occupation of
the Palestinian territories, we stress the importance of
maintaining a unified international position that rejects
Israel’s status quo policy and of supporting the United
Nations and the principles set out in its Charter, as well
as supporting the right of the Palestinian people to self
-determination and establishing their independent state
across 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital.
At the most recent meeting of the League of Arab
States, held in Saudi Arabia on 15 April, Arab leaders,
in accordance with their belief in the role of the United
Nations, international law and international legitimacy
and with a view to bringing about peace in the Middle
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East as a strategic option, underscored a number of
points, including the following.
First, it is important for there to be comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East as an Arab strategic
option within the Arab peace process, which continues
to be the more comprehensive plan to address all final
status issues, most important of which are those of
refugees and security in the region.
Secondly, the Arab leaders stressed the centrality
of the Palestinian cause for all Arab nations and the
Arab identity of occupied East Jerusalem as the capital
of Palestine.
Thirdly, they stressed that East Jerusalem will
remain the capital of Arab Palestine, and called on
States of the world to not recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel or to move their capitals there or take
any measures that would alter the legal and political
nature and character of Jerusalem, as that would have
repercussions in the Middle East at large.
Fourthly, they stressed the importance of
relaunching serious and effective Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations in order to overcome the impasse
caused by the stringent Israeli positions. The
negotiations should be time bound in order to bring the
conflict to an end on the basis of a two-State solution.
The Arab leaders supported the vision expressed by the
Palestinian President for peace in his statement before
the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183).
Fifthly, they rejected all unilateral Israeli steps
aimed at changing the realities on the ground and
undermining the two-State solution. They called on the
international community to implement the resolutions
of the international legitimacy, the most recent of
which is resolution 2334 (2016), which condemns the
settlements and confiscation of lands.
This meeting is being held at a time of tension as
Israeli occupying authorities are seriously escalating
their aggressions against the peace protesters in
Palestine, especially in Gaza Strip. These painful
incidents cause us to seriously request international
protection for the defenceless Palestinian people.
We renew our condemnation of those acts of
aggressions against the Palestinian people in the
strongest possible terms. We reaffirm our full support
for the call by the Secretary-General and many States
to conduct a transparent and independent investigation
into the fatal incidents related to the Great March of

S/PV. 8244

Return for the fourth week in a row. Pressure must be
brought to bear on Israel to exercise restraint and refrain
from using live ammunition against the Palestinian
protesters while they commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the Nakba. All those violations and
aggression exacerbate the humanitarian situation on
the ground, in particular in the besieged Gaza and
the camps. Basic relief services, including health
and education, are threatened as a result of the evershrinking deficit in the budget of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNWRA) and the decline in financial
allocations. We would like to thank donors for their
support. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts to fill the financial gap and to
ensure the financial sustainability of UNWRA, which
would afford protection and a decent life to more than
5 million Palestinian refugees.
The international recognition of the State of
Palestine enabled it to obtain observer status at the
United Nations and to become a full member of a
number of organizations and international treaties. The
Group of Arab States seeks to promote the status of
the State of Palestine internationally. It has stepped up
its consultations with Member States and the Security
Council with regard to the continued efforts to enable
the State of Palestine to become a full Member of
the United Nations in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
We strongly believe that we have no option other
than to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine
and all other Arab territories. That is the only way to
achieve peace in the region. We support all serious
efforts and endeavours to revive the peace process
and resume negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides on the basis of the two-State solution and
in accordance with the international terms of reference,
the resolutions of the Madrid Peace Conference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
A full version of my statement will be circulated. Allow
me to make a few remarks.

18-1252733/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/04/2018

Recent events in Gaza are a stark reminder of
how volatile the situation on the ground can be in the
absence of a clear political horizon. That is why, in past
months, the European Union has consistently kept the
Middle East peace process high on the political agenda,
at a time when the region faces many other challenges.

situation in Gaza could have significant consequences
for regional and international peace and security, as
demonstrated by three conflicts over the past decade.
Therefore, the Security Council must contribute to
de-escalation efforts, including through an appropriate
public expression.

Our overarching objective remains to restore a
political horizon and an appropriate framework for
political progress, together with our regional and
international partners, starting with the Middle East
Quartet. The European Union appreciates the United
Nations role in that regard, including in particular the
role played by the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Peace Process, Nikolay Mladenov.

The European Union has made important efforts,
together with its partners, in recent months to improve
the situation for the people in Gaza and support the
return of the single legitimate Palestinian Authority
to Gaza. The European Union co-chaired a donor
conference for the Gaza desalination plant, which
received pledges of €456 million, €77 million of which
came from the European Union. The plant, which will
address the human right to water in Gaza, will take
some years to build, but some of its components will
have an immediate positive impact.

The European Union remains fully committed
to its known positions on parameters for a two-State
solution, on the need to avoid any steps that are eroding
the viability of the two-State solution, as laid down in
the Quartet report of July 2016, including in particular
continued Israeli settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law and remains an obstacle to
peace, as reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016), as well
as incitement and violence.
The European Union has followed closely the
recent protests and violence at the Gaza border fence.
Over 30 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli live
fire, including minors and journalists. Thousands have
been injured. That raises serious questions about the
proportionate use of force, which must be addressed
through independent and transparent investigations.
The European Union takes note of the fact-finding
assessment mechanism established by the Israel
Defence Forces to review its own actions and specific
incidents that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza
border since 30 March. Facts must also be established
regarding reports about violent attacks against Israel
under the guise of the protests.
The most immediate priority for all sides must
be to prevent any further escalation and loss of life.
We call on all sides to act with utmost restraint and
responsibility, while respecting the rights of freedom
of expression and freedom of assembly. Israel must
respect the right to peaceful protests and ensure the use
of proportional measures when protecting its legitimate
security interests. Those leading the protests and the
de facto authorities in Gaza must avoid any incitement
to violence, ensure that the protests remain strictly
non-violent and not exploit them for other means. The
34/66

The efforts of the international community in Gaza
can bear fruit only if there is also responsible leadership
on the ground. We expect all Palestinian factions to
work together to address the needs of the Palestinian
population. That will require a serious engagement in
good faith, under Egyptian auspices, to implement the
agreement of 12 October 2017, allowing the Palestinian
Authority to resume its full responsibilities in Gaza.
Gaza and the West Bank must be reunified under one
single and legitimate Palestinian Authority. That is an
important element for achieving the two-State solution
and a viable and sovereign Palestinian State. All parties
must take swift steps to produce a fundamental change
in the political, security and economic situation in the
Gaza Strip, in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009),
including the end of the closure and a full opening of
the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
over recent significant reductions of funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is facing its
most difficult financial situation since its inception in
1949. That will have serious security and humanitarian
consequences not only in Gaza, but also in the West
Bank and neighbouring countries. The extraordinary
Ministerial Conference held in Rome on 15 March,
at the initiative of Sweden, Jordan and Egypt, was
an important occasion to mobilize both political and
financial support for the Agency and find ways to
assure sustainable forms of financing for UNRWA.
Collectively, the European Union and its member States
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are among the largest contributors to the Agency, and
that will continue. We call on all donors to continue
or increase their support and on those that have cut
funding to rethink their decision.
The European Union reiterates its support for
Israel’s legitimate right to exist, as well as Palestine’s
legitimate aspirations to statehood and sovereignty. In
view of the upcoming events in mid-May and the risks
of a flare up of tensions and violence on the ground,
the priority must be to avoid further escalation and loss
of life. We urge the parties to show restraint and avoid
provocative rhetoric and acts that would risk fuelling
further tensions. The European Union and its member
States will continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem embodied in, inter alia,
resolution 478 (1980), including on the location of their
diplomatic representations, until the final status of
Jerusalem is resolved.
Allow me to turn briefly to Syria, where the
conflict has entered its eighth year.
We strongly condemn the repeated use of chemical
weapons in Syria and their continued and repeated use
by the regime, in violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, including the latest attack
on Douma, which was a grave breach of international
law and an affront to human decency. The EU fully
supports the ongoing investigation by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OCPW)
Fact-finding Mission into that devastating chemical
attack. The EU reiterates its strong commitment to
combatting the re-emergence of chemical weapons and
is supportive of all efforts aimed at the prevention of
the use of chemical weapons.
In that respect, the European Union deeply regrets
the multiple Russian vetoes of the renewal of the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism mandate
in November 2017, and urges the Security Council
to rapidly re-establish an independent attribution
mechanism to ensure accountability for perpetrators
of chemical weapons’ attacks. We support the current
efforts led by the Security Council to recreate dialogue
and move forward on all tracks of the Syrian conflict.
The European Union held the second Brussels
Conference on supporting the future of Syria and
the region, co-chaired with the United Nations. We
concluded on a strong message of broad international

S/PV. 8244

support for relaunching the political process, under
United Nations auspices, in Geneva to solve the Syrian
crisis, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015), and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We reiterate
that the European Union will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated
by the Syrian parties in the conflict on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué is
firmly under way.
At the Brussels Conference, $4.4 billion were
mobilized in support of operations to address both
the worsening humanitarian situation inside Syria and
the enormous needs of refugees and their hosts across
the region this year, as well as multi-year pledges of
$3.4 billion for the period 2019-2020.
In conclusion, the momentum of the current
situation should be used to reinvigorate the process to
find a political resolution to the Syrian conflict. The
European Union repeats that any sustainable solution
to the conflict requires a genuine political transition,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué, negotiated by the Syrian parties within
the United Nations-led Geneva process, and we remain
committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian State. In that context, the
European Union commends the tireless efforts of the
United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to facilitate the implementation of all relevant
resolutions. The European Union will spare no efforts
in support of a peaceful solution to the Syrian conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): At the outset,
I would like to express my deep condolences to the
delegation of Côte d’Ivoire. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
attended the Brazilian Diplomatic Academy, and we
were both in the same class. He was a very dear friend
and colleague, and we will miss him.
(spoke in Spanish)
I wish to thank the Peruvian mission for convening
this open debate. We believe that the United Nations as
a whole and the Security Council in particular have a
pivotal role to play in seeking solutions to the complex
and prolonged conflicts that affect the Middle East.

18-1252735/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Once again, Brazil wishes to express its full support
for implementing a two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, with Palestine and Israel living side
by side in peace and security, within mutually agreed
and internationally recognized borders based on the
1967 borders and in accordance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the parameters of
the peace process. Moreover, the Brazilian Government
reaffirms its understanding that the final status of the
city of Jerusalem must be defined through negotiations
between Israel and Palestine based on the relevant
Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).
Brazil is following the situation in the Gaza
Strip with concern, against the backdrop of the
demonstrations of recent weeks. We reiterate our
conviction that civilians should be able to exercise their
right to demonstrate peacefully. The recent escalation
has caused many deaths and unnecessary injuries,
including among young people. We call on the parties
to refrain from any act that could put more civilians
in danger.
Recent developments in Syria continue to demand
the urgent attention of the Security Council. The
Brazilian Government expresses its great concern
over the escalation of the conflict in recent weeks, and
once again condemns the use of chemical weapons. We
reaffirm that it is imperative to conduct thorough and
impartial investigations into all allegations of chemical
attacks and that, if confirmed, those responsible must
be brought to justice.
Emerging from the conflict in Syria, however, will
require full respect for international law. In that context,
Brazil reiterates its belief that the conflict can be
brought to an end only through political means through
negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our
full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura and the political negotiations in Geneva. The
international community must send an unequivocal
message in support of an inclusive political solution to
the crisis in Syria. We are also deeply concerned about
the situation in northern Syria and the violence in Idlib
and Afrin. We call on all relevant parties to respect
international law.
In Yemen, we are currently witnessing one of the
most serious humanitarian disasters in the world. We
36/66

26/04/2018

deeply regret the recent escalation of hostilities and
all violations of international law and international
humanitarian law arising from conflict. We reiterate
that the only way to end the Yemeni conflict and
address the humanitarian crisis is a negotiated political
solution through an inclusive dialogue.
In that regard, we reaffirm our full support for the
work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We welcomed
his early contacts with the parties to the conflict
with attention and optimism, and we wish to offer
our strongest support for his proposal to resume the
negotiations, based on parameters that will be defined
in the coming months. We call on all parties to work
with the Special Envoy and to return to the negotiating
table without preconditions. We also reiterate the need
to respect resolution 2216 (2015) on the arms embargo
on Yemen, and we urge all Member States to observe
its provisions.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its adamant support
for the efforts of the Government and the people of
Lebanon towards stability and development. In that
context, we underline the vital role played by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and its Maritime
Task Force in stabilizing a highly volatile environment.
Brazil is proud to lead the Maritime Task force, at its
helm since 2011.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Pahad (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this crucial open debate
focusing on the situation between Palestine and Israel.
The unresolved matter of Palestine is nothing
less than a gaping wound in the international political
landscape — one that the Council has failed to
adequately address for over 70 years. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict is as old as the Organization, and it
therefore deserves to be a top priority of this organ. The
resolution of that long-standing conflict will contribute
to the stability of the region. However, the recent events
in Gaza can be seen as symptomatic of the lack of will
and commitment to a political process for the resolution
of the conflict. We therefore urge the Security Council
to redouble its efforts towards minimizing the internal
differences that have long made it impossible for the
Council to shoulder its charter responsibility with
regard to this matter.
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8244

Every year that goes by appears to make peace
even more elusive. New generations of Israelis and
Palestinians grow up knowing nothing but the conflict
between themselves. In all this time, new challenges,
as we have seen recently with the developments
pertaining to the status of Jerusalem, Israeli illegal
settlement activity and the recent events in Gaza, have
compounded the crisis.

already been set. Those include the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Plan and the Quartet road
map, to name a few. Unilateral action, particularly
on final-status issues, undermines the revival of a
peace process. Those include the building of illegal
settlements and the recognition by some Member States
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

South Africa is deeply concerned by the excessive
use of force by the Israeli military on the frustrated
people of Gaza who were protesting the blockade
imposed on their territory. As the conflict continues and
their political and humanitarian situation worsens, the
Palestinian people feel a constant existential threat as a
metaphorical and literal wall closes in around them. It
can only be expected that they would want to resist such
a constant threat and have their voices heard. While
those voices continue to be ignored, the parameters of
what we have come to accept as a two-State solution are
beginning to dwindle. Indeed, a peace process that is
stagnant without any progress gradually loses the trust
of the people who depend so desperately upon it. That
loss of trust will be the death knell for the prospects of
peace in the region.

Before I conclude, there are two additional issues
of concern that we wish to raise.

It is frightening to imagine the alternative to a
political solution to the conflict. While the occupation of
Palestine continues, there will continue to be resistance
and the entrenchment of hatred between peoples who
have a shared history and have the potential to be
peaceful neighbours, benefiting from mutual support
and cooperation.
Today, during the centenary year of the birth of late
President Nelson Mandela, we must draw on his legacy
and those of countless other leaders in our own country,
which have resulted in South Africa benefiting from the
reconciliation of its people and overcoming entrenched
divisions among people. With that in mind, South
Africa supports all initiatives towards a negotiated
solution to the crisis, including the recent proposal by
the President of the State of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, to convene an international summit to pursue a
means of salvaging the two-State solution.
South Africa reaffirms that the central
responsibility for attaining peace is primarily in the
hands of the Palestinians and Israelis themselves. We,
as part of the international community, should support
and encourage the parties towards that endeavour. The
international legal framework for those negotiations has

The first issue is the plight of children in military
detention in Israel. While the immediate injustice of
those abuses cannot be overstated, it is the psychological
and developmental harm to those young individuals
that is most troubling. Furthermore, such abuses merely
seek to reinforce hatred between the two sides to the
conflict, prolonging the crisis and doing nothing to
reconcile the parties.
The second issue is the dire financial situation
faced by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The continued generous support of the international
community is necessary to ensure the Agency’s
continuity of services, and is especially needed in
light of the recurrent and severe financial shortfalls
that continue to affect its programmes. We would like
to emphasize that the funding for UNRWA should be
sustainable, predictable and sufficient. For its part,
South Africa will continue to support UNRWA through
its financial contributions.
Finally, we believe that the commitment and good
faith of all Council members are utterly essential
if we are to mend the open wound that continues to
harm generations of innocent people. We hope that
these quarterly debates, which unfortunately have so
far yielded no outcome or action, will very soon be
converted into concrete and practical steps towards
a political dialogue for a durable and sustainable
resolution, with a negotiated solution based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions. The resolution of
the situation in Palestine will be the ultimate test of
the ability of the United Nations to fulfil its central
purpose of saving succeeding Palestinian and Israeli
generations from the scourge of war. Israel will never
have peace and security if the legitimate right to selfdetermination is not given to the Palestinian people.

18-1252737/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I convey my delegation’s appreciation to Peru
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, at this
critical juncture for Palestine and the Middle East.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic Venezuela,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is at
the core of and central to all conflicts in the Middle
East. That injustice has continued for more than
seven decades and has intensified through the Israeli
expansionist, aggressive and apartheid policies towards
Palestinians and the region. No political theatre by the
United States and the Israeli regime can cover up the
aggressive and expansionist policies of that regime and
its behaviour towards its neighbours as the main source
of threat to the peace and security of the region. While
Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan Heights
remain under illegal Israeli occupation, the Minister of
Regional Cooperation of that regime boasts that Israel
has carried out more than 100 strikes on Syria and
Lebanon, all of which played directly into the hands of
terrorists when and where they needed them.
Each time we meet in this Chamber, we receive
news regarding illegal settlements or aggressive policies
implemented by the apartheid Zionist regime. The
Israeli regime now works day and night to negate all
rights of the Palestinians and to entrench its occupation.
Indeed, Israel is a rogue regime, by definition. That is
an undeniable fact for the international community,
except for those who believe that illegal occupation,
illegal settlements, apartheid, sieges, regular attacks
and mass murder are the legitimate actions of a regime
that proclaims itself to be the only democracy in the
Middle East.
As one prominent Palestinian scholar said three
decades ago, what is so extraordinary is that what the
Israelis are now doing in the West Bank and Gaza is
really a repetition of the experience of apartheid and
what the United States did to the Native Americans,
putting them in reservations or simply exterminating
them in the hope that the problem would go away. Those
words are more true today than ever.
38/66

26/04/2018

As a result of the new and ongoing mass murder
in Gaza, dozens of unarmed Palestinian civilians have
been killed and thousands wounded so far. Those latest
attacks conform to the pattern that has been followed
by the Israeli regime during the course of the past seven
decades. Given the circumstances, there is no doubt
that those vicious attacks and killings are planned and
deliberate. Those who support and enable the Israeli
regime to commit those types of crimes also have the
Palestinians’ blood on their hands.
The unlawful announcement on Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the imminent transfer of the United States Embassy
to that city are another example of the policies that are
exacerbating the problems. Those measures gravely
contravene international law and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
exceptionalism that has long been accorded to the Israeli
regime must now end if the Council is serious about
establishing peace and security in the Middle East. The
impunity that the regime has enjoyed for so long would
not have been possible without the help it receives from
the United States and certain interest groups.
In conclusion, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing rising Israeli aggression, Iran reaffirms its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
recognizing their decades of resilience despite so much
suffering and injustice. Iran reiterates its strong support
for their legitimate and inalienable rights, including to
self-determination and freedom, in an independent and
viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Tensions are increasing in
the Middle East, and it has become even more difficult
to re-engage Israel and Palestine in a meaningful
political process. It is therefore imperative to prepare
the ground for political initiatives that can lead to
renewed negotiations on a two-State solution.
Norway is deeply concerned about the violent
clashes on the Gaza-Israeli border. We urge all parties
to act with responsibility and restraint and to refrain
from any actions that could lead to further escalation
or loss of life. The use of lethal force against unarmed
protesters who are demonstrating peacefully is
unacceptable. While Israel has a legitimate right to
protect its borders, any use of force must be necessary
and proportionate.
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is also important to stress that freedom of
expression and freedom of assembly are fundamental
rights that must be respected. But protests must be
non-violent. As we have already emphasized, the most
serious incidents must be subject to an independent
and credible investigation. This is first and foremost
a national responsibility. However, Gaza can be
sustainable only as part of a comprehensive resolution
to the conflict.
As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Norway — together with the
European Union, the United Nations and the United
States — has intensified its work to support Palestinian
institution-building and to address the precarious
humanitarian situation in Gaza. We recently held
two AHLC meetings in Brussels, on 31 January and
20 March, both of which aimed at improving the
critical situation in Gaza. Key priorities are increased
water and energy distribution and improved access and
movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza, with
special priority given to medical equipment and people
in need of medical treatment.
Our goal must be to help the 2 million people in
Gaza. Norway is actively consulting with the parties,
Egypt and key international partners to address the
current situation. The policies and decisions of the
parties that run counter to the needs of the people of
Gaza must stop. It is also imperative that the Palestinian
Authority reinstate its full authority in Gaza. The Cairo
agreement must be fully implemented and the closure
of Gaza must be eased.
Following chemical attacks in Syria, it is crucial
that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons inspectors have unhindered access so that
they can continue their investigations. We also urge
the Security Council to establish a mechanism to hold
those responsible to account.
Norway is deeply concerned about the recent
escalations of violence in Syria. We underline the need
for renewed efforts to find political solutions. It is
important that all the parties involved in the conflict
work through the United Nations-led negotiations to
achieve a durable peace.
Yesterday, at the Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region, the donors
pledged $4.4 billion for 2018. While this confirms the
international commitment to easing the burden of the

S/PV. 8244

Syrian people, the pledges made are less than half of
what the United Nations estimates is needed. Norway is
on track to fulfil our four-year pledge of over $1 billion,
and this year we will contribute $280 million to the
crisis in Syria, including neighbouring countries.
Norway fully supports the Iran nuclear deal. When
it was signed in 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) was a milestone for international peace
and security. Iran has complied with its commitments
under the deal. It is now crucial to ensure that the
JCPOA survives. This means that all parties must
remain committed to complying with both the letter
and the spirit of the agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to discuss the situation in
the Middle East. Escalations in different parts of the
region and political paralysis in the Council make the
participation of the entire membership in this debate
particularly important.
The ongoing paralysis of the Security Council with
respect to the situation in Syria is a reason for deep
concern. No less than 12 vetoes have been cast on
proposals before the Council to deal with the situation.
Moreover, its rare decisions have been ineffective, such
as the ceasefire mandated under resolution 2401 (2018),
which continues to be disregarded by conflict parties.
The conflict has turned from an internal armed conflict
into a threat to the stability of the region and beyond.
It continues to be characterized by massive violations
of international humanitarian law, including the use of
chemical weapons and large-scale displacement. Both
the briefing we heard yesterday (see S/PV.8242) and the
Brussels Conference have made it clear just how far we
are from a political solution to this conflict.
Accountability must be an integral part of any
peace process for Syria, as evidenced by the situation
on the ground and called for consistently by Syrian civil
society groups. We continue to strongly support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, whose mandate
encompasses crimes committed by all parties and, of
course, the competence to investigate the use of chemical
weapons which is, under all circumstances, a war

18-1252739/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/04/2018

crime. The Mechanism will soon be fully operational
and is already in a position to receive information and
evidence. We call on all States to extend this type of
cooperation to the Mechanism. We reiterate our view
that the Council should refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as called for by
the Secretary-General and supported yesterday at the
Brussels Conference.

One of the few positive developments in the recent
past with respect to the situation in the Middle East
was the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), a highlight of multilateral diplomacy
and a testimony to the effectiveness of the Council,
which has endorsed that important agreement. We
continue supporting the JCPOA and hope that its terms
will be honoured by all parties.

The peace process in the Middle East, having
already been stalled for a considerable time, is now
further jeopardized by recent developments in Gaza.
We are deeply concerned by the recent violence, in
particular the excessive use of force and extrajudicial
killings by Israeli security forces. We support the
call of the Secretary-General for an independent and
transparent investigation and echo the ICC Prosecutor’s
reminder that the situation in Palestine remains under
preliminary examination.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

According to the principle of complementarity,
the primary responsibility to investigate lies with the
national judiciaries concerned, with a role for the Court
to monitor such proceedings, which have to be conducted
in conformity with relevant standards of international
criminal law. We also closely follow discussions
on possible action by the Human Rights Council in
Geneva. Liechtenstein continues to support a twoState solution, within an international legal framework
based on applicable international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The catastrophic humanitarian crisis and the
systematic disregard for international humanitarian
law in Yemen remain alarming. It is crucial that
humanitarian aid have unimpeded, sustained and safe
access, as over 20 million people urgently require help.
We welcome the Council’s call for increased access for
humanitarian aid to Yemen through sea and air ports.
Nevertheless, we are concerned that hostilities on all
sides continue and will lead to a further escalation of
the situation. The Security Council must live up to
its responsibility and protect civilians from the most
serious crimes under international law, including
the deliberate targeting of civilian populations and
infrastructure. We support the new Special Envoy’s
initiative to recall inclusive peace talks. Council
members, in particular those nine that have signed the
code of conduct on mass atrocity crimes elaborated by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
should use their procedural majority in the Council to
address the situation in Yemen.
40/66

Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM)
at this quarterly open debate on a matter to which
we have historically attached special importance,
namely, the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, particularly at the current
international juncture.
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing.
We are living in a world facing multiple, complex
and newly emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security. We believe that these
must be resolutely addressed through multilateralism
in the framework of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, can be no
exception. In that regard, we, the 120 States members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, in accordance
with the communiqué issued on 19 April, reaffirm the
full validity of the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the peaceful resolution of
disputes, in accordance with Article 2 and Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October 1970.
Many sombre anniversaries took place in 2017,
and 2018 seems to be no different. This year marks the
seventieth anniversary of the Nakba, the catastrophe
and tragedy that befell the Palestinian people in 1948
when they lost their homeland under the Palestine
Mandate and the majority of Palestinians were forcibly
expelled or fled in fear. Uprooted from their cities,
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

towns and villages, dispossessed and displaced, they
became refugees whose tragic plight continues until this
day. We take this opportunity to once again call for the
undertaking and intensification of all efforts required
to bring an end to this injustice and advance a peaceful
and just solution. We cannot allow the suffering of the
heroic Palestinian people to continue.
In this regard, NAM reaffirms that the ongoing
Israeli occupation, and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
as a whole, continue to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. This requires urgent
attention and action in accordance with international
law, the relevant resolutions and, of course, the Charter
of the United Nations itself. Moreover, the Security
Council must uphold its duties in the framework of
the Charter of the United Nations and act to uphold its
own resolutions, which constitute the foundation for a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict.
Furthermore, we reaffirm that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power — such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981 aimed at altering the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as Israel’s measures
to apply its jurisdiction and administration there — are
null and void and have no legal effect. In this regard,
and in line with our principled position, we demand
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981)
and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the lines of 4 June 1967, pursuant to resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
In relation to the Palestinian question, the States
members of NAM remain ready to contribute to the
achievement of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to
the conflict. We therefore welcomed the peace proposal
presented by President Mahmoud Abbas to the Security
Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183) and extend
our support to his call for the early convening of an
international peace conference.
In this vein, we call for the intensification of
international and regional efforts in support of this
objective, and recall the responsibilities of the Security
Council and the General Assembly in this regard, as
most recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). We
believe that this resolution provides the most viable
path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for a just solution that would preserve
the two-State solution on basis of the pre-1967 lines,

S/PV. 8244

with respect for the long-standing terms of reference of
peace endorsed by the international community and in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map. This shall ensure the realization by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and independence in their State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We continue to call for the full respect and
implementation of all relevant resolutions in this regard,
which would establish the conditions necessary to
bring an end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict
in all its aspects and make Palestinian- Israeli peace
and security a reality for the benefit of both peoples,
the region and the international community as a whole.
It is also imperative that action be taken immediately in
line with international law and relevant resolutions in
order to redress the situation on the ground, de-escalate
tensions and foster a environment conducive to the
pursuit of peace.
The situation in Gaza remains of great concern
to the Movement, particularly the grave humanitarian
situation which, regrettably, continues to deteriorate.
NAM therefore reiterates its call for the total lifting
of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
continues to impose untold humanitarian, social and
economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men. We stress once again that
the crisis in Gaza must be comprehensively addressed
in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
resolutions, in the context of the overall situation of
the ongoing illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, since 1967, as well as in the context of the
unequivocal calls for an end to the occupation of more
than half a century.
The recent tragic events that have taken the lives
of over 30 innocent Palestinians and injured more than
3,600 people in the Gaza Strip in under a month provide
yet another reason to direct all efforts to achieve peace
and find a peaceful resolution of the conflict, rather
than its escalation. They are also another reason to put
an end to the prolonged tragedy and suffering of the
Palestinian people.
In this connection, the Nam condemns Israel’s
excessive and disproportionate use of force against

18-1252741/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/04/2018

Palestinian civilians who participated in the Great
March of Return, which is a peaceful civilian protest
against Israel’s illegal occupation, oppression and
dispossession of the Palestinian people, who have
endured such treatment for over 50 years. We call for
international action — particularly on the part of the
Security Council — to ensure accountability for and
a cessation of the violations being committed by the
occupying Power.

reaffirm our commitment to continuing to support
the heroic Palestinian people in their quest to achieve
justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations, including their right to selfdetermination, freedom and independence in their State
of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital. Only a
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question will
allow us to achieve the long sought-after peace in the
Middle East region.

Moreover, the Movement welcomes the statements
made by the international community, including
by the Secretary-General, Governments, regional
organizations and human rights organizations,
reaffirming the right to peaceful protest and calling
for independent and transparent investigations into
the killings perpetrated by the Israeli occupying
forces against Palestinian civilians participating in the
peaceful protests.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

As Israel has clearly renounced its obligation as
the occupying Power to protect the civilian Palestinian
population, in line with the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Movement urges the international community to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians in the
Gaza Strip and across the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, with a view to addressing the
dire state of insecurity of the occupied population and
prevent further loss of innocent human lives.

The protracted stalemate in the peace process
inflames tensions and gives way to new cycles of
violence. Despite continuous international calls,
Israeli violations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, have been increasing at an
alarming rate. The dramatic escalation of settlement
activities, intended to create new realities on the ground,
remains a major obstacle to peace. The measures
aimed at altering the demographic composition and
character of Jerusalem and unilateral decisions to that
end threaten the possibility of coexistence. Jerusalem
is a holy city for all three monotheistic religions. It
is the responsibility of all humankind to preserve its
historic status.

In this connection, the States members of the
Movement express their grave concern over the lack
of accountability for all the violations committed
by Israel, which does nothing but foster impunity,
further destabilize the situation on the ground and
diminish peace prospects. We reaffirm the importance
of ensuring that the occupying Power complies with
its duties and responsibilities under international
law. It would be alarming for a country with such a
background to become a non-permanent member of
this organ, which is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security and the implementation
of its own resolutions.
To conclude, the Movement reaffirms its
unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian people
and its steadfast support for their just cause, and
reiterates its commitment to further strengthening and
coordinating international efforts to promote a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian question in all its aspects. On the eve of the
seventieth anniversary of the tragic Nakba, we further
42/66

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I do not know how many
times we have come here and stated that the Palestinians
have the right to live like the rest of us. They have the
right to be free and secure, and they have the right to
have what is their own, yet nothing is changing. The
illegal occupation continues and the Palestinians are
deprived of their basic rights.

Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance
with international law and Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), further emboldens
Israel’s recklessness. What we have witnessed since
the start of the Great March of Return is the latest
example. We strongly condemn the disproportionate
use of force by Israeli forces and deliberate attacks on
defenceless Palestinians participating in the peaceful
demonstrations to protest the denial of their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations. Israel must
comply with its obligations under international human
rights law and humanitarian law and respect the right
to peaceful protest.
The international community — the Council in
particular — cannot turn a blind eye to the blatant
disregard of international law. It needs to take action
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to stop the targeting of civilians, ensure independent
and transparent investigations into the incidents, and
implement its own resolutions.
The latest developments remind us once again of the
urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A two-State
solution, with the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, remains the only way to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace that can also ensure
security for both sides. Any peace plan or initiative
should be based on the established parameters. Peace
requires Israel to show political will and refrain from
provocative and detrimental actions. It also requires the
Palestinian side to act in unity, work towards national
reconciliation and establish an inclusive Government.
The situation in Gaza, which is on the brink of
collapse after a decade of blockade, continues to be
deeply worrying. This tragedy is compounded by
the worst financial crisis in the history of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA). Until a just and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is achieved, the work of
UNRWA will remain vital. It is our collective and moral
duty to support the Agency. In that understanding,
we have announced an additional $10 million for the
UNRWA programme budget and increased our in-kind
donation. We also decided to pledge €11 million to
the Gaza central desalination plant project. While our
assistance to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinians
will continue, we will spare no effort to contribute to a
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We shall also pursue our efforts to calm the situation
on the ground in Syria and to advance the political
process. Turkey has also been actively contributing to
the counter-terrorism and stabilization efforts in Syria.
Operations that we have carried out, namely Euphrates
Shield and Olive Branch, have cleared more than 4,000
square kilometres of terrorists. So far, 160,000 Syrians
have voluntarily returned to the Euphrates Shield area.
We expect a similar pattern of stabilization in and
return to Afrin.
In the same spirit, have we stepped up our
humanitarian efforts. From the beginning, we have been
providing continuous humanitarian aid and fundamental
health services to the region in order to prevent civilian
suffering. We also have closely cooperated with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on how to best respond to changing circumstances. We

S/PV. 8244

are currently working on new United Nations crossborder humanitarian assistance shipments from Turkey
to Afrin, with the first shipment having already been
delivered in early April.
The United Nations-led Geneva process remains
the main venue for finding a lasting political solution
to the Syrian conflict, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). At the same time, the Astana format has
proven to be an important international initiative to
reduce violence, give impetus to political process and
adopt confidence-building measures. This month in
Istanbul, the Presidents of the Astana guarantor States
reiterated what they underlined in their joint statement
in November 2017: that the political solution to the
conflict should be achieved through a Syrian-owned,
Syrian-led process leading to a new constitution, as
well as free and fair elections, under appropriate United
Nations supervision.
In this understanding, the Sochi congress endorsed
the 12 Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles put
forward by United Nations Special Envoy De Mistura
and called for the establishment of a constitutional
committee. This road map still constitutes a significant
framework for efforts to achieve a political solution
through the Geneva process. In this context, the Foreign
Ministers of three guarantor States will continue their
efforts to that end and elaborate on the next steps on
28 April in Moscow.
Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey will continue to deploy all efforts to consolidate
de-escalation on the ground, to advance the political
process and to address the plight of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See thanks the Peruvian presidency for
holding this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
a source of extreme concern in terms of its impact on
international peace and security. This is clear due to the
great space afforded to this issue by the Council during
our debates over the past year on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Syrian crisis and other crises in the region.
The ongoing conflicts in the region have had
negative impacts that threaten the stability of the

18-1252743/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

region as a whole and entailed grave consequences
for international peace and security. The challenges
of governance; the youth bulge and high rates of
unemployment; the collapse of State institutions; the
violation of human rights and international humanitarian
law; sectarian strife; geopolitical rivalry; the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism; the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, including the use of
chemical weapons; a massive influx of refugees and
migrants; and humanitarian crises are just some of the
challenges faced by the region.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
marked by unparalleled suffering, destruction and
disregard for human life. As Pope Francis said last
week, “there is no good war or bad war”. He appealed
to political and military leaders to choose another
path — that of negotiations, which is the only path that
can bring peace rather than death and destruction.
The lives of millions of Yemenis have been
devastated by what the Secretary-General has rightly
called a stupid war. The events in Yemen have been called
the world’s largest humanitarian catastrophe — one that
is entirely man-made. The international community
must pay much greater attention to this conflict, where
civilians are paying a huge price in a senseless war that
has been overshadowed by other conflicts in the region.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Holy See joins the great majority of the delegations
here today in reiterating its strong support for the twoState solution as the only viable way of fulfilling the
aspirations for peaceful coexistence among Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Every Israeli and Palestinian has
the right to live in peace and security. What is needed
now is a renewed commitment to negotiations towards
a two-State solution. In order to have the best chance of
success, peace talks must take place in an environment
free from violence. The ongoing violence only
underlines how overdue a just and lasting resolution is.
Concerning Jerusalem, the Holy See would like to
recall once again the obligation of all nations to respect
the historical status quo of the Holy City, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. Only
an internationally guaranteed status can preserve
Jerusalem’s unique character.
This bleak picture of the region leads my
delegation to reiterate the appeal of Pope Francis,
who, in considering the responsibility of the Security
Council to seek a unified and effective response for a
44/66

26/04/2018

lasting peace in Syria and in other regions of the world,
encouraged all those with political responsibility to
ensure that justice and peace prevail. In this regard,
the Security Council remains a key actor in making
sure that all such efforts will be guided by the relevant
international law. The sheer range and scope of the
challenges that we face should galvanize all those who
value peace and human rights to resolute action so that
those most affected by conflict and insecurity will not
be left behind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): We thank Peru, as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April, for organizing today’s debate on the important
topic of the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
In the lead-up to the seventieth anniversary
of the 1948 war, which takes place on 15 May, the
demonstrations of the Great March of Return are
being held every Friday at the border fence between
the Gaza Strip and Israel. This sustained campaign is
focused on the return of those Palestinians expelled
in 1948 to their country, Palestine. Since 30 March,
at least 35 demonstrators have been killed and a large
number have been wounded following the excessive
and disproportionate use of force by Israel. On 5 April,
the Secretary-General urged Israel to exercise caution
in the use of force in order to avoid casualties. Civilians
must be able to exercise their right to demonstrate
peacefully. We fully support this statement of the
Secretary-General.
Namibia reaffirms its support for General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 and Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Those and subsequent
resolutions affirm Jerusalem as the capital of both
the future Palestinian State and the State of Israel.
The recognition by the United States Administration
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel alone therefore
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8244

contradicts the Council resolutions and clearly further
complicates the prospect of a viable two-State solution.

and as a rightful member of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

On 26 March, in his fifth report to the Security
Council on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), Special Coordinator Mladenov noted that,
between December 2017 and March 2018, Israel had
advanced 22 plans for some 1,500 housing units in
Area C settlements and that around a dozen units had
been approved for construction (see S/PV.8214). These
settlements are illegal under international law and are
a serious impediment to the peace process and to any
realization of the two-State solution. The destruction of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, has also continued, albeit
at a slower rate. From December 2017 to March 2018,
92 structures, including 15 that were donor-funded,
were demolished. This destruction also represents an
impediment to peace.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

Namibia remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The electricity supply
sees cuts of up to 20 hours a day. The dire situation
is compounded by the recent funding cuts to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Through its
267 schools in Gaza, UNRWA provides education to
262,000 students. Each year, an average of 4 million
patients visit UNRWA’s 21 primary health-care
facilities in Gaza.
As the conflict in Syria drags on into its eight
year, we call on the Security Council to live up to
its obligations pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and to find a lasting solution that brings peace
to Syria through peaceful means. Any unilateral action
is incompatible with the Charter and risks undermining
the effectiveness of the very institution created to
resolve such crises. We urge Security Council members
to remain united in pursuit of common justice, peace,
security and stability through dialogue based on the
principles of multilateralism.
To conclude, we once again call on the Israeli
Government to end all construction of settlements and
the destruction of Palestinian homes and infrastructure.
We call for Israel’s complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and urge all parties to
return to negotiations so that the Palestinian people
can exercise their inalienable rights in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to commend your efforts, Mr. President, during
Peru’s presidency of the Security Council this month,
and we thank you for holding today’s important debate.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his briefing this morning.
There is agreement in the Council and in the
world that achieving peace in the Middle East will
help to overcome all the challenges facing the region,
in particular the elimination of terrorism. Clearly,
the world will then reap the fruits of peace, security
and stability in the region. To achieve and promote
peace in the Middle East, the current policies and
violations of international law must be abandoned,
since they undermine the efforts aimed at establishing
a comprehensive peace in this vital region of the
world. The implementation of international resolutions
and the initiatives that seek to achieve that objective
therefore provides a strong basis for the success of the
international efforts.
The Israeli military escalation on the occasion of
Earth Day, which led to the death and injury of many
Palestinian civilians, undermined peace efforts and
was a blatant violation of international norms. The
State of Qatar reiterates its condemnation of such
violations and calls on the international community and
the Security Council to shoulder their responsibility to
protect civilians.
Based on our conviction that settling the Palestinian
question and achieving peace will serve both the
Palestinians and the Israelis and will bring about
gains for the region and the world, the State of Qatar
continues to support all efforts to resume meaningful
negotiations between the two parties in order to achieve
peace within clear parameters and timetable. This
would enable the two parties to live side by side in peace
and security based on the two-State solution, establish
a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and respect the legal status
of Jerusalem in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. This
would also facilitate an end to the Israeli occupation
of all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, and the immediate and complete cessation of

18-1252745/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement activities, lift the blockade on Gaza Strip,
and allow for the return of refugees and the restoration
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
In response to the United Nations appeals to fill
the gap in funding of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) for its humanitarian projects and based on the
United Nations resolutions that have affirmed that the
international community has an obligation to support
UNRWA, the State of Qatar contributed $50 million at
the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference in support of
UNRWA that was held last March in Rome.
The chemical attack against civilians in Douma, in
eastern Ghouta, at the beginning of this month, revealed
the risks of the ongoing Syrian crisis with respect to
regional and international security, the magnitude of the
suffering endured by the Syrian people and the inability
of the international community to end the suffering,
cease war crimes and crimes against humanity that
are being perpetrated in Syria. The State of Qatar
reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of
this disgraceful act. It supports military operations
of the United States, the United Kingdom and France
against military targets used by the regime to launch
attacks against innocent civilians. We reiterate our
call upon the international community to uphold its
responsibilities to end the aggression by the regime,
stop the use of internationally banned weapons and
bring the perpetrators of these crimes to international
justice. We emphasize once again our support for all
the efforts aimed at a political resolution of the conflict
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in a
manner that fulfils the aspirations of the Syrian people
who yearn for security and stability and the unity of
Syria at the national and regional levels.
We will also continue to work with our partners
to alleviate the impact of the humanitarian crisis. In
this regard, I would mention the State of Qatar’s new
pledge of $100 million this year, announced yesterday
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Minister at the Brussels conference on supporting Syria
and the region. This comes in addition to our ample
past contributions in support of the Syrian people.
In the light of the highly tense international
environment and challenges as a result of continued
conflicts, terrorism and the slow pace in resolving
conflicts, and at a time when the challenges in the
46/66

26/04/2018

Middle East must be faced with cooperation by all, the
continued fabricated crisis against the State of Qatar
is negatively affecting security and stability of the
region. The continued unjust blockade and arbitrary
unilateral measures imposed against my country
without any justification or legal basis, which will soon
enter their second year, reveal the narrow interests they
aim to achieve. They contradict international law, the
multilateral international order, friendly relations and
human rights. They also have grave effects on regional
and international cooperation in terms of maintaining
international peace and security.
The serious implications of this fabricated crisis
against the State of Qatar in the Middle East and its
direct impact on efforts of the Security Council in the
area of maintaining international peace and security
require immediate lifting of the blockade, ending the
arbitrary unilateral actions against the State of Qatar
and initiating dialogue as a means to resolve disputes
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The State of Qatar has called for this since the start of
the crisis, based on its responsibility as a State Member
of the United Nations and as a major partner within the
international community in efforts to address common
challenges. We appreciate the valued mediation of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait, and we express gratitude to
all States that have supported the mediation to resolve
the crisis.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue its
active and positive contributions to achieve peace in
the Middle East. We will harness all the legal means
to reach solutions for conflicts and crises in the region
and work in a manner to achieve the Security Council’s
objectives in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by
thanking the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his incisive briefing.
Speaking in this Chamber a few days ago, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres sounded the warning that
the Cold War had returned with a vengeance across a
multiplicity of divides, including in the Middle East
(see S/PV.8231). Moreover, he observed that this new
Cold War was under way without the mechanisms and
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

safeguards used to manage the risk of escalation in the
past. Big Power rivalries combined with the divergent
policies and interests of major regional States presage
a period of continued conflict and instability in the
region, contributing to the suffering of the millions of
innocent victims of the regional conflicts and the rising
danger of major international conflagration.
In recent times, no people have suffered greater
injustice than the people of Palestine. During the past
70 years, they have been driven from their homes and
their homeland, militarily occupied and obligated to
living conditions that resemble apartheid. The world
witnessed the latest manifestation of Israel’s cruel
occupation and repression during the Great March of
Return in Gaza. A peaceful protest was transformed
into a callous killing zone by the occupying Power even
as the world watched the wanton shooting of unarmed
Palestinians on their television screens.
While the Palestinians mourned the pointless
murder of scores of their men, women and children, some
as young as 14, the Security Council was unable to even
call for an independent and transparent investigation
into the incidents, much less condemn the crimes of the
occupying Power. The Palestinian demand for justice
was met once again by arrogant dismissal. International
peace and stability cannot be promoted by denying
freedom and justice to peoples living under foreign
or alien occupation. The international community has
long since recognized that peace between Israel and
the Palestinian people and other Arab and Muslim
peoples can only be built through a two-State solution.
An illusory one State will perpetuate occupation and
conflict and provide neither peace nor security.
Pakistan also deplores the constraints placed on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). It is deplorable
that the suffering of Palestinian refugees is sought
to be mortgaged to political ambitions. Sufficient,
predictable and sustainable financing of UNRWA’s
activities is essential, moral and legal, all the more so
at this grim political juncture when prospects for the
negotiated settlement appear so sombre and so bleak.
We have heard some characterize the Middle East
as a troubled place. The Council should analyse the
reasons for the region’s troubles. Most of these troubles
are a direct consequence of foreign occupation,
annexation and intervention. The region stands at a
dangerous crossroads. The seething fires of conflict

S/PV. 8244

and violence threaten to exacerbate the multiple
intersecting and overlapping regional fault lines, thus
presenting a greater risk to international peace and
security than ever before.
We are gravely concerned by reports of the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria. Any use of chemical
weapons by anyone anywhere is abhorrent and illegal
and deserves unreserved condemnation. We welcome
the deployment of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission to the Syrian
Arab Republic and are confident that its investigations
will assist in establishing and ascertaining the facts. At
the same time, we reiterate our call on all sides to refrain
from actions that are incompatible with the Charter of
the United Nations and with international law.
Pakistan views the forthcoming parliamentary
elections in Iraq as another important landmark in
the march of our Iraqi brothers and sisters towards a
democratic and pluralistic Iraqi State that reconciles
the interests of all the Iraqi people.
Meanwhile, the situation in Yemen remains a cause
for extreme distress. Some 22 million Yemenis are in
dire need of immediate humanitarian assistance, which
warrants both a surge in diplomacy to realize a political
settlement and the provision of generous humanitarian
support to the millions in need across the country.
We will continue to extend our full support for all
diplomatic efforts, including those being made under
the auspices of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, to find an inclusive and just political
solution in Yemen.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the Middle
East is a cradle of civilization, but it has been
transformed into a cauldron of conflict. Unless the
value of human life and the rights of all peoples are
respected and unless the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are upheld in the Middle East and
other regions near and far, the Middle East may well be
racing towards unprecedented disaster.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month
and on your initiative to hold this debate today on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It clearly shows that your country is

18-1252747/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

committed to continuously supporting the Palestinian
question particularly in the current situation. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his valuable briefing on this topic.
Today’s meeting is being held under very difficult
and delicate conditions. The situation in the Middle
East is deteriorating day by day, particularly with
regard to the Palestinian question. We must recognize
that tensions in the region have dominated international
political discourse, at the expense of the Palestinian
question. The situation in occupied Palestine is clearly
worsening, which could have grave consequences,
owing to the continuation of the policies of Judaization,
colonization and oppression policies methodically
exercised by the Israeli occupation authorities against
the Palestinian people. These policies have exacerbated
tensions and thwarted the prospects of any action that
could help resolve the situation and relaunch the peace
process, which has been stalled since 2014, in order to
reach a two-State solution and establish the State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the 4 June 1967 borders.
The use of excessive force against unarmed
civilians in such a way that causes casualties among
them is deplorable and to be condemned. Such actions
only exacerbate tensions and perpetuate the cycle
of violence. The use of force and violence has never
been the key to peace or the peaceful solution that is
so sorely desired and needed today. Conditions that
are not conducive to a decent life cannot support the
peace process. The settlement activities continue in
violation of United Nations resolutions, especially
resolution 2334 (2016), which only serves to provoke
the Palestinians and the international community.
The city of Jerusalem has a privileged status, not
only for its inhabitants, but also for the adherents of
the three monotheistic religions. Jerusalem is the first
Qibla and the third holiest site in Islam for more than
1.5 billion Muslims. The city of Jerusalem has a special
legal status, which must not be challenged in any way,
pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose King, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, chairs the Al-Quds Committee,
insists on the need to safeguard the historical, legal
and political status of Jerusalem. Morocco calls on
the United Nations and, in particular, the permanent
48/66

26/04/2018

members of the Security Council, to fully discharge
their responsibility to protect that status and ensure that
nothing undermines international efforts to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is now necessary for the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
and encourage the parties to return to the negotiation
table and relaunch the peace process based on the twoState solution — a solution that is more at risk now
than ever of vanishing and opening the door to chaos,
violence and hatred.
At the request of His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Mr. Nasser Bourita, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation, visited Palestine on
27 March. He was welcomed by President Mahmoud
Abbas, the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and other Palestinian leaders. The purpose of the visit
was to reaffirm the Kingdom of Morocco’s unchanging
view in support of the Palestinian people, their leaders
and their just cause. Additionally, the visit provided an
opportunity to hold consultations on the current delicate
situation and rebuff all attempts to rid Jerusalem of
its Arab and Islamic identity. The visit also helped to
strengthen our bilateral relations and place Morocco’s
capacities — be they diplomatic or economic — in the
service of the Palestinian question. In order to reinforce
that cooperation, the Joint Morocco-Palestine
Committee will meet soon to forge closer ties between
the two countries and to adopt a number of conventions.
In conclusion, the position of my country with
regard to the conflict is unchanged and consistent with
the Arab Peace Initiative and its principles and terms of
reference for peace, namely, for the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side
by side with Israel in peace, security and harmony. As
in the past, Morocco is ready to effectively commit to
all initiatives that seek to advance the peace process
and reach a settlement to achieve security and stability
in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Abdelaziz.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): To begin
with, I would like to express our appreciation to the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
comprehensive briefing before the Council today.
I would like also to express our condolences to the
Government and delegation of Côte d’Ivoire for the
sudden death of our dear friend, Ambassador Bernard
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Tanoh-Boutchoue, the Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire and its former Ambassador to Cairo.
Today’s meeting is held against the backdrop of
deplorable regional and international developments
that are having a negative impact on international peace
and security and, specifically, on peace and security in
the Middle East. These developments also threaten the
multilateral system embodied by the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, which risks losing its
credibility and international legitimacy.
An increasing number of unarmed innocent people
in Palestine, Syria, Libya, Somalia and other countries
in the Arab world are falling victim to the current
environment. Yet the Security Council is unable to play
its crucial role in maintaining international peace and
security owing to the paralysis in its decision-making
mechanisms, particularly the alarming increase in the
use or threat of use of the veto in resolutions that aim
to put an end to the suffering of Arab people in our
countries, or to stop the violations of the legitimate
rights of our people, or to conduct an impartial and
transparent investigation into such violations with a
view to bringing the perpetrators to justice. The use or
threat of use of the veto in resolutions that emphasize
the principled positions taken by the Council leads to the
protection of one party at the expense of other parties.
Furthermore, the inability of the Security Council and
its mechanisms to provide a clear political framework
for restoring peace and stability in the Middle East
based on respect for international legitimacy and
recognition of the right of all peoples in the region to
live, without exception, in peace, security and stability
and of their right for their territories not to be subject
to competition between the major Powers is clearly
exacerbating the crisis.
The Council must refrain from the use of double
standards in dealing with various Arab issues, which
undermines its credibility, and it is therefore urgent that
efforts be made to reform it and enlarge its membership.
The Security Council must reaffirm the principle of the
two-State solution, which has long been recognized by
the international community as a whole as the basis
for reaching a just and comprehensive settlement to
the Palestinian question, and realizing the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital across the 4 June
1967 borders. That requires direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine on final-status issues, foremost
among which is that of Jerusalem, under impartial

S/PV. 8244

international supervision. This should be done without
favouring any party on the account of another party, in
keeping with the main parameters of the peace process,
which include, inter alia, the Madrid principles and the
principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace Initiative;
the Quartet road map; and Security Council resolutions,
especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016).
All of this should be consistent with the
comprehensive vision presented by President Mahmoud
Abbas to the Security Council on 20 February 2018,
which would ensure the establishment of the independent
State of Palestine and its becoming a full-fledged,
effective member of the United Nations following an
international conference to be held in the summer of
2018. That vision was endorsed by the Arab Summit
held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which Arab
leaders called the Jerusalem summit. This represents
an affirmation of the centrality of this cause of reaching
a just and comprehensive settlement, as indicated by
the representative of Tunisia in his statement today on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, which supports that
statement in its entirety.
Until the independent State of Palestine is
established, with East Jerusalem as its capital, the
League of Arab States stresses that it is urgent to
provide protection to the Palestinian people. This is
particularly true in the aftermath of the bloodshed that
occurred when the Israeli army fired live rounds at
unarmed Palestinian protesters who had taken to the
streets starting on Earth Day to express peacefully
their right to return to the land of which they had been
dispossessed. Those events claimed the lives of scores
of Palestinians and injured thousands more. We stress
the importance of the Security Council responding
to the call by the Secretary-General to conduct a
transparent and impartial investigation into these events
under United Nations supervision, as they represent
gross violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. The aim is to
bring the perpetrators to international justice.
The League of Arab States calls on the Council not
to be deceived by the false allegations that Palestine
uses children as human shields. The Council instead
should focus on the situation of Palestinian children in
Israeli prisons. The League also stresses the importance
of the full and honest implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), which will prevent Israel, the occupying
Power, from altering the realities on the ground through

18-1252749/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/04/2018

its illegal and expansionist settlement policy. That
policy has consistently been condemned by the League
given its negative impact on final-status negotiations.
This can be achieved only if the Secretary-General
provides monthly written reports with maps, images
and documents, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016). In
addition to that, there should be an effective response
to the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people,
including the provision of sufficient funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order to enable it to
discharge its lofty mandate.

open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, a matter to which
my delegation attaches great importance.

In conclusion, the League of Arab States
underscores that the continued occupation by Israel
of Palestinian territories and Israel’s violation of the
rights of the unarmed Palestinian people, as well as
the settlements built illegally by Israel, all pose serious
threats to international and regional peace and security.
Hence, on the basis of the provisions contained in
Article 23 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the 22 States members of the League of Arab States
believe that Israel is not qualified to be a candidate for
non-permanent membership in the Council for 20192020, given that it lacks the main prerequisite needed
as stated in that Article, which is to contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
achieve the lofty goals of the United Nations.

It is a fact that the Council has for 70 years now
had on its agenda the situation in the Middle East, with
particular reference to the question of Palestine. While
we regret this reality, Botswana stands firm and will
not tire of expressing its position on this matter as long
as a durable solution has not been achieved.

The League of Arab States and its member States
call on all peace-loving countries to do the same and to
express their rejection of Israel’s candidacy, given that
it is continuing to occupy territories in Palestine, Syria
and Lebanon; to violate the norms of international law,
humanitarian and human rights law; and to explicitly
disrespect the international legitimacy of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. Israel
openly disrespects the United Nations and its principal
organs and Member States — whose goal is to maintain
multilateral international legitimacy, the Organization’s
solid foundation — by falsely accusing them of being
biased against it.

While we remain optimistic, we are at the same
time deeply concerned about the growing tension
between the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. To this end, we deplore unilateral actions,
as they lack legitimacy and also have the potential to
undermine prospects for peace.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Ms. Motsumi (Botswana): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to reiterate my delegation’s sincere congratulations
to you and your country, Peru, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April. I wish also to express my delegation’s
appreciation to you for having convened this quarterly
50/66

I further wish to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his invaluable input on
the subject.
My
delegation
aligns
itself
with
the
statement delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We continue to be encouraged by the unrelenting
pressure being brought to bear by the international
community for the resumption of the intra-Palestine
peace talks. We accordingly call for the intensification
of efforts to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that is jointly facilitated by
the United Nations, the Middle East Quartet, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Madrid terms of reference, as
well as the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Against the backdrop of challenges relating to
the achievement of sustainable peace in the disputed
territories, we condemn any activities that undermine
international efforts to achieve a lasting solution,
including increasing illegal settlements; violence;
and the denial of the rights of peaceful protesters. We
also deplore the lack of progress on negotiations on
final-status issues. In this regard, Botswana supports
the plan proposed by President Mahmoud Abbas, which
he presented to the Council in February this year (see
S/PV.8183). The plan sought to address problems that
have consistently undermined efforts to bring about
peace in Palestine.
We encourage the parties to respect all relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(2016), which is clear in its call for parties to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric or acts of provocation or
incitement. It urges them to act in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian law, in the
interests of promoting peace and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my delegation’s long-standing position on the question
of Palestine. We continue to believe that there is no
alternative to the two-State solution. We therefore
cannot overemphasize our continued support of a
negotiated solution that embraces the coexistence of
Israel and Palestine, living peacefully side by side as
two sovereign States.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Botswana’s
solidarity with the Palestinian people and my country’s
unwavering support for their just cause. We reiterate
our call for the strengthening of the coordination
of international efforts to promote a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the situation in
the Middle East, in particular the question of Palestine.
We also lend our full support to the continued
diplomatic efforts of the Security Council and the good
offices of the Secretary-General. We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and all
other agencies, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
for their commitment to the peace process, as well as
for their relentless efforts aimed at finding a sustainable
solution to the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate of the Security Council. I also thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing on the most
recent developments in the region.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the statement to be delivered by my colleague, the
representative of Nicaragua.
Only two weeks ago, while addressing the Council,
the Secretary-General made the same observation as
he did this morning, citing the examples not only of
Palestine, but also of other countries in the Middle East

S/PV. 8244

(see S/PV.8231). He described the situation as chaotic
and stated that it has become a threat to international
peace and security. However, as we have always said,
what is happening in Palestine is the ongoing failure
of the international community to implement the twoState solution. We reiterate our call on the Council to
emerge from its very dangerous inertia.
The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has continued for
far too long. Current global crises should not divert
our attention from the Palestinian issue. It is crucial
to put the Palestinian issue back on the international
agenda. This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the 1948 war — the Nakba — during which more than
800,000 Palestinians were expelled from their land. It
also marks another regrettable milestone: almost three
quarters of a century has elapsed and the world still
awaits a just, lasting and comprehensive resolution to
the conflict.
In the past month, there has been tremendous
violence on the Gaza-Israeli border, with protesting
and unarmed civilians being gunned down by Israeli
forces. As of last Friday, the death toll since the weekly
protests began on 30 March stood at nearly 40, with
thousands wounded by Israeli shooters. The killing of
unarmed civilians violates every known provision of
international law and human decency. It must end.
Hundreds of resolutions and communiqués on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict have been adopted, and yet
those documents have not been implemented. What is
happening in Palestine is the persistent failure of the
international community to implement the two-State
solution. We therefore reiterate our call on the Council
to rouse itself and take action on this very dangerous
situation. We must reaffirm and preserve a negotiated
two-State solution for peace on the basis of pre-1967
borders, within a clear and defined timetable, in
accordance with the internationally recognized terms
of reference, including the Arab Peace Initiative. The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which stated that
Jewish settlement of Palestinian lands has no legal
validity and is a flagrant violation of international law,
demonstrates some of the progress seen in recent years.
My delegation again calls on States to avoid
provocative actions or pronouncements that contradict
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on the status of Jerusalem. We have already seen the
implications of such actions and pronouncements.
Accordingly, we must create conditions conducive for

18-1252751/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the peace process. In the meantime, we must do what
we can to help the people of Palestine, including the
refugees, for whom the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNWRA) has been essential. That is
why the recurring financial shortfall of UNRWA raises
deep concerns. We therefore call on the international
community to recommit to supporting the work of
UNRWA. Indonesia will play its part in this regard.
We owe it to ourselves to resolve this ongoing conflict
during our lifetime.
We would like to see peace in Yemen and Syria.
Many civilians have already lost their lives or been
uprooted and become refugees or internally displaced
persons. Nothing can justify the targeting of civilians,
including the use of chemical weapons or weapons of
mass destruction. We reiterate our call for all parties to
respect international law and United Nations resolutions
and to ensure the safety of civilians.
We share the belief of many that peace in Syria can
be achieved only through a lasting and comprehensive
solution and not by military means. The solution
must also be credible and respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
Moreover, the international community must continue
to press for the cessation of hostilities and full, safe
and unhindered access for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The international community must refrain
from any unilateral action that might jeopardize
prospects for peace.
Our meeting today could not be more timely,
following the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We must ensure that peace goes hand in hand with
development and human rights. The high-level meeting
encourages us to do more to achieve peace in the Middle
East. What is needed is greater reconciliation. What we
do today will dictate our place in history. Let us stop
the nightmare faced by the Palestinians and make their
dream of an independent nation a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
52/66

26/04/2018

Cuba has been deeply concerned about the
pernicious deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East since the last open debate on the topic (see
S/PV.8167). We reiterate our firm condemnation of
the criminal aggression perpetrated by the Israeli
army against the Palestinian population in the Gaza
Strip on 30 March, which led to the death of dozens of
people and left more than 400 injured. This cruel and
disproportionate act is a gross and blatant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
humanitarian law, heightens tensions in the region
and reduces the likelihood of success of efforts aimed
at resuming peace talks between Palestinians and
Israelis. It is very regrettable that, because of constant
obstruction by one of its members, the Security Council
has not even been able to condemn the tragic events
in the Gaza Strip or enforce respect for international
law and international humanitarian law, including the
protection of Palestinians, at a time when the urgent
action of the international community is needed.
Cuba calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibility under the United Nations Charter with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security and take the necessary decisions and demand
that Israel puts an immediate end to the occupation of
Palestinian territories and to the aggressive colonial
policies and practices, and comply with Council
resolutions on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).
We express our solidarity with the Government and
the people of Palestine. We reiterate our unwavering
support for a comprehensive, just, peaceful and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question — which lies at
the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict — that is based
on a two-State solution and allows Palestinians to
exercise their right to self-determination and to a free
and sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and within the pre-1967 borders, as well as the right
of refugees to return. We will also continue to support
the admission of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.
Furthermore, we join in the international
community’s firm rejection of the unilateral decision
made by the Government of the United States to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, which
constitutes a serious and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions. That decision, intended to alter the
historical status of Jerusalem, can only undermine the
legitimate interests of the Palestinian people and the
Arab countries.
Cuba also expresses its most emphatic
condemnation of the recent attack perpetrated by
the United States and some of its allies on 13 April
on military and civilian facilities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, using as a pretext the alleged use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Government against civilians in
Douma, without any proof that the Syrian Government
had used such weapons and prior to the investigation
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission. That unilateral action,
which sidestepped the Security Council, and the
Israeli attack on a Syrian airbase in the governorate of
Homs on 9 April are yet further flagrant violations of
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the Organization.
Cuba demands the full and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian Golan and
all occupied Arab territories. We reiterate that any
measure or action that has been taken or is to be
taken to change the legal, physical or demographic
status or the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s measures to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration on that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), and the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Cuba advocates a constructive and respectful
dialogue among the peoples of the region and calls
for non-interference in internal affairs and an end to
foreign aggression and to support, financing or the
supply of weapons to terrorist groups with the goal of
promoting instability and conflict in the Middle East.
Moreover, Cuba calls for an end to the fabrication
of excuses and concepts in the Council that aim to
legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States. Let us uphold multilateralism,
strictly based on the purposes and principles of the
Charter and international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): The Maldives wishes to
begin by emphasizing the importance of this ongoing
debate in the Council on the situation in the Middle

S/PV. 8244

East, including the question of Palestine. Given the
constant evolution of the political dynamics and the
situation on the ground, this thematic debate provides
an important forum to take stock of and assess the
pathway to sustainable peace in the Middle East. I
wish to thank the briefers at this open debate for their
contributions, which have contextualized the present
state of affairs.
Peace in the Middle East can never be realized
without a viable solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which has destabilized the region for 70 years.
Taking note of the report presented to the Council last
month by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process (see S/PV.8214), the Maldives condemns
in the strongest terms the new wave of violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
It is evident from the progressive activities on
expanding settlements that there is a need to respect the
principles of international law and abide by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. The impunity
with which violence is perpetrated and the continued
violation of international norms set a dangerous
precedent that has far-reaching consequences for the
maintenance of peace and security in future.
The Maldives has always been a strong advocate
for the resolution of disputes and conflict through
peaceful means, by exploring new and innovative
solutions for persistent conflicts and finding common
ground through mutual dialogue. In that regard,
the Maldives welcomes and supports the proposal
by President Mahmoud Abbas to the Council in
February for an international peace conference aimed
at resuming peace talks between Palestine and Israel
( see S/PV.8183). We applaud Palestine’s leadership
and willingness to begin that dialogue, and strongly
urge Israel to engage in those talks in good faith. The
Maldives also acknowledges the fact that this is a
dispute that has many dimensions and impacts many
actors in the international community. We therefore
encourage all parties and stakeholders concerned to
contribute to those negotiations, as appropriate, in the
most constructive and conducive manner possible.
In addition to taking assertive political action to
resolve the conflict, my delegation also wishes to
emphasize the importance of enhancing action on the
ground to alleviate the suffering of people. In that
regard, we welcome the relief and aid efforts from the
United Nations, Member States, intergovernmental

18-1252753/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

organizations, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector. We note with concern the $446 million
funding gap for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and
urge Member States to address that issue, taking into
account the wide range of support that the Agency
provides to the Palestinian people.
The Maldives reiterates its call for a two-State
solution recognizing the sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. My delegation urges
the Security Council to take more concrete action to
fulfil its mandate and encourages all Member States
to engage in a form of debate that will deliver the end
results necessary to establish and maintain sustainable
peace in Palestine and the Middle East.
On the question of Syria, we remain concerned.
We need to urgently address the humanitarian situation
in Syria and protect its citizens from further pain, fear
and uncertainty. We remain confident in the ability
of the Council to deliver the result that is required in
Syria — a lasting ceasefire and sustainable peace.
We also remain committed to doing our part, lending
our voice and joining the chorus of actors supporting
lasting peace in the country.
We need to work together to find meaningful
solutions to the many situations of violence and
instability in the Middle East. We need to focus on
sustaining peace, so that societies ravaged by war
and conflict may progress again. State failure has the
potential to derail any peace process. We believe that,
whether it is through strengthening the capacity of State
institutions, the eradication of poverty or addressing
other determinants of conflict, such as a lack of access
to resources, natural and man-made disasters and
climate risk, we need to focus on building the capacity
and resilience of States.
The Maldives will continue to stand with the people
of the Middle East — a region that is close to our hearts
and with which we share many cultural, religious and
historical ties. The Maldives will remain committed
to working with all our partners on that important and
historical issue to find shared solutions, so that the
suffering of people in the various conflict zones in the
region can be brought to an end through peaceful means.
We will work with our partner countries, international
organizations and other important actors to bring
lasting peace to our shared destiny.
54/66

26/04/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mr. Inguanez (Malta): I wish to thank the
delegation of Peru, in its capacity as the President of the
Security Council, for convening today’s open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. I also wish to join others in thanking the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and would like to
add a few elements in its national capacity.
Malta notes with deep concern the recent
developments throughout the Middle East, which
continue to propagate instability and insecurity in
the region and beyond. There is an urgent need for
de-escalation, be it between the Israelis and Palestinians
or in Syria. We call on all sides to avoid actions that
undermine the prospects for peace. In the context of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, I reiterate that Malta’s
position is quintessentially pro-peace. Prospects for
a two-State solution are in danger, and it is our firm
conviction that the international community is dutybound to ensure that they be safeguarded.
Lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians
can be based only on a two-State solution, including
addressing the needs and aspirations of both sides as
well as all permanent status issues. Malta reiterates
that the status of Jerusalem is a final-status issue,
and maintaining international consensus on the issue
is of the utmost importance. Malta also opposes
further settlement activity, as settlements are illegal
under international law and are an obstacle to peace.
In addition, Malta condemns all acts of violence by
all sides, especially against civilians and minors, and
urges an end to incitement and provocations, which
serve only to widen the gap between the two sides.
Furthermore, the freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly should be respected by all.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is one of the
key elements towards reaching a two-State solution.
Therefore, Malta encourages the Palestinians to
persevere on that track. We certainly commend Egypt
for its mediation role. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation
is also an important element to improve the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Gaza. In that regard, Malta
also advocates an end to the closure of Gaza, while
addressing the security concerns of Israel. I take this
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

opportunity to reiterate Malta’s full support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. It is as crucial for Palestinian
refugees as it is for the stability of the whole region.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is in dire need of
a political horizon and the resumption of dialogue.
Confidence needs to be restored and trust rebuilt.
That is easier said than done, but forgiveness and
restraint — in words and in action — remain crucial
as the underlying basis for rebuilding confidence and
trust. The international community and multilateralism
have an important role to play in establishing a political
horizon and in facilitating the resumption of dialogue
between the two sides.
I also take this opportunity to underscore the
importance that Malta attaches to the resumption of
the United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
as emphasized yesterday at the second Brussels
conference on supporting the future of Syria and the
region. There can be no military solution in Syria. Only
a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
can yield a sustainable solution for Syria and for peace
in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Peru for organizing today’s open debate. Our special
appreciation goes to the briefers for sharing their
insightful perspectives on this very important subject.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Nigeria notes with grave concern the alarming
situation in many parts of the Middle East, particularly
in Palestine. In that regard, it is pertinent for all parties
to make genuine and concerted efforts to find peaceful
solutions and to cooperate closely with the United
Nations and its agencies in order to achieve the shared
objective of a two-State solution, in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law.
As the international community continues to seek
avenues to advance the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question, international efforts must remain
focused on paving the way for Israel and Palestine to
return to meaningful negotiations. We therefore wish
to highlight the cogency of multilateral diplomacy,

S/PV. 8244

and reiterate that there is no substitute to an agreed
multilateral approach for addressing the IsraeliPalestinian conundrum in a sustainable manner.
Nigeria believes that achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine
is imperative for the attainment of durable peace and
stability in the Middle East. It is for that reason that we
acknowledge the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 72/240, concerning the status of Jerusalem,
on 21 December 2017, and once again call on all parties
to respect the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Israeli-Palestinian issue.
We therefore encourage Israel to take concrete
measures to freeze all settlement-related activities in
occupied Palestinian territory. On their part, Palestinian
leaders must also signal their readiness to return to
the negotiating table by, inter alia, making enhanced
efforts to forge unity and deal with militancy and
other internal security challenges. It is beyond doubt
that violence and unilateral actions will not resolve the
long-drawn-out conflict.
My delegation reaffirms its full support for the rights
of the Palestinian people, including the protection of
their fundamental human rights, particularly their right
to free movement and self-determination, as well as the
maintenance of the dignity of the individual Palestinian
person and their inalienable right to live without the
fear of persecution. In that regard, we restate our belief
that the Security Council must not fail in its duty and
responsibility to the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, Nigeria calls on States with influence
over the parties concerned to encourage them to
re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other existing
agreements. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side-by-side in peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank our brothers from
Peru for their work at the healm of the Security Council
during this month.
The past month has again reminded us why,
despite the many issues on the Security Council’s

18-1252755/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

agenda, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must remain a
priority demanding the Council’s attention. At least 37
demonstrators have been killed and over 4,900 wounded
due to the excessive and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, the occupying Power, particularly in response
to the Great March of Return demonstrations at the
Gaza Strip border fence with Israel. The Committee
urges that the Council join and support the call made by
Secretary-General, among others, for an independent
and transparent investigation of the incidents. As the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court warned,
violence against civilians could constitute crimes under
the Rome Statute. Moreover, the continuing violence
foreshadows the deterioration of an already unstable
and tense situation, with serious repercussions. We also
condemn the attack on the convoy of the Palestinian
Prime Minister during his 13 March visit to Gaza,
which was a hostile and violent act at cross purposes
with Palestinian reconciliation. We urge all Palestinian
parties to continue working towards unity to peacefully
achieve their shared goals and realize the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people.
This coming May, we will commemorate the
seventieth anniversary of the 1948 war, which led to the
expulsion and flight of almost 800,000 Palestinian Arab
inhabitants from their homes in what was then the British
Mandate of Palestine. That legacy of expropriation,
known as the Nakba — the catastrophe — continues
to cast a shadow over the refugees of 1948 and their
descendants. The continued lack of a just solution
to that tragedy and the current plight of Palestinian
refugees have prolonged and exacerbated the conflict,
as well as its regional and global impact. In that
context, the Committee invites all Member States to
participate in its upcoming forum, entitled “Seventy
Years after 1948 — Lessons to Achieve a Sustainable
Peace”, to be held at Headquarters from 17 to 18 May to
consider that history, as well as possible joint solutions
to promote peace.
The Committee urges donor countries to act quickly
in providing broad support for the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, especially given the fact
that the humanitarian situation in Gaza is seriously
worsening and the needs of Palestinian refugees
suffering from the consequences of the Syrian crisis
are increasing. At this fragile juncture, we must meet
our humanitarian obligations vis-à-vis the refugees by
providing the Agency with the necessary support so
56/66

26/04/2018

that it can fulfil its mandate and play its stabilizing role
in the region.
As was indicated in the fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), introduced
by Mr. Mladenov on behalf of the Secretary-General
before the Security-Council last month (see S/PV.8214),
we regret that the Government of Israel decided to move
forward settlement plans, which violate its obligations
as an occupying Power under international law and are
a clear indication of its indifference to the authority of
the Security Council. We encourage Member States to
follow the examples set by the Danish Parliament and
the European Commission, which decided to make the
distinction between the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967 in their respective dealings with
each, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016) and in adhering
faithfully to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The unilateral decisions of some States Members
to move their embassies from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
in violation of resolution 478 (1980) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions, irreversibly slows prospects
for peace and puts in jeopardy the viability of the twoState solution within the 1967 borders.
Faced with that prospect, we welcome and support
President Mahmoud Abbas’ peace initiative presented
before the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183).
Visits by the Committee’s delegation to Uganda in
February and Panama in early April elicited broad
acknowledgement of the outlook and efforts of the
State of Palestine, as well as the support for the full
exercise of the rights of the Palestinian people. That
reflects the international consensus that continues to
prevail concerning the just and peaceful resolution of
the question of Palestine that must be realized. Our
willingness — that of the international community — to
act rapidly and unwaveringly remains the best assurance
for achieving a peaceful solution to the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): At the outset, I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate, which allows non-members of the
Security Council to express their views on the
worrisome situation in the Middle East. We hope that
the views expressed here will be considered seriously
by the Council members in all their deliberations on the
maintenance of peace and security in the region.
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The situation in Palestine remains dire. A peaceful
resolution of the longest man-made conflict remains
elusive. That is largely due to the continued defiance
by Israel — the occupying Power — of various relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). The excessive use of force by Israel in
responding to the Palestinians involved in the peaceful
Great March of Return, which Malaysia strongly
condemns, is totally uncalled for and unacceptable.
We therefore demand that Israel stop all violations and
illegal activities and fully comply with all its obligations
pursuant to all the relevant resolutions.
It is the responsibility of all Members of the United
Nations to contribute to finding a just and peaceful
solution to the conflict. It is in that context that
Malaysia reiterates its deep concern about the decision
taken by the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and to relocate its Embassy
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. That decision, which
regrettably is being emulated by a number of other
States, undermines efforts to finding a comprehensive,
just and durable settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. It has led to the dismay and frustration of a
majority of Member States, the Palestinians and the
Muslim world in particular, and those who wish to
see peace, stability and security in the region. The
decision not only contravenes and undermines the
relevant Security Council resolutions, but it would also
embolden Israel, as the occupying Power, to continue
to execute its brutal occupation and repressive policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory — a clear violation
of international law, including humanitarian law, while
inflicting immense suffering on the Palestinians.
For its part, Malaysia will continue to provide
assistance, within its means, to the Palestinians as
well as the efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in providing assistance, protection and advocacy for
Palestinian refugees. We therefore urge all Member
States to strengthen their support for the Agency so as
to ensure that the basic needs of Palestinian refugees
are met, which include educational access, emergency
food assistance and other support, as well as primary
health care.

S/PV. 8244

Malaysia sincerely hopes all Members of the United
Nations can provide a positive contribution in breaking
the impasse in the Middle East peace process, based
on the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as international laws and norms. Malaysia continues
to believe that a two-State solution, with Palestinians
and Israelis living side by side in peace, based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of Palestine, is the only viable solution to this longstanding conflict.
Besides the situation in Palestine, Malaysia remains
deeply concerned about the continued deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. In that regard,
Malaysia stands in solidarity with the international
community in addressing this issue and urges all parties
to the conflict to adhere to their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The parties must also
fulfil their responsibilities in enabling unfettered
humanitarian access to reach those in need, critically
sick or wounded.
On numerous occasions, Malaysia has expressed its
view that there is no military solution to the conflict
in Syria. A political solution is the only way forward,
and that hinges on the political will of the parties to
the conflict themselves. Prolonging violence will not
benefit any party and will only be exploited by terrorist
groups and lead to further humanitarian catastrophe.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms
the use of chemical weapons by any parties under any
circumstances. The use of such weapons is abhorrent
and a flagrant violation of international law, especially
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Malaysia also
strongly believes that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is the sole
organization mandated to undertake investigations on
the use of chemical weapons. In that regard, Malaysia
urges all parties concerned to cooperate with the OPCW
to ensure an impartial and thorough investigation of
Douma incident.
Malaysia has always believed that, in dealing
with matters of peace and security, all parties must
act in a manner consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. In that regard,
Malaysia believes that no military solution can bring
about an end to any conflict in the world, as ultimately
only the innocent would suffer. We therefore urge all
parties involved to bridge all political divides to find

18-1252757/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a political solution through dialogue and negotiations
in all conflicts, be it in Palestine, Syria, Yemen or
anywhere else in the world. We appeal to all parties to
demonstrate restraint and avoid any actions that could
escalate conflicts further, which would only worsen the
suffering of our fellow human beings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Peruvian presidency for convening
this important quarterly open debate under the agenda
item entitled “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question”. I also wish to
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
informative briefing.
I wish to join others in extending my deepest
condolences to the Government and the Permanent
Mission of Côte d’Ivoire for the loss of the distinguished
and dedicated diplomat, our dear colleague His
Excellency Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. He
will be very much missed at the United Nations.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Today’s meeting represents an urgent appeal by
the international community for concerted action to
push forward the peace process in the Middle East and
address the Palestinian question.
For over half of a century, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has become even more complex and tense as
a result of confrontation and unilateral actions. Viet
Nam is deeply concerned by the dangerous situation in
the region as reported by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, especially the lack of
dialogue between the parties, the continuing expansion
of illegal settlements, the killing of innocent people,
deadly clashes in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
the deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, growing incitement to violence
and the violation of the rights and dignity of the
Palestinian people. Those negative developments have
imperilled the prospect of the two-State solution, put
the security of the whole region at stake and had an
adverse impact on world peace. Allow me to highlight
the following points.
58/66

26/04/2018

First, de-escalating tensions on the ground is a
prerequisite for any future negotiation and dialogue.
We urge all parties concerned to strictly comply with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, exercise maximum self-restraint, refrain from any
provocative acts and foster a favourable environment
for dialogue and the pursuit of peace.
Secondly, it is clear that foreign occupation is illegal
under international law and constitutes an obstacle for
peace. We call on Israel to halt and reverse all settlement
development, lift its blockade in the Gaza Strip and step
up its efforts to protect civilians and improve the living
conditions of the Palestinian population.
Thirdly, we stress the need for all parties to respect
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, avoid any acts of hostility,
incitement or violence and ensure unimpeded access
to humanitarian assistance. My delegation reaffirms
its unwavering support to the indispensable role and
tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ease
the suffering of the Palestinians.
Fourthly, Viet Nam reaffirms its unconditional
support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people for their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State. We firmly believe that
a two-State solution that provides for the establishment
of the State of Palestine coexisting in peace, security and
mutual recognition with the State of Israel on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders is the only path to peace. All
solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
with regard to the status of Jerusalem, must be in line
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations, in particular resolutions 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016), as well as the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and
must be agreed upon by all the parties involved. In
that regard, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to Bolivia, France, Kuwait and Sweden for
hosting an Aria Formula meeting on 22 February on the
theme “Prospects for the two-State solution for peace”.
In conclusion, Viet Nam supports all efforts
and initiatives aimed at seeking a peaceful, just,
comprehensive and long-lasting solution to this
protracted conflict. In that vein, we welcome President
Mahmoud Abbas’s proposal and his call for an
international peace conference. It is high time now for
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the United Nations, especially the Security Council, to
play an important role in encouraging the resumption of
peace talks between the parties, ending the suffering of
the Palestinian people and bringing peace to the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured, Mr. President, to deliver my second
statement in a week in the Security Council under your
presidency: a few days ago I delivered a statement on
youth, peace and security (see S/PV.8243), and now
I am speaking on the situation in the Middle East. I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing today and for his ongoing efforts to
advance the peace process in the Middle East. I would
also like to thank him for his efforts to address the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza and his
work for Palestinian reconciliation.
The Middle East continues to face major
challenges as a result of the continued occupation of
Arab territories, which began in 1967 and has farreaching consequences for the region and its peoples.
The entire world remembers the occupation with every
piece of land that is confiscated, every settlement that
is approved or built and every Palestinian family that
suffers — whether in the West Bank as a result of the
separation wall, or in the besieged Gaza Strip.
We must again reiterate that the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State
based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
is an inalienable right under international law. It is an
eternal right. The only way to achieve the legitimate
Palestinian rights is by addressing the root causes of
the problem, namely, the occupation. The peace process
must also be revived in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions to
end the occupation and to realize the two-State solution
so that both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples can live
in peace and security like other peoples of the world.
The issue of Jerusalem has a special place in the
hearts of millions of people around the world. That
sensitive issue requires particular attention. However,
we acknowledge that international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions are the only international
legal basis to achieve these objectives away from
historical and religious reasons. Otherwise, there could
be grave consequences. Any arbitrary action would

S/PV. 8244

have serious repercussions and would render the twoState solution no longer viable.
The appeal to uphold the international resolutions
and international law is not extravagant, particularly in
a region beset by conflicts and at a time when the world
faces serious challenges and does not need further
instability. That appeal takes into account threats that
could lead to the collapse of the international order and
lead sooner or later to the suffering of all peoples of
the world.
Guaranteed safety and security is a right of all
peoples in the region so that they all, including the
Israelis, can live in peace within their borders and in
good-neighbourly relations with other nations of the
region. However, Member States may also agree that
equality and the rights of people are the basis for justice
and stability. We cannot believe that peace, security and
well-being can prevail in the region while the Palestinian
people suffer under decades-long occupation.
As part of the appeal for peaceful coexistence by
President Fattah Al Sisi on a number of occasions, we
therefore urge both parties — the Palestinian and the
Israeli — to recognize the truth that both peoples will
continue to exist as neighbours on this land. The choice
is either to find a way to coexist on the basis of equal
rights and duties or to give in to rhetoric and hardline
positions. That may ultimately serve the interests of
some and strengthen their position. However, it will
negatively affect both peoples for many years and have
grave consequences as a result of incitement and hatred.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank the presidency of Peru for having convened
this quarterly meeting on the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive and thoughtful
briefing this morning.
Allow me also to join other speakers in expressing
my condolences to the people and the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire for the untimely passing of our colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
Syria and Yemen cast a dark shadow over the Middle
East region and over the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council. Speaking about the eight years
of war in Syria, the Secretary-General referred to the
systematic violations of international humanitarian

18-1252759/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

law and international human rights law and the utter
disregard for the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
Government is well documented and constitutes one
of the most serious violations of international law. The
latest shocking reports from Douma have yet to be fully
investigated. However, the Syrian Government has
already demonstrated the will and the ability to use such
cruel and illegal weapons against civilian populations.
We urge the Security Council to find unity on the issue,
not only for the sake of the Syrians but also in order to
preserve the international non-proliferation regime.
The General Assembly again finds itself in a
position where it needs to look for alternatives to action
by the Security Council. The Council is not fulfilling
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Iceland applauds the commitments made in
Brussels earlier this week to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria and in its neighbours.
Iceland has increased its funding through a multi-year
contribution. It will have contributed nearly $9 million
over the period from 2017 to 2020.
The parties to the conflict, in particular the
Syrian Government and its backers, must show a
real commitment to negotiating an inclusive political
settlement. The Secretary-General has said that peace
is a moral and political imperative for the Syrian people
and for the world.
What the Secretary-General has called a stupid war
continues to devastate the lives of millions of Yemenis.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on Yemen. His
clear analysis offers some hope for progress on finding
a political solution. However, the search for a political
settlement must be inclusive, including of women, and
outside actors must not sabotage talks in the mistaken
hope of achieving a military advantage.
On the Israel-Palestine question, there is a clear
objective — the two-State solution, under which both
Israel and Palestine will live side by side in peace. Yet
there are actions and inaction on both sides that make
the two-State solution increasingly fragile.
The Israeli settlement policy continues to
undermine the possibility of the two-State solution and
Gaza remains a powder keg. If that situation is to be
60/66

26/04/2018

defused, Israel must end the isolation of Gaza and adopt
proportionate measures in the face of civil unrest. There
must also be an end to provocative acts by Palestinians
in Gaza.
Finally, a peace process needs to be put on track.
There needs to be a viable peace track.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq): I have the pleasure to deliver
my statement on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I extend
my sincere congratulations to Peru and wish it every
success as President of the Security Council for
this month.
Before delivering our statement, I would like to
express the sincere condolences of the OIC member
States for the tragic demise of Ambassador Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire and Chair of the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers.
Our debate today coincides with the worsening
situation and rising tensions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Less than four
weeks since the start of the Great March of Return by
the Palestinian people, at least 41 Palestinians have
been killed and more than 4,000 injured by the Israeli
occupying forces, who have used live ammunition
and other weaponry against unarmed, defenceless
civilians taking part in peaceful demonstrations in
demand of their rights and in protest against the cruelty
of the displacement, dispossession, occupation and
blockade that they have endured for decades. On the
eve of the seventeenth anniversary of the Nakba of the
Palestinian people, these protests have highlighted the
vast consequences and tragedy of this ongoing grave
injustice, as well as the urgency of the efforts to reach
a solution in the immediate interest of saving human
lives and the prospect for bringing about a future of
justice, peace and security.
We strongly condemn the brutal Israeli assault of
Palestinian protesters and urge this esteemed organ
to take responsibility and promote action to stop the
deliberate killing and wounding of Palestinian civilians,
particularly these days in the occupied and besieged
Gaza Strip; to ensure independent and transparent
investigations, as called for by the Secretary-General;
and to pressure Israel, the occupying Power, to comply
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with its obligations under international humanitarian
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Moreover, the OIC reiterates its call for lifting
the inhuman and illegal Israeli blockade; ensuring the
free movement of people, materials and goods; and
providing urgently needed humanitarian and economic
assistance to the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip,
in implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Serious
efforts in that regard are necessary for averting the
further deterioration of this dire situation and averting
a human catastrophe.
The ongoing abuses and atrocities we are witnessing
in the Gaza Strip are taking place against the backdrop
of continued hostile, repressive and provocative Israeli
practices in the rest of occupied Palestine, including
with regard to the situation in occupied east Jerusalem
and at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. Deliberately
unlawful and racist legislation being imposed by
the Israeli occupation Government — in violation of
international law, conventions and United Nations
resolutions — is inflaming the situation and causing
even more Palestinian suffering. The OIC warns once
again that such illegal Israeli actions threaten to further
aggravate the cycle of violence, exacerbate tensions,
hatred and radicalism, and stoke religious dimensions
to the conflict.
Therefore, we reiterate our appeal to the Security
Council to take action to effectively address this
security situation. In that regard, we condemn Israel’s
continuing settlement and colonization of occupied
Palestinian territory, including east Jerusalem, in
contempt of Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and the relevant provisions
of international law. This illegal settlement policy,
entrenching Israel’s decades-long military occupation
of Palestinian land, remains a core challenge to the
will of the international community and the major
obstacle to peace. It is a litmus test for the collective
international resolve and particularly the Council,
which is entitled to take concrete actions to ensure
respect for and compliance with its resolutions and
prevent unilateral acts by Israel — the occupying
Power — that would seriously undermine the vision
of the two-State solution, to which we are committed
and have repeatedly advocated as a peaceful solution
to this conflict.
Millions of Palestinians have been waiting for
more than seven decades for the universal values of

S/PV. 8244

justice, freedom and peace to prevail in their homeland,
Palestine, just as they have waited for their inalienable
rights and legitimate aspirations to statehood,
independence and recognition to be fulfilled, in
implementation of standing United Nations resolutions.
Today the OIC once again calls for their fulfilment
as a matter of obligation and responsibility by the
international community and as a matter of principle
and rights.
The status quo of political stalemate, along with
ongoing Israeli settlement policies are definitely neither
acceptable nor viable. In that regard, the OIC welcomes
and supports the peace plan presented to the Council
by President of the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas,
on 20 February (see S/PV.8183). The OIC remains firm
in its conviction that the Security Council must act to
enhance prospects for peace, hope and justice in order
to maintain the viability of the two-State solution, based
on 1967 borders, through immediate engagement along
with international actors, by launching and sponsoring
a multilateral political process to resolve all final
status issues on the basis of the long-standing terms
of reference and parameters enshrined in the United
Nations resolutions, within a specific time frame.
The ongoing plight of millions of Palestinian
refugees reflects the cruel reality of a lack of justice.
While we praise the role and endeavours of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in that regard, the
continued need for its services bears witness to the dire
situation being endured by Palestinian refugees across
the region and embodies the political commitment to
their right to return. The OIC, on this occasion, calls
upon the international community to make sure that the
plight and growing needs of the Palestinian people are
receiving adequate attention, including the necessary
funding to UNRWA, and to assume their historical,
political, legal and humanitarian responsibilities
towards finding a just and durable solution to the
question of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the full support
of OIC countries for and solidarity with the Palestinian
people and their endeavour to regain their legitimate
and inalienable national rights, including the right of
return, self-determination and the independence of
their State on their national soil, with east Jerusalem
as its capital.

18-1252761/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Peru and you, Mr. President, for ably presiding
over the Security Council this month. I also thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing this morning.
The Middle East is currently experiencing a most
difficult and complicated phase. At the same time, it is
most urgent to make joint efforts to confront the grave
challenges and conflicts before us. The whirlwind of
conflict and the political and security developments
of these crises are pushing the region towards further
violence and instability. They are rising to dangerous
levels that threaten regional security as well as
international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
division within the Security Council and its inability
to shoulder its responsibilities to bolster security and
stability in the Middle East will further exacerbate
current conflicts and undermine prospects for their
political and diplomatic settlement.
Despite the success achieved in confronting
terrorist groups and undermining their capacities, their
total elimination will require further joint action in the
framework of a common vision and methodology. We
always underscore that peace and stability in the region
hinge on a just settlement of the Palestinian question,
whose centrality we have always reiterated. We call
on the international community to give priority to
reaching a comprehensive solution in accordance with
the resolutions of international legitimacy. Temporary
or piecemeal solutions are no longer sufficient or
acceptable if we wish the Middle East to live in
sustainable security and stability.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories
has caused indescribable suffering for the Palestinian
people, who have suffered from systematic violations
and been denied their legitimate rights for decades.
The occupation fuels violence and hatred and will
undermine the remaining prospects for peace. A just,
comprehensive and lasting peace will be achieved only
when Israel fully withdraws from all the territories
occupied since 1967 and an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, has been
established, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative. These are absolute prerequisites, as they can
help to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
62/66

26/04/2018

The international consensus on ending the conflict
on the basis of the two-State solution is a reaffirmation
of the fact that these are prerequisites for a true peace.
Peace is a strategic Arab choice that we reiterated
time and again during our chairmanship of the Arab
summit last year, and was also reaffirmed at the most
recent Arab summit, the Jerusalem summit, held in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We will continue, along with
our brethren in the State of Palestine and in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, which holds the chairmanship of the
current summit, to make every effort to achieve peace
and support all efforts and international initiatives
aimed at saving the two-State solution, as well as to
support our steadfast Palestinian brethren so that they
can enjoy the right to freedom and statehood.
We stress the importance of implementing
the resolutions of the Security Council, especially
resolution 2334 (2016). Their non-implementation
would encourage the occupying Power to continue with
its illegal settlement activities and to avoid shouldering
its obligations in terms of achieving peace in accordance
with international law. Jordan strongly condemns the
illegitimate and illegal attacks by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially its repeated violations
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. These provocations are carried out in total
disregard for the sentiments of Muslims. International
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions have
reaffirmed the legal status of East Jerusalem as an
occupied territory and rejected any Israeli measures
aimed at changing its status in any way.
Jerusalem is the key to peace in the region. We
reaffirm its importance for the three monotheistic
religions and the enduring right of Palestinians, Arabs,
Muslims and Christians to the city. We will pursue our
efforts to preserve the historical and legal status of the
holy sites in East Jerusalem, based on the historical
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom over them.
This is a historical responsibility that his Majesty King
Abdullah II is honoured to hold.
We also condemn the unjustified violence
carried out by the occupying Power against unarmed
Palestinians, mostly women and children, in the Gaza
Strip recently, in blatant violation of international law
and international humanitarian law, as well as the
relevant United Nations resolutions. The Palestinians
have the right to demonstrate peacefully, and we stress
the Secretary-General’s call for an independent and
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

transparent investigation to be carried out into the
recent events in Gaza.
Peace cannot be achieved through violence,
persecution and oppression. This will only exacerbate
extremism and terrorism in the region and undermine
the prospects for peace and a return to negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis. Turning a blind
eye to these illegal practices by Israel and its use of
excessive force against civilians would only encourage
the occupying Power to continue to carry out more
oppressive practices against the Palestinian people,
who must be protected against such practices.
Jordan supports the request made by the State of
Palestine to seek full membership status at the United
Nations based on the Palestinian people’s right to a State
with a status equal to that of other States Members of the
Organization. We urge the international community to
shoulder its full responsibilities to provide the necessary
care to Palestinian refugees and the necessary political
and financial support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), so as to enable it to continue to provide
humanitarian and social services until a just solution
is reached on the basis of General Assembly resolution
194 (III) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Jordan appreciates the generous financial
contributions made by a number of countries at the
Rome conference and the Arab League summit held
in Al-Dhahran, However, the financial situation of
UNRWA is still of concern to us all. The continued
deficit in its budget will have serious repercussions for
the humanitarian situation and the services provided to
more than 5 million Palestinian refugees if we do not
address the situation in the coming months.
Concerning the Syrian crisis, we reiterate that the
conflict can be resolved only through a political solution,
pursuant to the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) and on the basis of the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria, in a way that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people. Jordan has supported regional and international
initiatives such as the Astana, Vienna and Sochi talks
in the framework of operationalizing the Geneva track
under the auspices of the United Nations and not as
an alternative to that track. De-escalation agreements
are an excellent opportunity to end the fighting and to
strengthen security in Syria. We stress that the ongoing
violence will move us further away from a political

S/PV. 8244

solution and pave the way for a new wave of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. This would also
undermine humanitarian efforts to deliver assistance
to civilians and IDPs in besieged and hard-to-reach
Syrian areas.
The ongoing fighting will also serve terrorist
groups and pave the way for such groups to strengthen
their abilities following the successful efforts made to
undermine their capacities and presence in Syria, Iraq
and the region, which would definitely have dangerous
repercussions for international and regional relations.
We congratulate Iraq on its victories and stress our
support as it complements its political process with the
participation of all segments of the Iraqi population.
Jordan strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons by any party and stresses the need to carry
out an independent international investigation into the
use of such weapons. The perpetrators must be held
accountable. Resort to such weapons will not serve the
cause of achieving a peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis but will only exacerbate the conflict and threaten
the international non-proliferation regime.
In conclusion, the current deterioration of the crises
in the region requires the international community to
take a series of steps and actions to create a political
environment that is conducive to achieving peace in
the region and not based on confessionalism, racial
discrimination or inequality. What is needed is a just
peace that meets the aspirations of the peoples of the
region, especially young people who yearn for security
and stability and represent the largest segment of
our societies.
It is our duty to provide an environment that enables
the current generation to contribute to building and
prosperity of the Middle East and not resort to violent
extremism and terrorism. We have only one option,
namely to take decisive and urgent measures to rebuild
trust and overcome differences. Let us give a serious
chance to just, comprehensive and lasting peace and
intensify our joint diplomatic efforts in that direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s important meeting at
a time when several developments and challenges are
increasing in our region. It is an opportunity to hear
the various views on the most complex and sensitive

18-1252763/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

issues with regard to the Middle East. Furthermore,
we thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
valuable briefing.
Today more than ever, we see just how important it
is for the international community to play a greater role
in ensuring the implementation of its resolutions aimed
at achieving peace and security in the Middle East
and create conditions conducive to providing every
opportunity for the success of the political solutions.
That includes protection of the people affected, an
end to interference in the internal affairs of countries,
and assistance to countries in safeguarding their own
sovereignty, security and independence. In that regard,
we deplore the situation in Gaza and the escalation in
the recent protests, which have claimed many victims.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its firm position
in support of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. It underscores that a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region will be achieved only
through a two-State solution, Israel’s full withdrawal
from all Arab territories that were occupied on 4 June
1967, the return of all Palestinian refugees to the lands
from which they were expelled, and the creation of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. This should be based on the
relevant international legitimacy resolutions, terms of
reference related to the Arab peace process and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
We emphasize that East Jerusalem is part and parcel
of the territories occupied in 1967 and that it is among
those issues related to the final status. It can be resolved
only through negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis, based on international law and the two-State
solution. We demand that Israel stops taking unilateral
actions to change the status of Jerusalem because they
are contrary to international resolutions and hamper the
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the region.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to playing
its full role in the Arab coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen and allow the legitimate Yemeni Government,
led by President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi, to perform
all its duties, namely establishing security and confront
the coup militias that threaten security and stability,
sow sectarian strife and spread terrorism. Furthermore,
we support a peaceful solution based on terms of
reference agreed upon, such as the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism,
64/66

26/04/2018

in addition to the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and resolution 2216 (2015). We note the
diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, through the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths.
The Kingdom of Bahrain condemns the fact that
Iran-backed coup militias in Yemen continue to launch
ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia, a brotherly
country. We stand by Saudi Arabia and completely
support its measures to defend its territories and
safeguard its security and stability.
The suffering of the Syrian people continues
to worsen day after day, despite all efforts to find a
comprehensive, consensus-based political solution.
The international community must take speedy action
to find a solution that is acceptable to the Syrian
people, based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). This would preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and
prevent interference in its internal affairs, as well as
ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian people and restore security and stability in order
to rise again with the participation of its entire people.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will pursue
its actions and efforts, together with the international
community, to resolve conflicts using peaceful means
and to achieve security and stability in the region and
throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening today’s open debate. We
convey our delegation’s deepest condolences following
the sad demise of the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his informative briefing.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and by the representative of Iraq on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
In our national capacity, our delegation would like
to make five key points.
First, we reaffirm our support for the peace plan
presented by the President of the State of Palestine to
18-12527

26/04/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8244

the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183). The plan
is yet another constructive proposal on behalf of the
Palestinian people in their just struggle over seven
decades for their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence. We urge all concerned to give due
consideration to the peace plan, as the status quo on the
Palestinian question is neither acceptable nor tenable in
the framework of the two-State solution.

Bangladesh
emphasizes
that
provocations,
unilateral actions and the escalation of tension are
totally incompatible with our shared pursuit of peace
and security in the Middle East. We expect the Council
to demonstrate unity of purpose in order to find
peaceful, just and lasting solutions to all protracted
conflicts and humanitarian situations in the region,
including the Palestinian question.

Secondly, the Government and people of Bangladesh
share grave concerns about the prevailing situation and
tension in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. We condemn the killing of at least 41
Palestinians during peaceful demonstrations since the
commencement of the Great March of Return nearly
four weeks ago. We urge the Council to send a firm
and unequivocal message against the unlawful killing
and injury of innocent Palestinian civilians. We join
the Secretary-General in calling for an independent
and transparent investigation into those incidents, and
for Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with its
obligations under international humanitarian law and
relevant United Nations resolutions.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to make a further statement.

Thirdly, we continue to insist on lifting the illegal
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has created
a dire humanitarian situation. Provocative policies and
legal measures concerning the occupied East Jerusalem
and the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque must be reversed in
deference to relevant United Nations resolutions and
international public opinion. We reaffirm the overriding
importance of preserving the question of East Jerusalem
as a final-status issue in the peace process.
Fourthly, Bangladesh urges the Council to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We remain
concerned about the total disregard to comply with the
provisions of resolution 2234 (2016). Immediate priority
must be given to ensuring international protection for
the Palestinian people suffering for decades from the
occupying Power’s policy of collective punishment.
Fifthly, we reiterate our concern about the
prolonged uncertain situation endured by millions of
Palestinian refugees in a number of host countries. We
reaffirm the need to ensure enhanced, predictable and
sustainable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees (UNWRA).
We call upon Member States in a position to do so
to enable UNRWA to discharge its mandate in a
meaningful manner.

Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today we
have heard some Iranophobic and hysterical statements
from a few delegations. We have been hearing such
statements recently from those who are badly in need
of an imaginary enemy to whom to sell their beautiful
weapons and from those who have entrenched their
illegal occupations and aggressions by using such
weapons. It is indeed a dirty business and has nothing
to do with peace and security in the Middle East. No
political theatre — such as we saw this morning inside
and outside this Chamber and repeatedly from the
representative of the Israeli regime — can cover up the
aggressive and expansionist policies of that regime or
its behaviour towards its neighbour, which constitute
the main threat to peace and security in the region.
Iran’s advisory presence in Syria is at the request of
the Syrian Government and is legitimate in providing
assistance to the Syrian Government to fight and
ultimately eliminate all terrorist groups, especially
Da’esh, and other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with them. It also seeks to restore the
unity of that country and achieve a political solution.
We categorically reject the Israeli allegations as
baseless and sheer fabrication. It is indeed ironic that
the Israeli regime — famous for its atrocities, apartheid
policies, war crimes that are well-documented
in different United Nations organs and agencies,
non-compliance with many United Nations resolutions
and occupation of lands of other people for many
decades — can allow itself to accuse others in such a
sinister way. It is also preposterous that the same region,
with its highly known record of developing, producing
and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, should
venture to falsely accuse others of trying to acquire
similar weapons.

18-1252765/66

S/PV.8244

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We believe that this open debate should be devoted
to Palestine. That is why my delegation asked to use
this second opportunity to react to the false accusations
also made by the representative of Saudi Arabia.
The baseless Saudi allegations against Iran and its
provocative and destabilizing behaviour in the region
aim to distract the international community away
from its own widespread systematic crimes, including
its support for Wahhabi takfiri ideology, which is the
source of many terrorist activities and originates in
Saudi Arabia.
The situation in Yemen is another example of the
Saudi Arabia’s war of aggression being the underlying
reason for the escalation of the crisis. There have been
various attempts by the aggressors, as well as their
accomplices in the war, to cover up their shameful war
crimes by introducing false charges against others. The
United States is pursuing its lucrative arm business in
Yemen, while those responsible for creating the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world are showcasing how
they hand over their checks to help the victims of their
own atrocities. The Saudi-led coalition’s measures and
indiscriminate aerial attacks have resulted in mass
casualties, including among women and children,
displaced millions, and amplified poverty and hunger
in an already poor country and a surge in epidemic
diseases. Such ambitious and expansionist policy
measures, as well as the inhumane blockade and
use of the threat of starvation as an instrument of
war, are tantamount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity that should be carefully investigated and
duly prosecuted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Israel to make a
further statement.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): I have asked for the floor in
order to comment on some of the remarks made here
earlier today.
In his statement earlier today, the observer of the
Observer State of Palestine insisted that the Palestinian
demonstrations were entirely peaceful and that all
reports to the contrary are “Israeli propaganda”. Either
we believe that planting and detonating explosive
devices, throwing Molotov cocktails and attempting
to breach the fence are forms of peaceful protest, or

66/66

26/04/2018

the representative is deliberately choosing to ignore
the facts also presented earlier today by the Special
Coordinator in his briefing.
As for Bolivia, as predicted, its representative
has once again delivered a statement to the Council
that is simply incorrect. As I pointed out in the last
open debate on the Middle East (S/PV.8167), although
Bolivia has sat on the Security Council since January
2017, not once has its representative even approached
us to discuss the conflict. It is now April 2018, and still
there is no contact.
As for the statement that was made here earlier
today by the Ambassador of Lebanon, while Hizbullah,
the internationally recognized terrorist organization,
plays an open, active and prominent role in the Lebanese
Government. The result is the deployment of over
100,000 rockets on our northern border as Hizbullah’s
fanatical bloodlust draws conflict ever nearer.
Meanwhile, Lebanon, which presumed to lecture Israel
about human rights, continues to perpetrate official
and systematic discrimination against Lebanese people
of Palestinian origin, preventing them from gaining
access to health care, education, social services and
opportunities for employment. There is, sadly, a new
meaning of the phrase “cedars of Lebanon” — the
irresponsible Lebanese officials who are ceding control
to Hizbullah and Iran, and seeding the ground for
future conflict.
Moving from Hizbullah to its master, Iran, the
Islamic Republic of Iran is the world’s leading State
sponsor of terror. All present in the Chamber are
well aware that Iranian-made and Iranian-supplied
weapons are fuelling conflicts and promoting terror
in Syria, Lebanon and, as the most recent Panel of
Experts has reported, Yemen. Iran’s activities violate
multiple resolutions and, as Iranian officials regularly
tell the world, they dream of the day when they will
be able to destroy Israel. We have repeatedly provided
the Council with evidence of Iran’s malicious and
dangerous activities throughout the region, especially
in Syria. It is a moral obligation of the international
community to take concrete actions against those who
insist on fuelling violence, promoting terror and doing
their utmost to undermine global peace and security.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-12527
